
exploring
Adobe
Photoshop CS5
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Annesa Hartman
exploring
Adobe
Photoshop CS5
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights 
 
 
  
 
restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial
review has deemed that any suppres ed content does not materially
 affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the 
right to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent
rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous 
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit
www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword 
 for materials in your areas of interest.
s
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 XX 12 11 10
Exploring Adobe Photoshop CS5
Annesa Hartman
Vice President, Career and Professional 
  Editorial: Dave Garza
Director of Learning Solutions: Sandy Clark
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Jim Gish
Managing Editor: Larry Main
Associate Product Manager: Meaghan O’Brien
Editorial Assistant: Sarah L. Timm
Vice President, Career and Professional 
  Marketing: Jennifer Baker
Marketing Director: Deborah S. Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan
Marketing Coordinator: Erin Deangelo
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Senior Content Project Manager: Glenn Castle
Senior Art Director: Joy Kocsis
Technology Product Manager: Christopher 
  Catalina
Cover design: Steven Brower and 
  Lisa Marie Pompilio
Cover Illustration: Stephanie Dalton
© 2011, Delmar, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may 
be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means graphic, 
electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, recording, 
scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or informa-
tion storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 
of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of 
the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Professional Group Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 
1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all
requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Adobe® Photoshop® are trademarks or registered trademarks of Adobe Systems, 
Inc. in the United States and/or other countries. Third party products, services, 
company names, logos, design, titles, words, or phrases within these materials 
may be trademarks of their respective owners.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2010921544
ISBN-13: 9781111130343
ISBN-10: 1-111-13034-5
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with 
oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, 
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: international.
cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com/delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred online 
store www.CengageBrain.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product 
information contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that 
provided to it by the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities 
described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with 
such instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of ﬁ tness for particular 
purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility 
with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the 
readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For my mother, Carolyn Murov
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
Preface 
xii
A Discovery Tour 
2
A Magic Tour 
4
Lesson: The 15-Minute Photo Makeover 
4
Photoshop—in Brief 
12
Summary 
13
The Staging Area 
14
Staging 
16
Lesson 1: Interface Highlights 
16
Lesson 2: Customize Your Experience 
26
Seeing Is Believing 
29
Lesson 3: Navigational Features 
30
Summary 
36
Image Essentials 
38
Image Construction 
40
The Brief on Bitmapped Images 
40
The Brief on Vector Graphics 
44
Seeing All Sides 
45
Importing and Exporting 
46
Pixels: The Main Ingredient 
46
Lesson: Playing with Pixels 
46
Summary 
53
Explorer Pages: Darrel Anderson 
54
vi
2
3
| Contents |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Selecting and Transforming 
58
About Selecting and Transforming 
60
How Do Selections Work? 
60
Overview of Selection Tools 
60
How Does Transforming Work? 
67
Overview of Transform Tools 
68
More Options for Selections 
69
Lesson: Dressing Max 
71
Summary 
82
Explorer Pages: Tim Warnock 
86
Working with Color 
88
Optical Mixing 
90
Spectral Illusion 
91
Choosing a Color Model 
92
Grayscale 
92
RGB 
92
HSB 
93
CMYK 
93
Lab 
94
Getting in The Mode 
95
Applying Color 
95
The Color Panel 
96
The Color Picker and Color Libraries 
96
The Swatches Panel 
98
The Gradient Tool and Gradient Panel 
98
Adjusting Color 
100
About Channels and Bit Depth 
100
Lesson: Playing with Color Models 
102
Summary 
112
Explorer Pages: Natascha Roeoesli 
114
4
CONTENTS
vii
5
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Image Correction 
116
Six Steps of En“Light”enment 
118
Import 
118
Resize 
118
Enhance 
120
Retouch 
121
Effect 
121
Save 
122
Lesson: Correcting the Mike Photo 
122
Summary 
134
Adventures in Design: Photomerge 
138
Explorer Pages: Michael Dwyer 
142
Drawing and Painting 
144
Pixels—A Contemporary Art Medium 
146
Using the Pencil and Brush Tools 
146
Making a Custom Brush 
151
Vectors—A Guest Appearance 
153
Paths 
153
The Pen Tool 
156
Vector Masks 
158
Type 
158
Vector Compatibility 
160
Making Shapes 
161
Lesson: Nonrepresentational Art Creation 
164
Summary 
166
Adventures in Design: Dodge and Burn 
169
Explorer Pages: Kevin Burke 
172
6
7
viii
| Contents |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ix
CONTENTS
Masking 
174
Unmasking Masks 
176
Types of Masks  
180
Layer and Vector Masks 
181
Clipping Masks 
182
Horizontal and Vertical Type Mask Tools 
183
Quick Masks 
184
Lesson: Lisbon View 
186
Summary 
189
Explorer Pages: Joe Summerhays 
190
Layers, Compositing, and Process 
192
About Compositing and Composition 
194
A Design Process 
194
Start with an Idea 
194
Make a Comprehensive Layout (Comp) 
195
Gather Content 
195
Assemble Content 
197
Fine-Tune and Output 
202
Blending Modes, Styles, and Effects 
202
Blending Modes 
202
Layer Styles 
204
Filter Effects 
205
Liquify Function 
206
Lesson: CD Jacket Project 
206
Summary 
209
Adventures in Design: From 
the Imagination 
210
Explorer Pages: Jim Carroll 
212
ix
8
9
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

 Print Publishing 
216
Printing Methods 
218
Desktop Printing 
218
Digital Printing 
218
Commercial Printing 
219
Portable Document File (PDF) 
219
Output Compatibility 
220
Color 
221
Resolution  
226
Format 
227
Consult the Professionals 
229
Setting up the Print Job 
229
Print Command 
229
Summary 
234
Adventures in Design: 
Wine Box Composition 
238
Explorer Pages: David Julian 
242
Web Publishing 
246
About Optimization 
248
Compression 
248
Image Format 
249
Image Color 
251
Image Size 
253
Save for Web & Devices 
253
Optimization Workflow Techniques 
255
Lesson 1: Preparing an Image for the Web 
256
Image Slicing 
261
 Lesson 2: Slicing a Web Page Navigation Bar 
261
10
11
x
| Contents |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi
GIF Animation 
264
Lesson 3: Creating a Web Animation 
264
Summary 
269
Explorer Pages: Glenn Mitsui 
272
A New Dimension (for Photoshop 
CS5 Extended version users) 
276
X, Y, and Z 
278
Lesson 1: Transforming in X, Y, and Z 
278
Lesson 2: Mapping a Texture and 
Adjusting Material Settings  
285
Turning 2D Images into 3D Objects 
289
Lesson 3: Exploring the 3D Postcard Feature 
290
Lesson 4: Explore New Mesh from 
Grayscale (Depth Mapping) 
292
Guided Project: Importing a 3D Object 
294
Summary 
296
Index 
299
12
CONTENTS
xi
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Preface |
“The universe is full of magical things, patiently waiting for our wits 
to grow sharper.”
—Eden Phillpotts 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PREFACE
xiii
intended audience
Quick, grab a seat. The show is about to begin, and it is full of a wonderfully 
mischievous cast of characters you do not want to miss. They call them “pixels,” 
magical spirits brought to life by digital mayhem and transported by light. They are the 
muses of the digital artist, the star performers on the Photoshop stage, and the lead 
actors in this book, Exploring Adobe Photoshop CS5.
Whether a new student to computer graphics, a computer arts educator, a professional 
visualizer, animator, designer, illustrator, photographer, or just plain curious dabbler, 
Exploring Adobe Photoshop CS5 has something for you. It offers a practical and 
straightforward introduction to the essentials of digital image creation, compositing, 
and photo retouching; comprehensive step-by-step lessons; easy reference to commonly 
used tools and features of Photoshop; and plenty of encouragement for artistic 
exploration.
emerging trends
In today’s world, the amount of data that moves through our consciousness is 
overwhelming. Some of this information we manage to absorb into knowledge and 
understanding, and it enhances and improves our lives. Other data comes to us as fluff; 
we hold on to or let go of it as our interest wanes. More so than ever, graphic designers 
have the tools and resources to bring data to visual life in diverse ways.
Thomas L. Friedman, author of The World Is Flat, says, “The world is being flattened. . . . 
we are now connecting all the knowledge centers on the planet together into a single 
global network . . . , which could usher in an amazing era of prosperity, innovation and 
collaboration. . . .”
A high-speed flow of digital information is prevalent and far-reaching to all corners 
of the world like never before. In our case—as graphic designers, artists, developers, 
students, and educators—this digitally connected world opens up a level playing field, 
where we can explore endless new ways to research, use, and effectively design our 
creative visions.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xiv
| Preface |
The need to find the best solutions for the effective, horizontal flow of data is not 
being overlooked. Adobe’s new creative software suites are designed for easy transfer 
of visual and textual content between different software programs, allowing quick 
workflow processes between various designers and developers. An illustrator can draw a 
logo in Illustrator, add effects to it in Photoshop, and then send it to an animator. The 
animator can make it move in Flash or After Effects, and then send it to a printer, the 
Web, or a mobile device content developer.
Furthermore, today’s successful graphic artists realize the importance of not just having 
a foundation in design principles and knowing the tools, but also having the skills to 
communicate clearly and collaboratively with others in the innovation process. The 
artists highlighted in this book were asked, “What suggestions for success would you 
give to the emerging graphic artist?” All emphasized the need for one to be adaptable 
to change and alterations; to be professional, organized, and prompt in all matters of 
his or her business; to be personable to others, and yet persistent in self-promotion; 
and to keep learning, exploring, and engaging with all that this expansive world offers.
background of this text
“Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic,” says Arthur C. 
Clarke, author of 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) and astrophysicist.
Aptly, Photoshop is an example of such a technology. For Photoshop, or any other 
current computer graphics software program, it is not uncommon to describe what it 
can do and how it is embraced by the user as anything but amazing, magical. Without 
lessening the impact Photoshop has made in the graphics and photographic industries, 
and the continual advancements occurring with each new version, this book is intended 
to demystify what ostensibly seems complicated but is really quite engaging and 
accessible. After all, as automated as the program can appear, it is still a product of the 
mortal mindset, which we can assume understands some method to the madness.
As is the purpose all the books in the Delmar Cengage Learning’s Design Exploration 
series, the objective of this text is to be clear and no-nonsense in approach, never 
negating the practical—yet vastly experiential—aspects of the program. You could say 
it is the “Penn and Teller” method of instruction. Yes, for the outside viewer it appears 
all magic (and we want to keep it that way!), but for the magician it really is just 
practiced tricks that can be easily explained and enacted.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xv
| Preface |
Textbook Organization
As you learn in Chapter 1, Photoshop is a “must-know” program for the graphic artist, 
with the ability to retouch, blend, composite, layer, and add effects to photos and 
digital imagery, draw and paint, and save in different image formats for different 
purposes, such as for use on the Web, for print, or in other programs.
This book has been conceptualized and organized with the following intentions:
 
▶
Explore the questions that face today’s Photoshop artist and provide some educated 
answers through the use of Adobe Photoshop’s digital tools and features
 
▶
Offer process-oriented lessons developed from actual implementation in the 
classroom and production firms
 
▶
Develop an understanding of core concepts related to digital artwork and image 
creation through fundamental design principles and methods
 
▶
Provide an inside look at how artists working in the field come up with ideas and 
inspirations
 
▶
And, most importantly, open the door for continued, self-guided discovery
The textbook contains common features found in each of the Design Exploration books, 
but specifically this material is presented in a need-to-know basis and so each chapter 
builds upon itself. This eliminates the amount of information the reader must know to 
successfully complete a task. Each chapter also accommodates those who appreciate 
alternative methods of learning information, providing both textually and visually 
succinct explanations of important concepts, step-by-step experiences; or for those 
who prefer to wander around, final project files, samples, and a section for further 
exploration. The following is a brief rundown of what is learned in each chapter:
Chapter 1: A Discovery Tour Right away, retouch a photo in Photoshop and discover 
the purpose of the Photoshop program.
Chapter 2: The Staging Area Take center stage and explore the workspace and 
navigational features of the program.
Chapter 3: Image Essentials Get the “know-how” on bitmap and vector graphics, bit 
depth, resolution, and image formats.
Chapter 4: Selecting and Transforming Using Photoshop’s varied selection tools and 
transform commands, get up-close-and-personal with selecting and transforming image 
pixels—the most fundamental of procedures in Photoshop.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi
| Preface |
Chapter 5: Working with Color Uncover fundamental concepts of color, such as how 
color is reproduced, color modes, and a hands-on study with color models. Additionally, 
explore important aspects of color specifically related to Photoshop, such as tips for 
managing color, channels, and using the color application tools.
Chapter 6: Image Correction Learn, step by step, fundamental techniques in the 
image-correction process such as adjusting tonal levels, retouching, and adding effects.
Chapter 7: Drawing and Painting Get a thorough introduction to the drawing and 
painting tools and options, advancing your creative possibilities to a whole new level.
Chapter 8: Masking Discover techniques for hiding and revealing areas of an image 
while preserving its integrity. Includes practice with layer, vector, type, clipping, and 
quick masks.
Chapter 9: Layers, Compositing, and Process Uncover the process and methods by 
which to composite, link, blend, merge, and organize graphical elements into complex 
images or graphic layouts.
Chapter 10: Print Publishing Learn about the different print processes and what it 
takes to prepare your digital images for print.
Chapter 11: Web Publishing Learn about image optimization and what it takes to 
prepare your digital images for the Web. Also learn how to slice and animate images for 
Web output.
Chapter 12: A New Dimension (for Photoshop CS5 Extended version users) Discover 
how Photoshop Extended supports transformation, material editing, and texture 
mapping on simple 3D objects available within the program or imported from 3D 
authoring programs.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvii
| Preface |
Features
The following list provides some of the salient features of the text:
 
▶
Learning goals are clearly stated at the beginning of each chapter.
 
▶
Written to meet the needs of design students and professionals for a visually 
oriented introduction to image composition and the functions and tools of 
Photoshop.
 
▶
Client projects and Adventures in Design involve tools and techniques a designer 
might encounter on the job.
 
▶
Full-color format provides the most accurate depictions of software screen shots.
 
▶
Explorer Pages highlight Photoshop artists, their artwork, and personal accounts of 
their design process.
 
▶
Exploring on Your Own sections offer suggestions and sample lessons for further 
study of content covered in each chapter.
 
▶
In Review sections are provided at the end of each chapter to quiz a reader’s 
understanding and retention of the material covered.
 
▶
A CD-ROM at the back of the book contains the support files to complete the 
exercises and audio interviews with the book’s contributing artists.
New! In Exploring Adobe 
Photoshop CS5
 
▶
Two new Explorer Pages featuring two new professional illustrators working in the 
field today
 
▶
Coverage of CS Live, which provides online services and resources that you can 
access directly from Photoshop.
 
▶
New coverage of the Mini Bridge tools, which makes the power of the Bridge 
program accessible directly within Photoshop
 
▶
Improved painting and 3D features
 
▶
New icons for several Photoshop tools
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xviii
| Preface |
Instructor Resources
This CD was developed to assist instructors in planning and implementing their 
instructional programs. It includes sample syllabi for using this book in either an 11- or 
15-week semester. It also provides answers to the “In Review” questions, PowerPoint 
slides highlighting the main topics, and additional instructor resources. To order, please 
call 1-800-347-7707.
ISBN: 1-111-13035-3
File Setup
Located at the back of this book is a CD-ROM containing all files for completing the 
lessons. These lesson files are compatible with Photoshop CS5. For a trial version of 
Photoshop CS5, visit http://www.adobe.com/downloads/.
Before starting the lessons, create a folder on your local computer. Name it My Lessons 
(or whatever name you prefer). From the CD, drag a copy of the lesson files to the 
folder. As you work on the lessons, open the lessons, assets, and sample files from this 
location. You can save your work in the same place. 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xix
| Preface |
About the Author
Annesa Hartman holds a Masters in Teaching 
with Internet Technologies, focusing her 
attention on instructional design for online 
technologies, and Web and graphic design 
concepts and programs. Currently, she is a 
Content Developer for Kaplan University, 
where she designs and develops online courses 
for educators. For over 15 years she also 
has taught computer graphic courses and 
is a freelance graphic designer with clients 
from around the world. She is the author of 
Exploring Adobe Photoshop CS4, Exploring 
Adobe Illustrator CS5, Exploring Adobe Flash 
CS5, and Producing Interactive Television. When 
she is not pushing pixels, she is performing in 
community theater and teaching yoga classes.
Why is Annesa turned upside down and twice? The upside down 
versions might look a bit strange, but turn them right-side up (flip 
this book over). One photo looks normal, the other not so much 
(scary!). It’s a trick on the eyes. This author photo is an illusion 
created using Photoshop. You can do it too – take a photo of your 
face and flip the eyes and mouth using Photoshop’s selection tools 
that you learn about in Chapter 4.
Visit where this idea came from — the Mona Lisa version on the 
Exploratorium Web site — at http://www.exploratorium.edu/
exhibits/mona/mona.html
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xx
Acknowledgments
It’s quite remarkable that this book is now in its fifth edition. And not unlike 
any momentous task, it would not have happened without the help of my friends, 
colleagues, and students. Many, many thanks to all those who contributed content 
for the book’s lessons, visual examples, “Adventures in Design” and “Explorer Pages”, 
including Ruth Marx, Kevin Burke, Jim Carroll, Max Ruse, Geoff Burgess, Karen 
Kamenetzky, Bruce and Linda Lord, Terry Hartman, Darrel Anderson, Joel Hagen, Michael 
Dwyer, Glenn Mitsui, Joe Summerhays, Natascha Roeoesli, Tim Warnock, Dave Garcez, 
Jeffrey Moring, Brian Sinclair, David Julian, and Charlene Chua.
For their patient persistence (if there is such a thing), I also thank the staff at 
Delmar Cengage Learning. What a comfort to know that you are out there in full force 
promoting the Design Exploration series and making this experience worthwhile. Last, I 
would like to thank my mother, Carolyn Murov, whose photographic talent supplied many 
of the images found in the pages of this book.
Delmar Cengage Learning and the author would also like to thank Toni Toland for her 
invaluable suggestions and quick eye in reviewing the technical accuracy of this text.
| Preface |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxi
| Preface |
Questions and Feedback
Delmar Cengage Learning and the author welcome your questions and feedback. If you 
have suggestions you think others would benefit from, please let us know and we will 
try to include them in the next edition.
To send us your questions and/or feedback, contact the publisher at:
Delmar Cengage Learning 
Executive Woods
5 Maxwell Drive
Clifton Park, NY 12065
Attn: Media Arts & Design Team 
800-998-7498
Or Annesa Hartman at:
Kaplan University
Content Developer
P.O. Box 83
Saxtons River, Vermont 05154
ahartman@kaplan.edu
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
xxii
  
How To Use This Text
The features discussed in the following sections are found in the 
book.
  Charting Your Course 
and Goals
The introduction and chapter 
objectives start off each chapter. 
They describe the competencies 
the reader should achieve upon 
completing the chapter.
 Don’t Go There
     These boxes highlight common pitfalls and 
explain ways to avoid them.
 Explorer Pages
These sections showcase the 
imagery, insights, and workflow 
processes of successful graphic 
artists.
233
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | 10–15 |
Conflict dialog box that could 
come up if your printer does not 
support PostScript information.
FIGURE | 10–16 |
Page Setup for printers 
specifically installed on my 
Macintosh. To scale to print 
size, use the options under 
the Print command rather than 
the Page Setup box for your 
particular printer.
t
t
As you roam through the various print dialog 
boxes, you might discover that you can set 
scaling options for your image in the print 
specifications dialog box of your particular 
desktop printer. See Figure 10–16. The 
recommendation is to not set the scaling 
options in this specific area, but rather in 
the Print window as reviewed previously.
  DON’T GO THERE!
WEB PUBLISHING
11
247
charting your course
Preparing images for the Web or screen-based publication is an important task in today’s online 
world. Luckily for us, Web development tools come packaged with Adobe Photoshop and alleviate 
many of the headaches that occur when we try to find the right balance between an image that 
looks good but can also be quickly downloaded from the Internet for efficient viewing. For the 
avid Web designer, there is much to explore in Photoshop’s Web tools, and it is not uncommon to 
find instructional books specific to this part of Photoshop. This chapter offers an overview of the 
three main features Web designers use in Photoshop: the Save For Web & Devices command (see 
the section by the same name); the ability to slice images for fast rendering and to create button 
and rollover effects (see the section “Image Slicing”); and the Animation panel (see section “GIF 
Animation”).
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Optimize images like a pro
 
▶
Get a handle on Web file formats
 
▶
 Examine the interrelationship among image color, format, size, and compression in the Web 
publication process
 
▶
Get hands-on experience with the Save for Web & Devices options
 
▶
Slice a Web page
 
▶
Create an animated GIF using the Animation panel
xxii
| Preface |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xxiii
 In Review and Exploring on Your Own
Review questions are located at the end of each chapter. They 
allow readers to assess their understanding of the chapter. The 
section Exploring on Your Own contains exercises that reinforce 
chapter material through practical application.
 Adventures in Design
These pages contain client assignments showing readers how to 
approach a design project using the tools and design concepts 
taught in the book.
| Image Correction |
134
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
A whole new world—blemish-free—has opened up to you in this chapter. With the powerful 
 image- correction tools and processes available in Photoshop, every photograph has the potential 
for  perfection.
1. 
What are the six basic steps for image correction?
2. 
Why is it important to check the resolution setting of an imported photograph or image?
3. 
Why might someone choose the RGB Color mode over other modes?
4. 
What are you adjusting when you move the sliders in the Levels histogram?
5. 
What keyboard command must you press to take a pixel sample with the Clone Stamp tool?
6. 
When working with the retouching tools, why would viewing your cursor as Brush Size be helpful? 
Where do you go to make this setting?
7. 
What is the advantage of using an adjustment layer to make color or tonal corrections on an image?
8. 
Why would you save backup copies of the original photograph before retouching it?
1. 
Play further with the Adjustments panel and image-correction presets. 
Open a photograph that you have that needs some tonal correction 
(some examples can also be found in the chap06_lessons/samples/
color_tonal folder). Select the Essentials workspace. Docked in 
the panels on the right is the Adjustment panel (if you don’t see 
it, choose Window > Adjustments). See Figure 6–35. A list of icons 
is located at the top of the panel. Roll over each icon to reveal its 
adjustment type Levels, Color Balance, Exposure, etc.). We explored 
the Hue/Saturation adjustment in previous lessons. Click on an 
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
FIGURE | 6–35 |
Roll over the icons in the Adjustments panel to reveal its text equivalent.
| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
210
DESIGN
adventures 
IN 
Figure C–5. Being able to change one part at a time is a 
timesaver and gives great effects. I then scaled down each 
skull and began placing them over the face layer, changing 
the opacity and using the blending tools. I left many of my 
own facial features but also used the main skull features 
and blended the two. Feathering the selections can help 
soften an image, but be careful not to feather a selection 
too much. The tool I probably used the most is the Eraser 
tool. After you place one 
layer on top of the other, you 
can erase (with a soft-tipped 
brush) what you do not want. 
See Figure C–6. The more 
comfortable you get with the 
mouse, the better you can 
blend the images.”
YOUR TURN
Using some of the tools and 
techniques recommended by Jeffrey, create your own 
freak of nature or otherworldly vision of yourself.
FROM THE IMAGINATION
P
hotoshop can bring out the mad scientist in us all. It 
is a digital laboratory where instruments are used to 
piece together pixels, rather than strands of DNA, 
into new life forms that come alive on screen or 
paper, tabloid covers, DVD or video game splash screens, 
or in this book’s Explorer Pages. Enter an adventure in 
design for the wild imagination.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT EXAMPLE
Our experiment begins with an example brought to you 
from the digital artist, “Mad Scientist,” Jeffrey Moring. 
Jeffrey reveals the secrets used to bring about his optical 
vision titled Yesterday, Today, Forever. See Figure C–1.
“The first step in creating this piece was getting the right 
digital images to work with,” said Jeffrey. “I took some 
photographs of myself, then photographed many different 
skulls. (The biology department of your school should 
have such skulls.) After picking the right digital photos, I 
brought them into Photoshop. See Figure C–2 and Figure 
C–3. The most important techniques for this kind of digital 
manipulation are selecting areas and your ability to blend 
two different images together. The tools that I used were 
the Smudge tool, the Eraser tool, and the Clone Stamp 
“tool.” See Figure C–4.
“Getting a good selection of the image you are using is 
critical,” said Jeffrey. “Each picture should be on a different 
layer when building such images. This is also critical. See 
t
t
FIGURE | C–1 |
Artist Jeffrey Moring’s 
altered self in his 
image Yesterday, 
Today, Forever. Printed 
with permission of 
Jeffrey Moring.
FIGURE | C–2 |
A self- portrait was 
taken and imported 
into Photoshop. A 
black background 
was added.
Fi
C 5 B i
bl
h
FIGURE | C–3 |
Photographs of 
skeletal remains were 
taken, brought into 
Photoshop, and their 
background pixels 
selected and removed.
FIGURE | C–4 |
Tools used to blend 
the images: the 
Smudge, Eraser, and 
Clone Stamp tools.
| Preface |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

1
| A Discovery Tour |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A DISCOVERY TOUR
1
3
charting your course
I hope you have brushed up on your “ta-das,” because you are in for a Harry Houdini of an 
experience—a venture into the digital wizardry of Adobe Photoshop. If there is only one program 
you should know as a graphic artist, Photoshop is it. And, if I begin to sound a bit highfalutin 
about its prospects, well, it is because I am. You can say Photoshop is the pinnacle (the Big Daddy) 
of all computer graphic programs, proven to handle in numerous ways just about any type of 
graphic and photographic image. In this chapter you will get hands-on practice with Photoshop and 
experience a first taste of its illusionary talents. Depending on your learning style, you can choose 
to “do” the lesson, “read” the lesson, or both. The trick is to get you started on the experience of 
Photoshop and then show you what makes it so magical.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Discover the purpose of Photoshop
 
▶
Get excited about Photoshop
 
▶
Fix a bad photo and optimize it for the Web
 
▶
Explore some of Photoshop’s tools and features
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
4
A MAGIC TOUR
No matter what kind of multimedia project you might be up against, Photoshop 
more often than not is going to play a pivotal role in the creation process. Think of 
it as the Swiss Army knife of the digital imaging world. It will come to your rescue 
when the lighting for those wedding pictures is less than perfect—to remove the 
unwanted blemish on the bride’s cheek, or superimpose the indisposed from the 
family portrait. Take, for instance, the photograph shown on the left in Figure 1–1, 
which was taken by a point-and-shoot camera. The film was digitized on a CD 
and later handed to me to put on the Web. To tell you the truth, the photo quality 
was dreadful. However, with my bag of tricks (Photoshop), a wave of the magic 
wand (computer mouse), and $50 added to my client’s invoice, I produced what 
looked like the real thing: a room in a fine country inn, not a room in a rundown 
shack. OK, so maybe the differences in the two photos are not that extreme, but my 
point is that with a little magic, and about 15 minutes of your time, you can make 
a “ho-hum” image look “oh wow” and prepared to download fast from the Web.
LESSON: THE 15-MINUTE PHOTO MAKEOVER
It is said that a magician never reveals her tricks—until now. In this lesson 
you will learn how I fixed up the country inn photo (see Figure 1–1) 
and made it Web-ready. I will not get into too many specifics about the 
program just yet; there is plenty of that to come. However, you will learn 
enough secrets to realize that Photoshop is not mere hocus-pocus.
FIGURE | 1–1 |
The original photo of a room 
in a country inn (left), and a 
15-minute makeover version 
using Photoshop (right).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
|  Chapter 1 |
Importing and Cropping the Photo
1. 
Open the Photoshop program. (A trial version is available for download at http://www.
adobe.com/products/photoshop/compare/. There are two program versions you can 
choose from–CS5 and CS5 Extended. To complete Chapter 12 of this book you will need 
CS5 Extended.) Install the program version of your choice onto your hard drive.
2. 
Choose File > Open from the menu bar, and on your local hard drive browse for the 
Exploring Photoshop CS5 lessons/chap01_lessons/assets folder. Open the file 
masterbed.tif.
Note: As mentioned in the Preface, to save your work, you must make a copy of 
the chapter lessons to your local hard drive and select files from that location.
3. 
Press Shift-Tab to hide unnecessary window panels (at least for the time being). Your 
imported image of masterbed.tif should be visible, with the toolbox to the left of the 
interface, and the menu bars located at the top. See Figure 1–2.
FIGURE | 1–2 |
The Photoshop interface (Mac).
 4. 
From the menu bar at the top of the screen, choose View > Fit on Screen to enlarge the 
photo to the Photoshop window size.
 5. 
Select Photoshop > Preferences > Units & Rulers (Mac), or Edit > Preferences > Units & 
Rulers (Windows), from the menu bar.
 6. 
In the Preferences dialog box, set the Rulers units to “pixels” and click OK. See Figure 1–3. (If the 
rulers are not showing, select View > Rulers (Command+R for Mac or Ctrl+R for Windows).)
FIGURE | 1–3 |
Set the Rulers units to pixels.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
6
FIGURE | 1–4 |
Select the Crop tool 
in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 1–5 |
Enter parameters for the Crop tool in the Options bar. (Tip: to quickly move from field to field to enter 
each parameter, choose Tab on the keyboard.)
FIGURE | 1–6 |
Crop the image.
 9.  
From the upper left corner of the image, click and drag with the Crop tool to the lower right 
corner of the image. Select the entire image except for the unwanted section along the right 
edge. See Figure 1–6. If you feel the area was not cropped properly, press ESC and try again.
FIGURE | 1–7 |
Execute the crop action.
| 1 5 |
Note: When entering numbers numerically in the Options bar, it’s helpful to type 
in “pixels” or “px” after the number entered, otherwise Photoshop might default to 
a measurement you don’t want, like 550 inches!
7. 
Select the Crop tool in the toolbox. See Figure 1–4. With the Crop tool you can delete 
unnecessary or unflattering parts from an image.
 8. 
In the Options bar found along the top of your image, under the menu bar, type in the 
following parameters for the Crop tool. After entering a value, press the Tab key to move 
the cursor to the next field (see Figure 1–5).
 
▶
Width: 550 pixels
 
▶
Height: 350 pixels
 
▶
Resolution: 72 pixels/inch
 10. 
Click on the Crop tool icon in 
the toolbox to bring up the 
Crop dialog box. See 
Figure 1–7. Select the Crop 
option to execute the crop. 
(Alternatively, you can double-
click inside the selected area 
or press Return (Mac) or Enter 
(Windows) to execute the crop.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
|  Chapter 1 |
Note: Argh! What if you make a mistake? From the menu bar, select Window > 
History to open the History panel, if it is not already opened. Each step you 
perform in Photoshop is recorded in the History panel (up to 20 states by default). 
To go back a step, click on the state above the step you just made. For instance, 
from the Crop state, click up to the Open state to return the image to its original 
state. See Figure 1–8. You can also press Command-Z (Mac) or Ctrl-Z (Windows) to 
undo your last step.
11. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels 
to see the final cropped 
image.
12. 
Choose File > Save As. Make 
sure you are set to save 
in your chap01_lessons 
folder (copied from the text’s 
CD) when the Save As menu 
pops up. For Format, choose 
Photoshop (top of the list). 
Your file name should read 
masterbed.psd (the native 
file format for Photoshop).
Fixing the Color
1. 
You have probably noticed 
that the color of this image 
is too red. This can be fixed 
in one easy step: choose 
Image > Auto Color. Ta-da!
2. 
To lighten the image, 
choose Image > 
Adjustments > Levels. 
The Levels histogram 
comes up. This determines 
the lights and darks 
(brightness and contrast) 
in an image. You will learn 
more about levels in later 
chapters. Right now, move 
the white arrow (on the 
lower right side of the 
graph) inward until you get 200 in the Input Levels right box. Click OK. See Figure 1–9.
Note: You may have noticed the Brightness/Contrast choice found under 
Image > Adjustments. I chose not to use this, as Levels gives us more control over 
our image.
FIGURE | 1–9 |
Adjust the photograph’s 
brightness and contrast 
using Levels.
FIGURE | 1–8 |
The History panel—a life saver!
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
8
Creating a Shadow and 
Border Effect
 1.  Choose Window > Layers 
to open the Layers panel. 
Layers organize information in 
Photoshop. Right now we only 
have one layer: our photo. See 
Figure 1–10.
 2.  In the Layers palette, double-
click on the Background layer 
that contains the photo. The 
New Layer dialog box comes 
up. Type in master bedroom 
and click OK. (This renames the 
Background layer and unlocks it 
for further editing.)
 3. 
 From the menu bar, choose 
Image > Canvas Size. Select 
the Relative option. Then, for 
Width type in 20 pixels and for 
Height, type in 20 pixels. This 
will increase each side of the 
canvas by 20 pixels. On a side 
note, the Anchor box allows you 
to position where the current 
image will be on the new canvas. 
Let’s keep it in the center for 
now. Click OK. See Figure 1–11.
FIGURE | 1–10 |
The photo is located on 
one layer: the default layer 
called “Background.”
FIGURE | 1–11 |
Increase the canvas size.
FIGURE | 1–12 |
Create a drop shadow.
4. 
From the menu bar, choose Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow. Select “Preview” on 
the right side of the Layer Style window, so you can view the changes you make in the 
dialog box directly on the document. Enter the following parameters and remember to 
use the Tab key to move among them quickly 
(see Figure 1–12):
 
▶
Angle: 120 degrees
 
▶
Distance: 10 pixels
 
▶
Spread: 20%
 
▶
Size: 10 pixels
 
Leave the other settings at their default.
5. 
 Click OK.
Note: In the Layers panel, notice the 
small “fx” icon next to the layer name. 
This indicates that there are effects (i.e., 
the drop shadow) on the image. To edit 
the effects, simply double-click on the “fx” 
icon to open the Layer Style dialog box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
|  Chapter 1 |
6. 
 Now, let’s select just the photo and not 
the background, which can be tricky. In 
the Layers panel, place the cursor over the 
layer thumbnail (the small image to the 
left of the layer name). A pointer hand icon 
will appear. Press Command (Mac) or Ctrl 
(Windows) and click on the thumbnail. The 
photo (the object in the selected layer) 
will be selected in the document. This is 
indicated by a series of moving, dashed 
lines around the edge of the photo, also 
known as “marching ants.” See Figure 1–13.
7. 
From the menu bar, choose Edit > Stroke. 
Enter the following parameters 
(see Figure 1–14):
 
▶
Width: 4 pixels
 
▶
 Color: Click on the color box to open 
the Color Picker and choose white.
 
▶
Location: Center
Note: If Edit > Stroke is dimmed and 
therefore unavailable, be sure the master 
bedroom layer is highlighted in the Layers 
panel.
8. 
Click OK.
9. 
Choose Select > Deselect to view the white border you just created around the photo. 
If you see a checkered background, you can remove this to see your image better by 
going to Photoshop > Preferences > Transparency & Gamut (Mac) or Edit > Preferences 
> Transparency & Gamut (Windows) and change the Grid Size to None.
10. 
Save your file.
Note: If you receive a Maximize Compatibility Photoshop Format option 
dialog box, keep the option selected to ensure compatibility of this file with 
previous versions of Photoshop.
Creating a Title Effect
1. 
 Select the Horizontal Type tool in the toolbox. See Figure 1–15.
2. 
 In the Options bar, set the typeface to Arial or Verdana, depending on what is available 
on your computer. Set the type size to 24 points. For color, click the color box in the 
Options bar (see Figure 1–16) to open the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 1–13 |
Marching ants indicate 
a selected area.
FIGURE | 1–14 |
The Stroke options box.
FIGURE | 1–15 |
The Horizontal Type tool.
FIGURE | 1–16 |
Change the typeface and type 
size, and set the text color.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
10
 3. 
 Move the Color Picker dialog box 
to the right side of the screen, so 
you can see your image. With the 
Color Picker open, notice that your 
cursor changes to an eyedropper 
when you move it over the photo 
area. See Figure 1–17.
 4. 
 Move the Eyedropper tool over 
a light-brown area of the closet 
door frame in the photo and 
click to take a sample of the color 
(see Figure 1–17). The color is 
recorded in the Color Picker. Click 
OK to close the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 1–18 |
The final, glowing title.
 5. 
With the Horizontal Type tool, click in the upper left corner of the document. A blinking 
cursor will appear. Type in Master Bedroom.
 6. 
Choose Layer > Layer Style > Outer Glow. Leave the default setting for the outer glow 
(unless you want to play on your own!) and click OK. See Figure 1–18.
FIGURE | 1–17 |
The Eyedropper tool 
takes a sampling of color 
from the photograph.
FIGURE | 1–19 |
The Move tool.
 7. 
 Select the Move tool in the toolbox (see 
Figure 1–19). Place the Move tool over the 
text and click and drag it to a position of 
your liking on the photograph.
 8. 
Save your file. You’re almost there.
Optimizing the Image for the Web
 1. 
 OK, one last detail. Let’s prepare this 
photograph so it can be used on the 
Web. We need to do two things: make 
the file size smaller (compress it), so it will 
download quickly for those of us with 
slow Internet connections, and save it in 
JPEG format, which is a file format the Web can display (you will learn more about that in 
Chapter 11). For now, choose File > Save for Web & Devices. The document opens up in a 
new window.
2. 
Select the 2-Up option (see Figure 1–20). At the top is your original image. On the 
bottom is the image you will compress for the Web. By having them side-by-side, 
you can compare the quality of the Web image with the original as you adjust the 
compression settings.
3. 
In the Optimize panel to the right of the images, set the image quality to JPEG Low, next 
to the word Preset (see Figure 1–21). Note how the quality of the image on the bottom 
deteriorates compared to the image at the top. Look closely at the title text in particular.
Note: If you are having difficulty seeing parts of an image, use the Hand tool on 
the left side of the window to navigate the image view right, left, up, or down.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
|  Chapter 1 |
4. 
Now, set the quality 
to JPEG High. Much 
better. I know you’re 
wondering why you 
should ever use the 
JPEG Low setting. Look 
at the box with numbers 
right below the two 
images. Note that the 
lower the setting, the 
smaller the number, 
allowing for a faster 
download (more on this 
in Chapter 11).
5. 
Take a look at the estimated download 
time of the lower image at the bottom of 
the image’s window. See Figure 1–22.
6. 
Click Save and save the 
masterbed.jpg 
file in your lessons 
folder—Photoshop 
automatically adds 
the jpg extension for 
you. The image is now 
ready to be placed 
on a Web page. See 
the completed image, 
shown in Figure 1–23.
FIGURE | 1–20 |
Select the 2-Up option 
in the Save for Web & 
Devices window.
FIGURE | 1–21 |
The Optimize panel properly 
prepares the image for 
Web publication.
FIGURE | 1–22 |
View the size and estimated 
download time of the 
Web-formatted image.
FIGURE | 1–23 |
The completed 
photograph—it’s magic!
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A Discovery Tour |
12
Note: For fun, view your JPEG image in a Web browser. Open a Web browser of 
your choosing (e.g., Firefox, Internet Explorer, or Safari). Choose File > Open File 
and browse for the masterbed.jpg that you just saved to your lessons folder. The 
file will appear in the browser window. Alternatively, try opening the original TIF 
image (lessons/chap01_lessons/assets/masterbed.tif). The browser doesn’t 
recognize this type of image format. More on image formats in Chapter 3.
 7. 
Select File > Save to save the final Photoshop (.psd) file. You did it!
PHOTOSHOP—IN BRIEF
As you have probably surmised by its name, fixing up photos is the essence of 
what Photoshop can do. That’s what it was originally designed to do from its 
inception in 1987 with the brothers Thomas and John Knoll and in 1990 when 
Adobe first licensed the product. Now Photoshop and its immense toolset 
have grown to be a vital part of any magician’s repertoire—something you will 
discover in the lessons of this book. No animator, illustrator, game developer, 
scientist, multimedia developer, or Web designer could survive without 
Photoshop. It has a way of working with one of the main ingredients of digital 
image construction: pixels. These are the tiny picture elements that, when placed 
together in a grid, make all the images we see on a computer screen. Chapter 3 
gets into greater detail about pixels, among other important graphic essentials. 
For now, I can sum up what Photoshop does best in four simple bullet points:
 
▶Manipulates photographs and other digital imagery, such as select, cut, 
paste, clone, colorize, compress, erase, transform, and mask, and adds 
special effects
 
▶Composites, layers, and blends photographs and images
 
▶Draws and paints
 
▶Converts photographs and illustrations into different formats for different 
purposes, such as for use on the Web, for video, for print, and to import 
into other programs
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13
|  Chapter 1 |
  IN REVIEW
1. 
What does the command Shift-Tab do?
2. 
What is so great about the History panel?
3. 
In general, what are levels in Photoshop?
4. 
What are layers? How are they useful?
5. 
What are “marching ants”?
6. 
Name at least three uses for Photoshop.
1. 
Visit the Photoshop area of the Adobe site at http://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop/photoshop/.
2. 
The programmers of software packages such as Photoshop love to play tricks and hide fun, little surprises 
within the programs they create. These surprises are called “Easter eggs,” and you can find them in Photoshop 
if you know where to look and what to do.
Here is how to find the infamous magician Merlin. In Photoshop, go to Window > Layers (if not already 
open). Click on the small arrow with four lines in the upper right corner of the Layers window to open the 
layer options. Hold down Option/Alt and click on Panel Options in the drop-down menu. Merlin lives!
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
SUMMARY
Photoshop is the “must know” of all computer graphic software packages. For the successful graphic artist, it is 
as vital a prop as a deck of cards and a white rabbit to a magician. In this chapter you discovered one of Photo-
shop’s greatest and most used secrets: how it can fix a badly exposed photograph and make it Web-presentable. 
From here, there is only more magic to come.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

2
| The Staging Area |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

THE STAGING AREA
2
15
charting your course
If you were at a carnival, Chapter 1 would be the enticing gypsy beckoning you into the tent of 
digital enchantment. It was only a teaser, offering a small taste of what Photoshop has to offer. In 
this chapter you will pull back the curtain, step inside the tent, adjust your eyes to the darkness, 
and become a part of the performance rather than remain a spectator. Here, you take center stage—
where all the action happens—and explore the workspace and navigational features of the program.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Get comfortable with the Photoshop interface
 
▶
Set and delete preferences
 
▶
Navigate the workspace
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
16
STAGING
Before you produce your first Photoshop masterpiece, it helps to get acquainted 
with the program’s interface, or work area, and set it up to your desired 
specifications. In theater, this process is called staging. First, you will get 
familiar with such props as the document area, toolbox, menu bar, panels, and 
workspace. Second, you will practice using the navigational tools, avoiding 
any chance of getting lost among the bright lights of your virtual stage.
LESSON 1: INTERFACE HIGHLIGHTS
Learn your way around in this lesson.
Identifying Props
 1. 
Open Photoshop.
 2. 
Choose File > New from menu bar. Enter the following information (see Figure 2–1):
▶Name: Type myfile
▶Preset: Default Photoshop Size
▶Color Mode: RGB Color, 8 bit
▶Background Contents: White
FIGURE | 2–1 |
New Document options box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17
|  Chapter 2 |
 
▶Document Area: When you created a new file in step 2, you specified 
properties for a document area. This is the blank area in the center of 
the interface where you do all of your work (consider this your canvas 
or stage). At the top of the document area is a document tab, which 
provides information about the document (file), such as its name, 
current magnification, color mode, and bit depth. Each file you open 
or create in Photoshop will have different information in its document 
tab. See Figure 2–4. It is likely you will have many document windows 
open at the same time. All open documents are seen as tabs at the top 
of the document area. See Figure 2–5. To view a document, click on the 
document tab at the top of the document area to bring the document 
forward in the window. To close a document, click the X icon on its tab.
 
▶Menu Bar: Along the top of the interface is the menu bar, which contains all of 
the commands to perform certain tasks: File, Edit, Image, Layer, Select, Filter, 
Analysis, 3D, View, Window, and Help. The commands are categorized so you 
FIGURE | 2–2 |
The Photoshop interface (Mac).
3. 
The Photoshop interface may look different depending on whether you are a Macintosh 
or a Windows user. The main props, however, are the same. Compare your Photoshop 
interface with Figure 2–2 (Mac) and Figure 2–3 (Windows), and note where the various 
parts of the program are located.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
18
can find them easily (so do not bother memorizing 
them all!). For example, if you want to open a panel 
window, click the Window menu and a list of options 
will pop up. To make global adjustments to an image, 
go to Image. To edit, go to Edit. You get the idea.
▶ Application Bar: A recent feature in all Adobe Creative 
 Suite applications is the Application bar. The bar 
extends along the top of the program below the menu bar ON the Macintosh 
interface and as part of the menu bar on the Windows interface. It contains 
universal commands found across the Creative Suite programs, such as the 
application’s icon, a link to Bridge (more on that below), and setting and tool 
options for how you might like to view a file in the Document Area, such as 
show Grids, Guides and Rulers, Zoom level, Arrange Documents, and Screen 
Mode. See Figure 2–6. Also on the Application bar are workspace options. 
Workspaces are predefined panel sets for particular tasks in Photoshop. The 
Essentials workspace is the default, but there are other preset workspaces to 
FIGURE | 2–5 |
Open documents are seen as tabs at the top of the document area.
FIGURE | 2–3 |
The Photoshop interface (Windows).
FIGURE | 2–4 |
The document title tab shows specific information about an open 
document.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–6 |
The Application Bar for Mac and Windows.
FIGURE | 2–7 |
The really cool Adobe Bridge. Find a file quickly and visually!
meet your image creation needs, such as Design and Painting. A more detailed 
exploration of workspaces is covered in the Exploring on Your Own section at 
the end of this chapter. Furthermore, you can have the option to Access CS 
Live from the Application bar. CS Live provides online services that you can 
access directly from Photoshop to accomplish such tasks as color matching, 
data conferencing, and online document creation, as well as other resources 
to aid your creative workflow. Finally, the Application bar also provides access 
to the Adobe Bridge and Mini Bridge programs, stand-alone applications 
for file browsing and management across Adobe’s Creative Suite programs. 
Alternatively, open the Bridge program by choosing File > Browse in Bridge. 
Among many features, Bridge allows you to quickly browse for a file on your 
local hard drive, and it even provides a visual thumbnail of the file for easy 
selection. Check it out! See Figure 2–7.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
20
 
▶Tools Panel/Toolbox: Located by default to the left of the work area is the 
toolbox. This is where you choose the tools you need to select, edit, modify, 
and create your Photoshop masterpiece (see Figure 2–8 for tool names and 
shortcut keys). In CS5, the toolbox is displayed in a long, single column. If 
you wish to use the double-column toolbox from prior versions of Photoshop, 
click on the light gray double arrow at the top of the toolbox. This will 
toggle between the new toolbox (see Figure 2–8) and the classic toolbox 
(see Figure 2–9). Tool icons with a black arrow in the corner contain hidden, 
related tools. With your cursor, click and hold down on a tool’s icon to reveal 
the other tool choices (see Figure 2–10). You will be using the toolbox a lot, 
so always keep it handy. If you close it by mistake you can reopen it from the 
Window menu. You will learn about most of the tools in the next chapters, 
but if you are the curious type and cannot wait, choose Help > Photoshop 
Help on the menu bar, select the section Workspace, and review Tools.
FIGURE | 2–8 |
The Photoshop CS5 toolbox.
FIGURE | 2–9 |
The classic toolbox.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21
|  Chapter 2 |
 
▶Options Bar/Control Panel: Most of 
the tools selected in the toolbox 
have options. These are displayed in 
the Options bar (also referred to as 
the Control Panel), located along the 
top of the document window, below 
the Application bar. The Options bar 
is context-sensitive, which means it 
displays different information depending 
on what tool is selected. Try it out: 
select some tools in the toolbox and 
watch the content change in the 
Options bar with each new selection.
▶  Panels: Panels (referred to as palettes 
in previous versions of Photoshop), 
usually located to the right of the work 
area, help you modify and monitor your 
images. By default, panels are tabbed 
together in like-minded groups that can, 
in turn, be placed in docks. However, you 
can separate them. Simply click on their 
title tabs and drag them to another area 
of the workspace. Of course, you can dock 
any panel back into a group by dragging 
its title bar over the desired panel group. 
See Figure 2–11 and Figure 2–12. If 
you want your panels out of the way, 
so you can better see your workspace, 
just hide them by pressing Shift-Tab. To 
bring them back, press Shift-Tab again. 
If you don’t see a particular panel, go to 
Window on the menu bar and select the 
panel name. Panel names with checks 
by them are already open. To uncheck 
a panel, go to Window on the menu 
bar and select the checked panel name 
to toggle it off—close it from view.
 
▶Docks: Photoshop CS5 offers a handy 
way to organize your favorite panels, 
called docks. Docks are located on the 
right and/or left sides of the screen 
and can hold a single panel or groups 
of panels. To familiarize yourself with 
using the docks, try the following:
 1. 
 Choose Window > Workspace > Reset 
Essentials to set the Essentials workspace area 
to its default arrangement.
FIGURE | 2–10 |
Reveal hidden tools in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 2–11 |
Panels are grouped by similar topic. Select 
a tab to bring a panel forward.
FIGURE | 2–12 |
A panel can be separated from its group by clicking and 
dragging the title tab to a different area of the workspace.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
22
FIGURE | 2–13 |
Undock the Swatches panel.
 2. 
 Undock the Swatches panel: click in the title 
bar of the panel and drag it into the document 
area. See Figure 2–13.
 3. 
 Expand or collapse a dock: click on the double 
arrow in the title bar of a panel. See Figures 
2–14 and 2–15.
 4. 
 To close the Swatches panel, click on the Close 
icon on the left (Mac) or right (Windows) side of 
the title bar. See Figure 2–16.
 5. 
Choose Window > Swatches  to reopen the 
Swatches panel.
FIGURE | 2–14 |
Collapse a panel.
FIGURE | 2–15 |
Expand a panel.
FIGURE | 2–16 |
Close a panel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23
|  Chapter 2 |
 6. 
To re-dock the Swatches panel, click 
in the title bar of the panel and drag 
it over the Swatches and Styles panel 
already docked on the right side of the 
screen until you see a blue outlined dock 
shadow appear. See Figure 2–17.
 7. 
Close the panel by clicking the black 
arrow with horizontal lines in the upper-
right corner of the panel’s title bar and 
choosing Close Tab Group, or Ctrl-click 
(Mac) or right-click (Windows) over a 
title bar and choose Close or Close Tab 
Group.
Note: When a panel is docked the Close 
icon is not visible in the panel’s title bar, 
as it is when the panel is undocked. 
You can also close panel groups by 
unchecking them under the Window 
menu.
 8. 
Choose Window > Swatches to reopen the Swatches panel. Notice that the panel set 
remains docked.
 
▶Status bar: The status bar is located at the bottom left edge of the document 
window. It shows you information about a document’s size and dimensions, the 
current tool being used and its magnification level, and more. See Figure 2–18.
FIGURE | 2–18 |
The Status bar reveals information about a document.
FIGURE | 2–17 |
Drag a panel into a panel set.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
24
FIGURE | 2–20 |
The tool tip for the Rectangle 
tool is revealed.
FIGURE | 2–22 |
Set a foreground color.
 
▶Context menus: Context menus appear when you Ctrl-click (Mac) 
or right-click your mouse (Windows) in the document area. They 
are drop-down menus that give you quick access to various 
features of any tool you are currently using. See Figure 2–19.
Marking the Stage
 1. 
Place the cursor (do not click!) over the Rectangle tool in the toolbox. Note 
that a text equivalent of the tool name appears. This is called a tool tip. Next 
to the tool name there is also a shortcut key indicated. See Figure 2–20. (If 
your tool tips are not showing, you can turn them on using Photoshop > 
Preferences > Interface (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Interface (Windows).)
FIGURE | 2–19 |
Context menu for the Marquee 
tool. Ctrl-click (Mac) or Right-click 
(Windows) to get to the context 
menus.
FIGURE | 2–21 |
Click and hold on the Rectangle tool 
to reveal other shape options.
 2. 
Click and hold on the Rectangle tool to open other shape tool 
options. See Figure 2–21. Select the Ellipse tool.
 3. 
Click on the Foreground color swatch in the toolbox to choose a 
color. See Figure 2–22.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–23 |
Select a color from 
the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 2–24 |
Select the Shape layers option in the Options bar.
 4. 
Select a color in the Color Picker and click OK. See Figure 2–23.
FIGURE | 2–25 |
Create elliptical shapes.
5. 
To create an ellipse filled with color and have it 
automatically placed on its own layer, be sure to 
select the “Shape layers” option in the Options bar. 
See Figure 2–24.
 6. 
Place your ellipse tool over the document window. 
Click and drag on the document window to create 
an elliptical shape. Draw four or five shapes of 
different sizes. To create a perfect circle, hold down 
Shift as you click and drag to make the shape. See 
Figure 2–25.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
26
FIGURE | 2–26 |
Check that the workspace is set to Essentials.
 7. 
Unless you are up for playing around some more with this file, we are done with marking up 
the stage. However, save the file for use in the next lesson. Choose File > Save As. For Format, 
choose Photoshop. Name the file myfile.psd and save it to your lessons folder.
Note: You might be wondering, “What’s the ‘.psd’ at the end of my filename?“ 
This is the native file extension for all Photoshop files. If you see a file with this 
extension on the end, you know it was created in Adobe Photoshop.
LESSON 2: CUSTOMIZE YOUR EXPERIENCE
Photoshop is smart; it remembers what you like. Every time you open it and do 
things like drag panels into your dock, set ruler units, or change your cursor 
display, Photoshop saves these preferences in a Preferences file located on your 
hard drive. This is great when you want to reopen the program on your computer 
and have everything exactly where you left it. Let me show you how this works.
Note: You can also save the arrangement of your favorite workspaces—the 
setup of panels, menus, and keyboard shortcuts—to your liking (see No. 1 of the 
Exploring on Your Own section at the end of this chapter).
Setting Preferences
 1. 
Open Photoshop.
 2. 
Click on the double arrow at the top right of the 
Application bar and choose Reset Essentials to set 
the workspace back to its default settings. See Figure 
2–26.
 3. 
Choose File > Open and find the file myfile.psd that 
you created in the last step of Lesson 1.
 4. 
Choose Shift-Tab on the keyboard to close all the 
panels on the right side of the interface.
Note: If you do not have myfile.psd, open 
chap2L2.psd in the chap02_lessons folder instead.
 5. 
Choose Window > Layers to open only the Layers 
panel.
 6. 
Select the layer called Shape 1.
 7. 
In the Layers panel, click the black arrow with four 
horizontal lines in the upper-right corner of the 
window to open the panel’s options. Choose Blending 
Options from the drop-down menu. See Figure 2–27.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

27
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–27 |
Located at the top right of any panel is a sub menu (also referred to as a “flyout” menu) containing 
more options.
 8. 
In the Layer Style dialog box, choose the Drop Shadow and Bevel and Emboss style 
options. See Figure 2–28. Be sure Preview is selected in the dialog box so you can 
see the styles applied automatically to the document. Click OK.
 9. 
Select other layers (Shape 2, Shape 3, Shape 4, etc.) and apply other styles found 
in the Layer Styles dialog box. For example, try the Outer Glow and Satin styles.
Note: Yes, I know, the Layer Style dialog box can be overwhelming—no 
worries. I guarantee this will eventually be one of your favorite places to visit in 
Photoshop.
 10. 
Without really knowing it, you have already been setting some file preferences. To 
set some more use the Preferences dialog box. Choose Photoshop > Preferences >
Cursors (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Cursors (Windows). Any change you 
make in this box is recorded in a preferences file for the next time you open 
the program. There are many preference options. We will only tinker with a few. 
However, it is a good idea to look through all of them in case you want to make 
a change later.
 11. 
Under the Cursors option, go to Other Cursors and select Precise. This changes 
the cursor of a selected tool from its standard icon to a more precise, crosshair 
indicator. See Figure 2–29. This crosshair indicates a precision cursor; that is, the 
center of the cursor is the exact spot where you will select, draw, or edit. This is 
FIGURE | 2–28 |
Select a style option.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
28
much more accurate than an icon cursor. What if you like working with both cursors? 
Simple! Choose the Standard cursor in Other Cursors and use the Caps Lock key to 
toggle between the crosshair indicator and the regular cursor. For now, let’s keep it on 
Precise to show the advantage of Preferences.
 12. 
Click OK to close the Preferences window.
 13. 
Save your file as myfile2.psd.
 14. 
Choose Photoshop > Quit Photoshop (Mac) or File > Exit (Windows) to shut down the 
program.
15. 
Reopen the program and your saved myfile2.psd. Note that your preferences have not 
changed. Precise cursors are still indicated in the Preferences dialog box, and the Layers 
panel is still open on your workspace.
Deleting Preferences
 1. 
If you want to go back to Photoshop’s default Preferences settings, first close Photoshop 
by choosing Photoshop > Quit Photoshop (Mac) or File > Exit (Windows).
FIGURE | 2–29 |
Change preferences in the Preferences dialog box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29
|  Chapter 2 |
Alternatively:
 
▶In Windows, go to the Documents and Settings\username\Application 
Data\Adobe\Adobe Photoshop CS5\Adobe Photoshop CS5 Settings 
folder. Move a copy of the Adobe Photoshop CS5 Prefs.psp file to your 
desktop as a backup and then delete the one in the Settings folder.
 
▶In Mac OS, go to Users, then your username folder, and choose Library > 
Preferences > Adobe Photoshop CS5 Settings > Adobe Photoshop CS5 
Prefs.psp. Move a copy of the Adobe Photoshop CS5 Prefs.psp file to your 
desktop as a backup and then delete the one in the Settings folder.
3. 
Once you have deleted the preferences file, reopen Photoshop to view the default 
setup. It will look something like that shown in Figure 2–31.
SEEING IS BELIEVING
Have you ever been in the unfortunate situation where you paid $60 to see your 
favorite rock star in concert only to find yourself in the last row of the concert hall 
wishing you had remembered to bring your binoculars? Well, you will be happy 
FIGURE | 2–30 |
The delete file prompt.
 2. 
Now, depending if you are on a Mac or a Windows computer, do one of the following:
 
▶Press and hold Option-Command-Shift (Mac OS) or Alt-Control-Shift (Windows) 
while you launch Photoshop. You will be prompted to delete the current settings 
file. See Figure 2–30.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
30
to know that you will never have that problem working in Photoshop. No matter 
how many layers of objects you find yourself accumulating, there is a tool to help 
you see clearly where you are and what you are doing. In this next lesson, you will 
get up-close-and-personal with Photoshop’s navigational features, such as the 
Hand and Zoom tools, the Navigator panel, and the screen and view modes.
LESSON 3: NAVIGATIONAL FEATURES
Magnification Tools
 1. 
In Photoshop, open the file chap2L3.psd in the chap02_lessons folder.
Note: If you receive a dialog box stating, “Some text layers might need to be 
updated . . .” choose Update.
FIGURE | 2–31 |
Photoshop with default setup.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–32 |
The document title bar indicates the current magnification of the image.
FIGURE | 2–33 |
The Zoom tool.
 2. 
Choose View > Fit on Screen to magnify the image to fit in the window area. Note that 
the document title bar indicates the current magnification of the image. See 
Figure 2–32. This number varies depending on what view you have indicated for the 
document. For example, choose View > Print Size, which shows you the image size if it 
were to be printed (a number of factors influence how an image is viewed on screen, 
which will be covered in Chapter 3).
3. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels. This shows you the image size at 100% of the screen 
resolution (you will learn more about resolution in Chapter 3).
4. 
Select the Zoom tool in the toolbox. See Figure 2–33.
5. 
Click once with the Zoom tool over the image. It zooms in. Click again to zoom even 
closer.
6. 
Hold down Option (Mac) or Alt (Windows) to reverse the Zoom tool (note the minus 
sign in the Zoom tool cursor). Continue to hold down Option/Alt as you click once on 
the artwork to zoom back out. Click three more times to zoom out even farther.
  7. 
OK, let’s try a different (very cool!) method. With the Zoom tool click and hold the mouse 
button down over the image—it animates the magnification smoothly toward you. 
Now, hold down the Option (Mac) or Alt (Windows) and hold the mouse button to 
animate the magnification smoothly away from you. This zoom feature is playfully called 
“Scrubby Zoom.”  You can turn this feature off by unchecking the option in the Options 
panel of the Zoom tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
32
 10. 
Select the Hand tool in the toolbox (the tool right next to the Zoom tool in classic view, 
or just above it in single-column view). Click and drag with the Hand tool over the 
document, pushing it down until you see the Tyrone text at the top of the photo.
 11. 
In the Layers panel, select the layer called Tyrone. Change the blending mode for the 
text layer from Normal to Color Burn. See Figure 2–36. Note that the text blends with the 
background colors of the photo.
8. 
Let’s zoom into a particular area of the photograph. With the Zoom tool selected, click 
once over the copyright notice in the lower-left corner of the document. Click again in 
the same spot to zoom into the area even closer. See Figure 2–34.
FIGURE | 2–34 |
Select an area to zoom close.
FIGURE | 2–35 |
Change the text.
 9. 
Select the Horizontal Type tool in the toolbox. Then click and drag over the text 2003 
to select it (you will know when you can select type because the cursor changes from 
an I-beam with a box around it to a plain I-beam). Change the text to 2010. See 
Figure 2–35.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–36 |
Located at the top right of 
the Layers panel is the drop-
down menu to change the 
blending modes of a layer.
FIGURE | 2–37 |
The Options bar for the Hand tool.
Note: There are many different types of blending modes for layers, as well as the 
painting tools. Feel free to explore the others (such as Difference and Luminosity). 
Blending modes are used a lot, so this will not be the last time you get to play with 
them.
12. 
Be sure the Hand tool is selected in the toolbox. Note the options available for the Hand 
tool in the Options bar right below the Application bar. In the Options bar, select Fit 
Screen (alternatively, you can choose View > Fit Screen from the menu bar, or double-click 
on the Hand tool in the toolbox, or press Command 0 (Mac) or Ctrl 0 (Windows)). See 
Figure 2–37.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
34
The Navigator Panel
 1. 
The Navigator is another way to get a good view of your work. Choose Window > 
Navigator to open the Navigator panel (if it is not already open). Note in the panel 
window a small view of the image with a red border around it. See Figure 2–38.
FIGURE | 2–38 |
The Navigator panel.
 2. 
In the Navigator panel, slide the small arrow in the lower part of the window to the right 
to magnify your view or to the left to reduce it. Note that the red border adjusts in the 
viewing window to indicate what area is viewable in the document.
Note: As an alternative to moving the slider to zoom in and out, you can click on 
the mountain-looking icons on each side of the slider. You can also type in a zoom 
percentage in the lower-left corner of the Navigator panel.
 3. 
Magnify the image by sliding the arrow in the Navigator panel to the right. The red box 
in the Navigator window should grow smaller.
 4. 
Locate a specific area of the image by placing the cursor over the red box in the 
Navigator panel (note that the cursor changes to the Hand tool). Now, click and drag the 
red border area.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35
|  Chapter 2 |
Screen Modes
 1. 
With the Hand tool still selected, choose View > Fit on Screen to see the complete 
image.
 2. 
In the Application bar, click the Screen Mode button and select the Full Screen Mode 
option. See Figure 2–39. You will receive a warning that all panels will be hidden in this 
mode. Choose the Full Screen button. Press ESC or F on the keyboard to exit Full Screen 
Mode.
FIGURE | 2–39 |
There are three screen mode options located on the Application bar: Standard Screen Mode, Full Screen Mode with Menu Bar, and Full 
Screen Mode (no menu bar).
 3. 
From the Application bar, try Full Screen Mode with Menu Bar.
4. 
Go back to Standard Screen Mode by once again clicking on the monitor icon on the 
Application bar.
5. 
Close the file. You are done with this lesson.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| The Staging Area |
36
  IN REVIEW
1. 
What does Shift-Tab do?
2. 
What does .psd at the end of a filename indicate?
3. 
What is Adobe Bridge? How is it useful?
4. 
What is the difference between View > Fit on Screen and View > Print Size?
5. 
What is a precise cursor? How can you change the cursor from Standard to Precise Mode?
6. 
What are two ways to reset your preferences to the default settings?
7. 
What is the purpose of the Navigator panel?
1. 
There are many ways to customize your experience in Photoshop. Explore the various options for how 
your workspace could be set up by choosing Window > Workspace (or, for some features, the Workspace 
button on the Applications Bar). See Figure 2–40. Keep in mind, however, that you do not want to customize 
too much while you are doing the lessons in this book, or things might get confusing; the lessons are 
based on the default arrangement of the workspace and keyboard shortcuts. Options include:
 
▶New/Delete Workspace: Allows you to create, save, and delete your favorite workspace setup 
(panels, menus, and keyboard shortcuts) for quick access every time you use the program.
 
▶Reset Essentials: Resets the Photoshop interface to its default arrangement and closes any 
open panels.
 
▶Keyboard Shortcuts & Menus: Allows you to customize keyboard shortcuts for opening application 
menus, panels, and tools.
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
SUMMARY
This chapter familiarized you with the Photoshop staging area—the workspace and navigational  elements 
of the program. You also learned how to set your own preferences and, if necessary, delete them. 
 Additionally, you gained insight into how easy (dare we say “magical”?) it is to do such useful things as 
change your cursor icon, create a drop shadow behind a shape, and blend the colors of two layers.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37
|  Chapter 2 |
FIGURE | 2–41 |
When New in CS5 is selected, 
context specific menu items are color 
highlighted for certain workspaces.
 
▶New in CS5: When selected, new features of CS5 
will be highlighted in blue on the menu bar. 
See Figure 2–41.
 
▶3D, Design, Motion, Painting, and Photography are preset workspaces designed for 
a specific task within the program. When selected, panel sets associated with the 
particular task are made available. For example, choose the 3D workspace option 
(Window > Workspace > 3D) or from the drop-down menu in the upper right corner of 
the Application bar, and note that the panel sets change to reflect that workspace. 
 
▶For more information on Workspaces in Photoshop, go to Help > Photoshop 
Help and read the section Workspace > Workspace basics.
2. 
Create a new file. Use the Rectangle and Ellipse tools to make shapes. Fill each shape with a 
different color (Note: to have each shape created on its own layer choose the Shape layers option 
in the Options bar.) Use the Zoom and/or Navigator panel to practice zooming in and out of 
the document window. Move the file around with the Hand tool. Reset your preferences.
FIGURE | 2–40 |
Customize your workspaces under Window > Workspace on 
the menu bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

3
| Image Essentials |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

IMAGE ESSENTIALS
3
39
charting your course
Getting acquainted with the Photoshop staging area was the essence of Chapter 2. It allowed you 
to get comfortable in the space so the real show can begin. As you might already know, any well-
trained artist has a background in the classics. If you are an actor, you study Shakespeare’s works; a 
painter, Renaissance art; a musician, Mozart’s symphonies; a dancer, ballet. The study of the classics 
not only provides some perspective from the past, but, more importantly, becomes a fundamental 
sounding board to grow creatively. Such a sounding board for a graphic artist would be an 
understanding of how computer graphics are generated, and that is what this chapter is about. Your 
classical training begins with a study of vectors and bitmaps, with an emphasis on bitmaps, since 
that is what Photoshop knows best. It also begins with other vital information, such as bit depth, 
resolution, and image formats. In addition, you will get more practice working with Photoshop’s 
main ingredient: pixels.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Develop a firm grasp of the two types of digital images: vector and bitmap
 
▶
Discover the meaning of zeros and ones
 
▶
Master some tricks to make resolution your friend
 
▶
Learn about image formats and get an overview of common image format types
 
▶
Explore how images are created and edited using pixels
 
▶
Explore more tricks of the program with bitmaps and pixels in mind
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
40
IMAGE CONSTRUCTION
No doubt you are eagerly waiting to get your hands on Photoshop again. However, 
it would not be right to send you on the next phase of the journey ill-equipped. 
It would be like placing a light saber in your hand without guiding you in the art 
of “the Force”; you would survive a little while, probably create some really star-
studded stuff, but eventually you would want finesse. Filters and effects only get 
you so far. The real goal is to become one with the program—to know exactly what 
makes it tick. This applies not just to Photoshop but to any computer graphics 
program. Your training begins with an overview of how images are constructed 
in the digital world. They come in two forms: bitmap (or raster) and vector.
THE BRIEF ON BITMAPPED IMAGES
Let’s start by examining a basic black-and-white photograph. See Figure 3–1. 
Reproducing this image on paper is pretty straightforward: some black ink is 
deposited dot-by-dot on white paper. But how is this photo reproduced on a 
computer? Imagine this image is formed from a mosaic of tiles. However, instead 
of each tile being made of ceramic or glass, it is made of pixels—rectangular or 
square-shaped elements. When lined up side-by-side in a grid, these pixels form 
a complete image or pattern. See Figure 3–2. This grid of pixels is called a bitmap, 
and it is the manipulation of bitmapped images that is the heart of Photoshop.
FIGURE | 3–1 |
A photograph reduced to black and white.
FIGURE | 3–2 |
A photograph constructed from a grid of pixels.
Bit Depth
Two important concepts related to bitmaps are bit depth and image resolution. Let’s 
start with bit depth. Going back to our black-and-white visual in Figure 3–1, how 
does the computer know which part of the visual is black and which is white? Let 
me explain without getting too “techie.” First, you must know that the brain of the 
computer knows only two numbers: zero and one. Yep, no deep math here—just zeros 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

41
|  Chapter 3 |
and ones. Amazingly, how the computer calculates different combinations (or strings) 
of zeros and ones produces every image, letter, and movement made on the computer. 
For instance, if you type shazam on your keyboard, the computer translates that 
word into its own language of zeros and ones—a string of data that looks something 
like 0111001101101000011000010111101001100001011011010000110100001010.
Here is where it gets interesting. A single zero (0) or a single one (1) has a 
measurement called a “bit.” Furthermore, a certain number of zeros and 
ones (bits) is represented in each pixel (tile) of a bitmapped image. (Are you 
still with us? Hang in there; it will soon be made clear.) This representation 
is an image’s bit depth. In the instance of the black-and-white photo, a white 
pixel you see (or do not see) is translated as zero (off) in the computer brain 
and a black pixel is translated as one (on). Each pixel in this example is equal 
to one bit of color information, which can be either black or white.
Not surprisingly, a black-and-white image is sometimes 
referred to as a one-bit image. We will discuss the 
relationship of image color to bit depth in Chapter 
5. For now, just remember that the larger an image’s 
bit depth (accumulation of zeros and ones), the more 
variations of color it contains. See Figure 3–3. 
In general, a larger bit depth also produces a more 
detailed image with a larger file size.
Resolution
Resolution plays an important role in Photoshop, and the concept of resolution is 
going to crop up several times throughout this book. It is something of an elusive 
term because it can be discussed in many different contexts, depending on how an 
image is being used and where it is being viewed. Ultimately, though, resolution 
works as a measurement of how much information a file contains. For our purposes 
right now, resolution is a way to describe the amount of pixels in an image, which 
corresponds to the size (in dimensions and/or in file weight) an image might be when 
reproduced for print or the screen (i.e., the Web).
In Photoshop, an image with a resolution of 72 pixels per inch (ppi) and measuring 72 
pixels in width and 72 pixels in height equals a 1-inch-by-1-inch image when set to a 
magnification of 100%. This makes an image with a total of 
5,184 pixels. Huh? See Figure 3–4 for a visual.
Why 72? Well, that is the default screen resolution (the 
resolution set for viewing images on a screen) when creating 
a new document in Photoshop. If you don’t believe me, go to 
Photoshop > Preferences > Units & Rulers (Mac) or Edit > 
Preferences > Units & Rulers (Windows) and see for yourself 
FIGURE | 3–3 |
The larger an image’s bit depth, 
the more variations of color 
(for example, shades 
of gray) it contains.
FIGURE | 3–4 |
A 1-inch-by-1-inch image in 
Photoshop is set, by default, 
at a resolution of 72 ppi.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
42
(or see Figure 3–5). Do not mess around with this screen resolution setting. Keep it at 
72 ppi, which is the average resolution of Web images. This makes sense as Web images are 
viewed via a screen. (I know you’re wondering, “Will my picture look better if I increase 
the screen resolution?” The answer is no. You are just squeezing more zeros and ones (bits) 
into the same area. The only thing you would be doing is making your file larger in size.)
FIGURE | 3–5 |
The Preferences dialog box for setting screen resolution.
Now, by default, Photoshop views images at 100% based on the 72 ppi screen 
resolution. However, if you wanted to create an image that would print 1 inch by 
1 inch, the resolution needed would depend on the resolution of the output device 
(i.e., your printer). Let’s say you wanted to create an image that needed to be 144 ppi. 
What would it look like in Photoshop if set to a screen resolution of 72 ppi? Let’s find out:
 1. 
Open Photoshop.
 2. 
Choose File > New and enter the following information:
 
▶Name: res_72
 
▶Preset: Custom
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

43
|  Chapter 3 |
 
▶Width: 1 inch
 
▶Height: 1 inch
 
▶Resolution: 72 pixels/inch
 
▶Color Mode: RGB Color, 8 bit
 
▶Background Contents: White
 3. 
Click OK.
 4. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels to ensure the document is at 
100% magnification. You should see a blank document that is 
approximately 1 inch by 1 inch. See Figure 3–6. 
Note: If you do not see rulers around the image, choose 
View > Rulers from the main menu.
5. 
Keeping your res_72 document open, choose File > New and 
enter the following information:
 
▶Name: res_144
 
▶Preset: Custom
 
▶Width: 1 inch
 
▶Height: 1 inch
 
▶Resolution: 144 pixels/inch
 
▶Color Mode: RGB Color, 8 bit
 
▶Background Contents: White
 6. 
Click OK.
 7. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels to ensure the document is at 100% magnification. You 
should see a blank document, but compared to the first document (res_72), it is visually 
four times the size. See Figure 3–7. Even though its dimensions were set to 1 inch by 
1 inch like res_72, it appears bigger 
because you are viewing it at the default 
72 ppi screen resolution (remember that 
setting in the Photoshop preferences?). To 
show all the pixels for res_144 set at 144 
ppi (a total of 20,736 pixels) at a screen 
resolution of 72, the document must 
visually expand its size, precisely four 
times the size of res_72.
 8. 
Moreover, when the file res_144 gets to 
its final output source (a printer, which in 
this case requires an image of 144 ppi), it 
will print at the intended 1-inch-by-1-inch 
size. Choose View > Print Size to see this 
calculation.
FIGURE | 3–6 |
A 1-inch-by-1-inch document with a resolution of 
72 ppi, 100% magnification, in Photoshop.
FIGURE | 3–7 |
Compare the size of a 72-ppi 
document to a 144-ppi document 
at 100% magnification.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
44
Note: One more thing to be aware of is the file size of each of the documents 
created. The file size of res_144 is four times larger (61K) than res_72 (15K).
I completely understand if you are still unsure about the concept of resolution. Perhaps 
you even feel the urge to slam this book shut. Before you do, however, bookmark this page; 
you will probably want to refer to it again, as well as the “more on resolution” resource 
links found in the Exploring on Your Own section at the end of this chapter. If it is of any 
comfort, this whole resolution idea really begins to sink in when you find yourself in an 
actual predicament (or two or three) using the program. Until such a predicament arrives, 
you will get plenty of practice with resolution throughout the lessons in this book.
THE BRIEF ON VECTOR GRAPHICS
As you have discovered, when dealing with bitmap images, an image’s resolution and 
pixel dimensions are interdependent. Adjusting the amount of pixels per inch in a 
bitmap image affects its resolution, not to mention its visual quality, and vice versa. 
There is no way around it, unless you are working in vectors. Vectors are another 
way of constructing digital images. As part of your classical training, it is important 
to cover vectors, but only briefly. Photoshop does have some vector support 
(which comes in handy when you need some flexibility with free-form drawing or 
when importing vector-based graphics created in other programs, such as Adobe 
Illustrator), but, as you know, bitmaps, not vectors, are at the heart of Photoshop.
Vector graphics are comprised of points and lines that describe an object’s outline 
or shape. See Figure 3–8. Instead of being composed of a grid of square pixels (see 
Figure 3–2), a vector image is drawn based on mathematical calculations of X and Y 
coordinates. This means vectors are resolution independent: they can be scaled large 
(billboard size) or small (postage stamp size) and printed to any output device without 
loss of detail or clarity. If so, why not use vectors for all digital images? I hate to break it to 
you, but there is no one-stop shop. Vector graphics are great for a certain type of image 
design and for free-form drawing, including bold and illustrative types of graphics (i.e., 
logos and text treatments that can be easily scaled while retaining crisp lines and solid 
colors). On the flip side, bitmaps are a great way to represent continuous-tone images, 
such as photographs or digital paintings that have subtle gradations of color and shading.
FIGURE | 3–8 |
Anatomy of a vector 
graphic from full-shade 
view to outline view.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

45
|  Chapter 3 |
SEEING ALL SIDES
Now that you have gotten an idea of the differences between bitmap and vector 
graphics, I must confess it is not all black and white. With the proliferation of so 
many kinds of computer graphic software programs, you might find yourself sifting 
through a lot of digitized gray matter. Programs such as Adobe Photoshop, Adobe 
Fireworks, and GIMP are designed to work specifically with bitmap-constructed 
images. Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Flash, and CorelDRAW are designed to work with 
vector-based graphics. However, most programs, to some extent, have the ability to 
import and translate both vector and bitmap graphics. At first this convergence of 
image types might seem confusing, but once you understand how digital images are 
constructed, your work as a graphic artist will become more productive.
Before moving on, you should know that there are different image formats for 
different types of images. A format is described by an extension at the end of the 
filename, as in image.jpg or mywork.tif. An image’s format identifies whether it is 
comprised of bitmaps or vectors. It also determines an image’s file size and visual 
quality. There are many kinds of image file formats, depending on where you are 
going to use the image (i.e., print or Web, or exporting for use in another program).
Most graphic programs support the use of the following:
Bitmap-only Formats
 
▶BMP: Limited bitmap file format not suitable for Web or prepress
 
▶GIF: Compressed format mainly used for Internet graphics with solid colors and 
crisp lines
 
▶JPEG: Compressed format used for Internet graphics, particularly photographs
 
▶PNG: Versatile, bitmap-compressed format used mainly for Internet graphics
 
▶TIFF: Uncompressed format for saving bitmapped images (although in 
Photoshop there are some options for compression capability, with LZW being 
the best choice for compression with no loss in quality); most popular for 
artwork going to print
Vector and Bitmap-based Formats
 
▶EPS: Flexible file format that can contain both bitmap and vector data; most 
vector images are saved in this format
 
▶PICT: Used on Macintosh computers and can contain both vector and bitmap 
data
 
▶SWF: The Macromedia Flash output format; a common vector-based graphics 
file format for the creation of scalable, compact graphics for the Web and 
hand-held devices
 
▶SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics): An XML-based vector format for the creation 
of scalable, compact graphics for the Web and handheld devices
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
46
IMPORTING AND EXPORTING
In Photoshop, you can import (place) images and files saved in many types of 
formats. To import files into Photoshop and to view a list of the readable documents 
it supports, choose File > Place to place a file inside a currently open file or File > 
Open (All Readable Documents or All Formats) to open a file in a separate window.
You can also export (save) your Photoshop work to different formats 
depending on where it will go next in the design process (printed, published 
to the Web, or imported into another program). To export a file, choose 
File > Save As and select the format type you want to export.
PIXELS: THE MAIN INGREDIENT
Photoshop manipulates pixels like a sculptor molds clay. Pixels are the 
main ingredient from which all images are formed in the program. Just as a 
sculptor has various implements to mold his vision, the tools in Photoshop’s 
toolbox are designed to shape pixels. For example, the Magic Wand tool 
selects pixels, the Crop tool deletes them, the Smudge tool smudges 
them, and the Clone Stamp tool duplicates them. You get the idea.
LESSON: PLAYING WITH PIXELS
The purpose of this next lesson is to show you that no matter what mysterious 
tricks we get into in the upcoming chapters, the underlying truth is always 
the same: Photoshop is just a playground for pixels. See Figure 3–9.
Lightening and Darkening Pixels
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > Open. Open the file chap3L1.psd in the chap03_lessons
folder.
 2. 
Save a copy of this file in your lessons folder: choose File > Save As and name your file 
chap3L1_yourname.psd.
FIGURE | 3–9 |
The lesson before and after 
playing with pixels.
 3. 
From the menu bar, choose Image > Adjustments > Levels… , 
select Auto and click OK to have Photoshop automatically adjust 
the brightness and contrast (light- and dark-colored pixels) of 
the image. Ah, that’s already much better.
Deleting and Transforming Pixels
 1. 
With your chap3L1_yourname.psd file open, choose File 
> Open and open the file tile.tif located in the chap03_
lessons/assets folder.
 2. 
In the Application bar, click on the Arrange Documents icon 
and choose 2 Up. See Figure 3–10.
 3. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox. See Figure 3–11.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47
|  Chapter 3 |
 4. 
Click and drag the tile pattern on top of the chap3L1_yourname.psd file, and then let 
go of the mouse button. A copy of the image will appear on the file. See Figure 3–12. 
Right on!
 5. 
Close the tile.tif file.
FIGURE | 3–10 |
Select the 2-up viewing option.
FIGURE | 3–11 |
Select the Move tool 
in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 3–12 |
With the Move tool, drag 
the selected tile pattern over 
the main image to copy the 
content of one file to another.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
48
 6. 
Now, get rid of the white pixels around the tile pattern. Select 
the Magic Wand tool in the toolbox. See Figure 3–13.
 7. 
With the Magic Wand tool, click on a white section of the tile 
pattern. All white areas of the image are selected. Press Delete 
or choose Edit > Clear. Ta-da! No more white pixels. The Magic 
Wand really is magic.
 8. 
Choose Select > Deselect (Apple/Command-D on the Mac or 
Ctrl-D on Windows). The marching ants disappear.
 9. 
Select Window > Layers to open the Layers panel (if it is not 
already open).
 10. 
Double-click on the text Layer 1 and rename it tile pattern. 
See Figure 3–14.
 11. 
Be sure the tile pattern layer is highlighted. Choose Edit > Free 
Transform. In the Options bar below the menu bar, enter the 
following (see Figure 3–15):
Note: As an alternative to entering exact scaling and 
rotation numbers in the Options bar, you can scale and 
rotate the transform box that surrounds the selected 
image. See Figure 3–16 and Figure 3–17.
 
▶Width (W): 32.0%
 
▶Height (H): 32.0%
 
▶Set rotation: 55.0 degrees
FIGURE | 3–13 |
Select the Magic Wand tool in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 3–14 |
Rename the layer.
FIGURE | 3–16 |
Scale interactively by clicking 
and dragging on a corner of 
the Free Transform box.
FIGURE | 3–17 |
Rotate interactively by clicking 
and dragging right above a 
corner of the Free Transform 
box. Note the rotation icon.
FIGURE | 3–15 |
Scale and rotate pixels by entering exact increments in the Options bar for the Free Transform command.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49
|  Chapter 3 |
 12. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox. A dialog 
box will come up asking if you want to apply 
the transformation. Click Apply. (Double-
clicking on the transformed image or hitting 
Return or Enter will work as well.)
 13. 
Move the tile pattern over one of the floor tiles 
in the photograph. See Figure 3–18.
 14. 
Choose File > Save and save your work.
Note: If the Maximize Compatibility Options 
box appears, keep the default option selected.
Altering, Blending, and Duplicating Pixels
 1. 
In the Layers panel, be sure the tile pattern layer is 
highlighted.
 2. 
Choose Filter > Texture > Craquelure from the menu bar.
 3. 
Adjust the Crack Spacing to 10, Crack Depth to 2, and Crack 
Brightness to 10. See Figure 3–19.
 4. 
Click OK to apply the effect on the tile pattern.
 5. 
Ctrl-click (Mac) or right-click (Windows) on the tile pattern 
layer. Select Blending Options from the pop-up menu. See 
Figure 3–20.
 6. 
In the Layer Style dialog box, check and then highlight (by 
selecting the name) the Bevel and Emboss style. The Bevel 
and Emboss options will appear to the right of the dialog box.
FIGURE | 3–18 |
Move the tile pattern over 
a tile in the photograph.
FIGURE | 3–19 |
Adjust options for the Craquelure texture.
FIGURE | 3–20 |
Select Blending Options.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
50
For Structure:
 
▶Style: Pillow Emboss
 
▶Technique: Smooth
 
▶Depth: 1
 
▶Size: 3
 
▶Soften: 10
For Shading:
 
▶Angle: 120
 
▶Altitude: 50
 
▶Highlight Mode, Opacity: 75
 
▶Shadow Mode, Opacity: 75
 
Leave the other settings at their default.
FIGURE | 3–21 |
Select options for Bevel and Emboss.
 7. 
Be sure the Preview option is checked so you can see the Bevel and Emboss options 
directly applied to the pixels of the tile pattern. See Figure 3–21.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51
|  Chapter 3 |
FIGURE | 3–22 |
Use a blending mode and opacity to further 
blend the tile pattern pixels with the 
photograph’s pixels.
 9. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox.
 10. 
Place the cursor over the tile pattern, hold down Option (Mac) or Alt (Windows), and 
then click and drag to make a duplicate of the pattern with all of its effects. Move the 
duplicate over another tile in the photograph.
 11. 
Create several more duplicates and place them over other tiles in the photograph (Hint: 
go to View > Snap and check to be sure your snap option is turned off (no checkmark 
next to the command)). For reference, see the completed image in Figure 3–9.
Note: Each time you create a duplicate tile pattern, it creates a new layer for that 
tile object in the Layers panel. To move an individual tile pattern, select that tile 
pattern’s layer in the Layers panel. To delete a tile pattern, highlight its layer and 
click on the Trash Can icon in the lower-right corner of the Layers panel. If you find 
yourself trying to move an element of your image and it is not cooperating, check 
the Layers panel and make sure the correct layer is selected. Even the pros come 
across this problem, so do not be embarrassed if this happens.
 12. 
Save the file with the new changes.
 8. 
Click OK to apply the effect. To further blend the tile pattern into the photograph, be 
sure the tile pattern layer is highlighted. In the Layers panel, select Multiply for the 
blending mode and 60% Opacity. See Figure 3–22.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
52
Hiding and Revealing Pixels
 1. 
Let’s open another file to add to your scene. Choose File > Open and open the file 
ocean.tif in the chap03_lessons/assets folder.
 2. 
In the Application bar, click on the Arrange Documents icon and choose 2 Up.
 3. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox. Place the cursor over the ocean photo and drag a 
copy of it to your chap3L1_yourname file.
 4. 
Close ocean.tif.
 5. 
Position the photo in the top area of the file.
 6. 
Choose Select > Load Selection from the menu bar.
 7. 
In the Load Selection dialog box, select Channel: arches (See Figure 3–23). Click OK.
FIGURE | 3–23 |
Select a Channel in the Load Selections box.
 8. 
A selection (marked by marching ants) is indicated on the file. This selection was 
premade and saved for this lesson. You will learn how to make your own saved 
selections in Chapter 8.
 9. 
Choose Layer > Layer Mask > Reveal Selection in the menu bar. Amazing! The selection 
reveals the ocean scene, masking out all other pixels. The photo has taken on a whole 
new perspective—much more inviting, I think.
 10. 
Save your file. You are done playing with pixels (at least temporarily).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

53
|  Chapter 3 |
SUMMARY
This chapter was heavy duty! It was a big bite into the nitty-gritty of bitmap and vector graphics, bit depth, 
resolution, and image formats, not to mention an opportunity to practice playing with pixels. Like studying the 
classics in any field, however, it was important to get this fundamental information out of the way, so you can 
more easily, productively, and creatively progress to the next level of Photoshop know-how.
  IN REVIEW
1. 
Briefly describe the differences between bitmap and vector graphics.
2. 
What are bits? Why is a black-and-white image considered a one-bit image?
3. 
How does resolution affect a bitmap image’s dimensions?
4. 
Bitmap images are most common for what types of images? Why?
5. 
Text and logo treatments are created best as what type of graphic? Why?
6. 
What is an image file format?
7. 
What is the main ingredient in Photoshop? Name five ways you altered this ingredient in the lesson.
1. 
In Photoshop, go to Help > Photoshop Help. Choose the topic “Opening and importing Images” and read the 
sections “Image essentials,” “Image size and resolution,” “Creating, opening and importing Images,” and “Placing 
files.”
2. 
Play with blending other tile patterns and background images in the chap3L1.psd file. Some sample patterns 
and background images for your use are located in the chap03_lessons/samples folder. You can also bring 
in your own tile patterns and background photos. For example, what would the image look like with an outer 
space or underwater scene revealed through the arches?
3. 
For more information on the mysteries of resolution, visit:
 
▶The DPI dilemma (Resolution basics for beginners) at http://desktoppub.about.com/od/
resolution/a/resolutiondots.htm
 
▶Jay Arraich’s Photoshop Tips, Image Resolution: http://www.garymgordon.com/misc/
tutorials/photoshop_tutorial/ref/resolution.htm
 
▶Monitor Resolution at The Scream Online: http://www.thescreamonline.com/technology/
monitor/monitor_res.html
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Image Essentials |
54
| Image Essentials |
Explorer PAGES
Darrel Anderson
“No matter what medium you work in . . . let the medium 
inform the process. Tap into that part of the brain that is able 
to recognize imagery. Don’t preconceive too much, and allow 
the inspiration to occur to you and appear before you in the 
work.”
Learn more about this artist via an audio interview on the 
CD that accompanies this book.
About Darrel Anderson
Darrel Anderson has been creating and inventing professionally 
for over 30 years. His early love of science was diverted into the 
visual arts as a teenager. He originally pursued drawing as a 
means of visualizing ideas and inventions.
Digital Illustration: leapLight. © 2007 Darrel Anderson, Braid Media Arts
Darrel and several friends started their art careers straight 
out of high school. They were group-taught in the learn-
as-you-go school and accepted any and all art jobs, relying 
on collaboration and determination. Underground Comics 
(under their own Everyman Studios label) and science fiction/
fantasy illustration were their primary fields.
In the early 1980s an illustration job landed an Atari 800 on 
Darrel’s desk. This inevitably lead to an intertwining of art 
and science in his creative pursuits. Since then he has traced 
the common thread of imaging through printmaking, tool 
building (software), animation, and illustration.
Darrel co-founded Braid Media Arts with Rick Berry. Braid is 
a group of creative collaborators with ongoing projects in the 
arts and sciences. Darrel designed and built their first Web 
site in 1995.
His diverse works include:
 
▶Illustration of fiction by William Gibson, Arthur C. 
Clark, Ray Bradbury, and Stephen King
 
▶Magazine illustration for Antic, MacWorld, Computer 
Graphics World, and WIRED
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55
|  Chapter 3 |
 
▶Online illustrations for the Syfy Channel; CGI for the 
TriStar/Sony film Johnny Mnemonic
 
▶Creation of GroBoto, an intuitive, playful 3D graphics 
program built specifically for artists and designers who 
are not versed in the technical aspects of digital 3D
Digital Illustration: winterWreathe.
 © 2007 Darrel Anderson, Braid Media Arts
Darrel taught 3D graphics for the California State Universities’ 
Summer Arts Program, and has been a guest speaker at Tufts 
University, the Digital Burgess Conference, and several Contact, 
Cultures of the Imagination Conferences.
About the Work of Darrel Anderson
Darrel’s notes on the winterWreathe illustration:
“Although I use digital 3D tools extensively in my work, I have 
a bit of a love/hate relationship with them. I prefer work that is 
evocative rather than descriptive—and 3D usually has too much 
of the latter. Regardless of medium or tool, I use an exploratory 
approach—using the medium as a tool for seeing. The work is 
found in the process, rather than planned and executed. I find 
digital tools very well suited to this process, allowing infinite 
variety and flexibility. The ability to play with new combinations 
of techniques—often with no preconception of their end 
effect—gives unmatched creative freedom and breadth.
“Because of this approach, I rarely use the same set of 
techniques twice—and often don’t quite remember how I 
arrived at the final result . . . but here are a few nuts and bolts I 
do remember about winterWreathe.
“For this image I started with a 3D model created in GroBoto. I 
created several Photoshop layers with shifted and/or distorted 
versions of the alpha channel (provided by the 3D rendering) 
as layer masks. This clipping and overlaying provided energy 
and abstraction, breaking away from the photoreal rendering. 
Another image (just something of mine chosen at random) was 
added as a color layer. Some Dodge & Burn (often utilizing layer 
masks) and a little blending work with a feathery brush and 
the Smudge Tool helped pull everything together and provide a 
painterly feel.
“It’s nice to mix it up . . . that’s what I would say about tools for 
success . . . And to be a good collaborator . . . it’s one of the 
great ways to learn.”
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Essentials |
56
Digital Illustration: clockSpring. 
© 2007 Darrel Anderson, Braid Media Arts
Digital Illustration: copperVine. 
© 2007 Darrel Anderson, Braid Media Arts
Explorer PAGES, continued
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57
|  Chapter 3 |
Joel Hagen
Joel Hagen, computer graphics instructor and a collaborator with Darrel Anderson, has his own style of abstract creation using 
Photoshop.
Wetware by Joel Hagen. Compliments of Joel Hagen.
Ice Ram by Joel Hagen. Compliments of Joel Hagen.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
| Selecting and Transforming | 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SELECTING AND TRANSFORMING
4
59
charting your course
As you learned in Chapter 3, Photoshop knows pixels. And so will you, starting with this chapter. 
Using Photoshop’s versatile and varied selection tools (such as the Marquee, Lasso, and Magic Wand) 
and transform commands (such as Scale, Rotate, and Skew), you will get up close and personal with 
selecting and transforming individual squares of color.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Get versatile with Photoshop’s selection and transform tools
 
▶
Practice building a composite image
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
60
ABOUT SELECTING AND 
TRANSFORMING
Selecting and transforming pixels work hand-in-hand. You select an area of 
your Photoshop image and then move, scale, or rotate it in some way (or add 
a fill or effect to it, which will be addressed in later chapters). Learning to 
select and transform pixels is a critical step in your study of Photoshop.
HOW DO SELECTIONS WORK?
When you select something on your Photoshop document
—that is, when the marching ants appear (see Figure 4–1)
—what exactly are you selecting and how do you control 
these selections? When you examine pixels closely, you see 
that each pixel produced has its own shade of color. The 
computer can select pixels based on these shades or tones (see 
Figure 4–2). For example, the Magic Wand tool knows what 
pixels to grab by where you click it within an image and what 
you have chosen as its color tolerance. Tolerance defines how 
similar in color a pixel must be to be selected, ranging from 
0 to 255 (you will learn more about the 0-to-255 range in 
Chapter 5). Feathering of selections is similar to tolerance; it 
determines how much transparency is created in each pixel.
The selection accuracy is also controlled by the frequency 
and/or proximity of pixels in a given area. For example, 
a Lasso tool controls what pixels it snaps onto not 
only by the contrast of colors from pixel to pixel (edge 
contrast) but also by the number of pixels within the 
tool’s positioned area. The accuracy settings for the 
selection tools are always found in the Options bar of 
the selected tool. See Figure 4–3 on the next page.
All that being said, the concern here is not what feature of 
what tool does what (that comes next), but to get the big 
picture: Selections and their accuracy are determined by the 
color settings and location of pixels within a given area.
OVERVIEW OF SELECTION TOOLS
Before you start playing with selection tools in the next lesson, 
let me give you an idea of what each tool does and why one tool 
might be better suited for particular selections than another.
FIGURE | 4–1 |
A selection is indicated by a dashed line known as 
“marching ants.”
FIGURE | 4–2 |
Each pixel has its own tone of color. Photoshop selects 
pixels based on their color range, or a tolerance.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

61
|  Chapter 4 |
Select Menu
The quick and easy way to select all items on a layer 
is to choose the layer from the Layers panel and then, 
from the menu bar, choose Select > All (Command-A 
for Mac or Ctrl-A for Windows). From the Select 
menu you can also choose to deselect all items on 
a layer, reselect them, or invert the selection.
Marquee Tools
A marquee is a permanent canopy or bulletin board that 
projects over the entrance of a building, like those seen over 
Broadway theaters. They highlight, usually in bright 
neon colors, the performance and performers of the 
evening. In Photoshop, the Marquee tools are used to 
highlight (select) an area as a shape, such as a rectangle, 
ellipse, or row or column of pixels. See Figure 4–4. The 
Marquee tools are the most convenient way to select 
areas of an image. However, because the selections are 
defined within a specific shape, the tools are not designed 
to select more freeform areas of pixels. For instance, if 
I wanted to select the eye of the giraffe in Figure 4–5 
with minimal effort, I would use the Elliptical Marquee 
tool. If I wanted to select an area of the giraffe’s neck to 
create a pattern or tile effect from it, we would use the 
Rectangular Marquee tool. See Figure 4–6 on the next 
page. If I wanted to select one of the irregular spots on the 
giraffe, I would use another tool, such as a Lasso tool.
Three styles of selecting can be chosen in the Marquee 
tool’s Options bar:
 
▶Normal: In Normal style, you select the specific Marquee tool you want and
then click and drag the tool over the area of the document you want to select.
To constrain the shape proportionally, hold down Shift as you drag with the 
tool. When you let go of the tool, the marching ants appear, indicating the
selection. See Figure 4–7 on the next page.
FIGURE | 4–3 |
Options available in the Magic Wand tool’s Options bar.
FIGURE | 4–5 |
Select circular areas with the Elliptical Marquee tool.
FIGURE | 4–4 |
The Marquee tools available in the toolbox.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
62
 
▶Fixed Ratio: In this style, you can 
define a selection with a fixed 
height-to-width ratio. An example 
would be an image compatible for 
the NTSC TV format, which requires a 
4-by-3 aspect ratio. See Figure 4–8.
 
▶Fixed Size: If you already know 
exactly what size you want a 
selected area to be, you can enter 
it in the Fixed Size style of the 
Marquee tool’s Options bar. Keep 
in mind that the number of pixels 
needed to create a 1-inch selection 
depends on the resolution of the 
image (this concept is covered 
in Chapter 3). See Figure 4–9.
Magic Wand
If you recall, I revealed the secret of the 
Magic Wand tool to you at the beginning of 
this chapter. This tool selects pixels based on 
a color range or color tolerance, which is set 
in the tool’s Options bar. See Figure 4–10 on 
the next page. Enter a low value to select the 
few colors very similar to the pixel you click, 
or enter a higher value to select a broader 
range of colors. The pixels can be selected 
conti-guously (sharing a boundary or 
touching one another) or noncontiguously.
For the giraffe on the left in Figure 4–11 
on the next page, the Magic Wand tool’s 
tolerance is set at 45 and is applied to the 
sky area around the giraffe. The range 
indicated is low enough that it selects the 
light pixels of the sky but not the darker 
pixels that define the giraffe. In the same 
figure, the giraffe on the right was selected 
with the Magic Wand tool with a tolerance 
set at 100. This increases the range of 
color possibilities that can be selected. 
The Magic Wand tool is great for selecting 
noncontiguous, free-form shapes of similar 
color in a photograph. See Figure 4–12 
FIGURE | 4–6 |
Select rectangular areas with the Rectangular Marquee tool.
FIGURE | 4–7 |
The Normal style Options bar.
FIGURE | 4–8 |
The Fixed Ratio style Options bar.
t
FIGURE | 4–9 |
The Fixed Size style Options bar.
w
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

63
|  Chapter 4 |
on the next page. To use the Magic Wand 
tool, choose the tool in the toolbox, set the 
Tolerance in the Options bar, and click on 
the area you want to sample for the selection.
Quick Selection Tool
If you are the type of person who loves to paint a selection, then the Quick Selection 
tool might be the tool for you. It lets you “paint” a selection that grows outward. 
The tool appears as a round-tip brush. As you click and drag it, it begins to create 
a selection around the areas you paint over.
FIGURE | 4–10 |
Select the Magic Wand tool in the toolbox to access its Tolerance settings in the 
Options bar.
FIGURE | 4–11 |
On the left, the color tolerance for the Magic Wand tool is set at 45 and is applied to the sky area of the image. On the right, the 
color tolerance is set at 100, expanding the selection area.
Lasso Tools
Unless you are a surgeon or you can thread a needle with a steady hand, the Lasso 
tools can be tricky to master. It takes practice, but it is worth the effort when you want 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
64
to select odd areas of an image, which might otherwise be impossible 
to do. There are three types of Lasso tools (see Figure 4–13):
 
▶Lasso: This tool lets you draw selections with free-form 
or straight-edged segments. See Figure 4–14. To create 
freehand segments, click and drag around n area. To 
create straight segments, hold down Option/Alt, and 
click once at the beginning and once at the end. You can 
switch between free-form and straight-edged modes as 
you draw—cool! To close (define) the selection, make sure 
you are at the beginning of your selection, and let go of 
the mouse button.
 
▶Polygonal Lasso: Like the Lasso tool, this tool lets you 
draw selections with free-form or straight-edged segments. 
To create freehand segments, hold down Option/Alt and 
drag over the area. To create straight segments, click
once on the spot where the segment should begin and 
then click again where you want it to end. (Yes, the same
commands do the opposite of the commands for the Lasso
tool.) To close (define) the selection, double-click with
the Polygonal Lasso pointer tool. See Figure 4–15 on the 
next page.
 
▶Magnetic Lasso: Similar to the Magic Wand tool, the 
Magnetic Lasso tool is attracted to pixels based on color 
and their proximity to one another. As you move along the 
edge of an object you want to select, the tool attaches to 
pixels with fastening points. The more fastening points, 
the more precise the selection will be. If you draw free-
form (click and then drag), the tool will automatically 
place fastening points based on the frequency you set in 
the Options bar. (To place fastening points wherever you 
want, simply click with the tool.) The higher the frequency 
number set in the Options bar, the more fastening points 
are created. This makes the selection border more precise. 
You can also determine something called edge contrast, 
which defines the lasso’s sensitivity to edges (contrasts 
in color) in the image. A lower percentage detects lower-
contrast edges (i.e., a white pixel next to a light-gray 
pixel); a higher percentage detects edges that contrast 
sharply with their surroundings (i.e., a dark-blue pixel next 
to a white pixel). Like the Polygonal Lasso tool, to close 
(define) the selection, double-click with the tool. See 
Figure 4–16.
FIGURE | 4–13 |
The Lasso tools in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 4–14 |
Use of the Lasso tool.
FIGURE | 4–12 |
You can use the Magic Wand tool to select areas of
similar color, such as the patch on the hide of the 
giraffe.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

65
|  Chapter 4 |
Adding, Subtracting, and Refining Selection Areas
Inevitably your selections will not be perfect the first time. You might 
close and define the selection border and discover you missed some 
areas. You have two options here. You can redraw the selection, 
which is good practice but not always very efficient. Or, you can add 
to, subtract from, or intersect your selection area by choosing these 
options in the Selection tool’s Options bar. See Figure 4–17.
You can also add to a selection by using the Lasso, Quick Selection, 
Magic Wand, or Marquee tool and holding down Shift as you draw over the areas you 
want to add. To subtract, choose a selection tool and hold down Option/Alt as you draw 
over the areas you want to remove from the selection. See Figure 4–18. In addition to 
modifying a selection, the Refine Edge button in the Options bar gives you the ability to 
refine the edges of a selection. See Figure 4–19 
on the next page. This is a great way to clean a 
selection’s edge and preview how the selection 
looks against various backgrounds.
Selecting an Object on a Layer
When you begin to work with objects 
on multiple layers, often you will want 
to select items on a specific layer. 
FIGURE | 4–15 |
Use of the Polygonal Lasso tool.
FIGURE | 4–16 |
The Magnetic Lasso tool deposits fastening points to 
define the selection border. In this example, the frequency 
of fastening points is set to 80, quickly and more precisely 
selecting the intended area.
FIGURE | 4–17 |
Add to, subtract from, or intersect your selection by 
choosing the option in the Options bar.
FIGURE | 4–18 |
Hold down Shift to add to a selection. Hold down Option/Alt to subtract from 
a selection. Note the plus or minus icon next to the selection tool’s pointer, 
depending on your choice of action.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
66
In the upcoming lessons, there will 
be plenty of opportunities to practice 
this selection method, but if you need 
to know right now, follow these 
three steps:
 1. 
Choose Window > Layers to open the 
Layers panel (if not already open).
 2. 
In the Layers panel, select the layer 
containing the item(s) you want to 
select. Be sure it is an active layer, not 
the Background layer.
Note: To convert the Background 
layer to an active, editable layer, 
double-click on the Background layer 
thumbnail in the Layers panel and give 
it a new name.
 3. 
Roll the pointer over the selected 
layer, and Ctrl-click (Windows) or 
Command-click (Mac) the layer’s 
thumbnail image. Note that the 
opaque items on that layer are 
selected in the document.
Quick Mask
Photoshop’s Quick Mask selection feature 
can rock your world. It is complicated 
to get the gist of at first, but with time, 
it could become your favorite selection 
tool. See Figure 4–20. I will explain 
more about quick masks and let you 
practice masking in Chapter 8. For now, 
try to wrap your brain around the idea 
of making selections using a paintbrush 
(sized to your liking) and letting color 
differentiate what is fully and partially 
(semitransparently) selected.
FIGURE | 4–19 |
The Refine Edge option in the Options bar further refines the edges of your 
selections.
FIGURE | 4–20 |
Get to Quick Mask Mode 
from the toolbox.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

67
|  Chapter 4 |
HOW DOES TRANSFORMING WORK?
Once you select something in Photoshop, you might want to transform it. This means 
moving, scaling, rotating, or distorting it. You can transform numerically by entering 
exact numbers for the transformation in the Options bar. See Figure 4–22. Or, you 
can use the Free Transform command, which lets you interactively—and in one, 
continuous operation—transform (including rotate, scale and variations thereof, 
such as skew, distort, and set perspective) a selected item using selection handles 
and specific keyboard commands. See Figure 4–23.
FIGURE | 4–22 |
When an item is selected, you can numerically enter a transformation in the Options bar.
FIGURE | 4–23 |
The Free Transform command lets you transform an 
object interactively and with keyboard commands 
by adjusting the bounding box handles.
T
DON’T GO THERE!
FIGURE | 4–21 |
Warning: You cannot do that! Deselect all and check to be sure you are on the layer you want to modify.
Once you have an area selected, whatever 
you do next in the program—move, add a filter, 
paint, etc.—will be applied to that area within 
the marching ants only. On occasion, you might 
select something inadvertently (or forget it was 
selected) and then attempt to do something else, 
like paint on another layer. When this happens, 
a warning circle comes up. See Figure 4–21. Do 
not freak out. Choose Select > Deselect from the 
menu bar to remove all selected areas (even those 
you cannot see), and then make sure the layer you 
want to modify is highlighted in the Layers panel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
68
OVERVIEW OF TRANSFORM TOOLS
Briefly, let’s go over the Transform tools:
▶Move: Since moving (translating) things is so much a part of Photoshop, the 
Move tool is probably the most used tool in the program. See Figure 4–24.
▶Scale and Rotate: To change the size of a selected object or to rotate it, 
choose Edit > Transform > Scale or Rotate. See Figure 4–25 and Figure 4–26.
▶Skew: To slant an item vertically or horizontally, choose Edit > Transform > 
Skew.
▶Distort: To stretch an item in all directions, choose Edit > Transform > Distort.
▶Perspective: To apply perspective to an item (see Figure 4–27), choose Edit > 
Transform > Perspective.
▶Warp: To stretch cross sections of an item, choose Edit > Transform > Warp.
B
FIGURE | 4–24 |
The Move tool in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 4–26 |
Position the pointer slightly 
outside a corner of the free 
transform bounding box to 
rotate the selection.
FIGURE | 4–25 |
Scale proportionally by holding down Shift while dragging the scale handles on the corner of the selection. To scale 
disproportionately, drag the selection handles on a corner or a side of the free transform bounding area without holding 
Shift. Note that the hat on the right is also being rotated.
Note: When choosing Edit > Transform, you also have the option to rotate a 
selection 180 or 90 degrees clockwise or counter clockwise, or to flip it horizontally 
(from left to right) or vertically (from top to bottom).
Note: For quick ways to execute 
multiple transformations and adjust 
the reference point on an object, see 
item #3 of the Exploring on Your Own 
section at the end of this chapter.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69
|  Chapter 4 |
MORE OPTIONS FOR SELECTIONS
You can do more with selections than just transform them. 
You can also copy, paste, delete, duplicate, paint, draw, 
adjust, or add an effect or filter to the selection. Most of 
these operations will become second nature as you work 
with the program, but let me go over them briefly.
▶Copy, Paste, and Duplicate: To copy and paste, first 
make your selection, then choose Edit > Copy, go 
where you want to paste it, and choose Edit > 
Paste. If you paste it into the same document, it 
will place the copy on a new layer, and perhaps 
directly over the original selection. Use your Move 
tool if you need to move one object away from 
another. Like most programs, shortcut keys for copy 
are Command-C (Mac) and Ctrl-C (Windows) and, 
for paste, Command-V (Mac) or Ctrl-V (Windows). 
To duplicate a selection on the same document, 
first make a selection, choose the Move tool, and, 
while rolling the pointer over the selection, hold 
down Option/Alt. A duplicate icon appears. See 
Figure 4–28. Click and drag to make the duplicate.
FIGURE | 4–27 |
To create the illusion of a 
dimension, use a combination 
of the distort, skew, and 
perspective transformations.
FIGURE | 4–28 |
To duplicate, make a selection, choose the Move tool, 
hold down Alt/Option, and click and drag to make 
the duplication.
T
d
o
p
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
70
 
▶Delete: To delete contents within a selection, press Delete on your keyboard 
or choose Edit > Clear. To remove the selection and paste it somewhere else, 
choose Edit > Cut. See Figure 4–29.
FIGURE | 4–29 |
On the left is a duplicate of the giraffe’s head. On the right the background has been selected and deleted.
 
▶Add Effect or Filter: To adjust the color or add an effect or filter to a part of 
an image, select the layer and area you want to work on and then choose a 
filter from the Filter menu. Alternatively, you can invoke an image adjustment 
command (Image > Adjustments), such as Brightness/Contrast, Hue/Saturation, 
or Replace Color. You can also edit color fills and gradients. See Figure 4–30.
 
▶Paint, Draw, and Erase: You can use the Brush, Pencil, and Erase tools within a 
selection—a convenient way to stay inside the lines.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

71
|  Chapter 4 |
FIGURE | 4–30 |
On the left the giraffe selection has been modified with the Plastic Wrap filter. On the right the background of the giraffe has been modified 
with a gradient and texture effect.
LESSON: DRESSING MAX
Finally, here is your chance to select and transform pixels. While dressing Max (see 
Figure 4–31 on the next page) for school (the Photoshop way), you’ll learn how to use 
the Marquee, Magic Wand, and Lasso tools. You will also learn to move, scale, and 
rotate objects, and to transfer and organize selected pixels from one file to another.
Setting Up the File
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > Open. Open the file chap4L1.psd in the chap04_lessons
folder.
 2. 
Save a copy of this file in your lessons folder. Choose File > Save As, and name your file 
chap4L1_yourname.psd.
Note: If you get a “Maximize compatibility” dialog box, keep the option checked 
and click OK.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
72
 3. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels to see the document at 100% magnification. This is Max, a 
friend of mine.
 4. 
Choose Image > Image Size. Note that the image is set at 72 pixels per inch (ppi)—a 
good resolution if you want to use this image on the Web or for screen display, or for 
experimenting with ideas, but not for documents that will be professionally printed. 
Close the dialog box.
 5. 
Choose Window > Layers (if not already open) to view the three layers currently in the 
file. Each clothing item you bring into the file will have its own layer.
Selecting and Translating from One Document to Another
 1. 
Choose File > Open and browse for chap04_lessons/assets/hat.tif. Click Open.
 2. 
View the Layers panel. Note that the hat is located on a background layer. The 
Background layer is the default layer of any new Photoshop file. All other layers go 
above the Background layer, and you cannot change its stacking order, blending mode, 
or opacity. It is not necessary, however, to have a Background layer. Actually, I prefer to 
convert the Background layer into a regular layer, where I can create transparent content, 
move it anywhere in the Layers panel, and change its blending mode. To convert the 
Background layer of the hat image, double-click on the Background layer and enter a 
new layer name (such as hat) in the New Layer dialog box. See Figure 4–32.
 3. 
Now, select the Magic Wand tool in the toolbox. See Figure 4–33. In the tool’s Options 
bar, set the Tolerance to 10.
FIGURE | 4–31 |
Max before and after.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

73
|  Chapter 4 |
 4. 
Click on the white background of the hat image to select it. Press Delete to remove 
the background pixels. The grid image you see behind the hat indicates that this 
area is transparent. The grid will not be saved when you convert the image into 
another format other than Photoshop (.psd) or when you print it. See Figure 4–34. 
You can change the grid size and colors in Preferences > Transparency & Gamut 
(Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Transparency & Gamut (Windows).
 5. 
Choose Select > Inverse from the menu bar to select the hat area (the part you 
want!) rather than the background.
 6. 
Position the chap4L1_yourname document (Max) and the hat document side by 
side on the screen by clicking on the Arrange Documents button in the Application 
bar and choosing the left 2-Up option. See Figure 4–35 and Figure 4–36. Select the 
hat document.
 7. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox. Move the pointer over the hat image and note 
that the pointer has a scissors icon next to it. The scissors indicate that you can 
move the hat by dragging it. Click and drag the hat to the chap4L1_yourname 
document (Max). Let go of the mouse to deposit a copy on the file—hey, that’s 
sweet! See Figure 4–37 on the next page.
 8. 
Close the hat.tif file. Do not save it; you are done with it.
FIGURE | 4–32 |
Change the Background 
layer to an editable layer, so 
you have more options.
FIGURE | 4–33 |
Select the Magic Wand tool in 
the toolbox. Then, in the Options 
bar, set the tool’s tolerance to 
determine how many pixels within 
a certain color range the wand will 
select.
FIGURE | 4–35 |
Select the Arrange Documents 
option on the Application bar.
FIGURE | 4–34 |
The transparent areas of a layer 
are indicated by a grid pattern.
y
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
74
Transforming the Hat
 1. 
First, note in the Layers panel that the hat has 
been placed on a new layer at the top of the 
stack. Double-click on the layer title (Layer 1) 
and rename it hat. It is always good to keep 
your layers labeled intuitively. You never know 
when you are going to need to find something 
again.
 2. 
On the Max document, it is obvious that the hat 
is too big to fit on his head. If you don’t believe 
me, be sure that the hat layer is selected in the 
Layers panel, select the Move tool, and move the 
hat so it is positioned over Max’s head—huge! 
See Figure 4–38.
 3. 
With the hat layer selected, choose Edit > Free 
Transform. Click and drag inward on a corner of 
the transform bounding box to scale the hat to 
fit Max’s head. To do this uniformly, hold down 
Shift as you drag. If you make a mistake, don’t 
worry: choose Edit > Undo, or reverse your steps 
in the History panel.
FIGURE | 4–36 |
Select the 2-Up 
option to view two 
open documents side 
by side.
FIGURE | 4–37 |
With the Move tool, drag 
the selection from one file to 
another to make a copy of it.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

75
|  Chapter 4 |
 4. 
To position the hat, click within the selected portion of the 
image, but not right on center, because that would move the 
object’s registration point, and drag the hat to the desired 
location. If the hat seems to be jumping around his head, go to 
View > Snap on the menu bar and make sure it is unchecked.
 5. 
To rotate the hat, position the pointer slightly outside a corner 
of the free transform bounding box. An icon with two curved 
arrows will appear. Click and drag to execute the rotation. See 
Figure 4–39.
 6. 
To complete the transformation, do one of the following: click 
on the check-mark button in the Options bar, hit Return or 
Enter, or double-click on the hat. If you do not want to commit 
to the transformation, choose the warning circle button in the 
Options bar or hit Esc. See Figure 4–40.
 7. 
Save your file.
FIGURE | 4–38 |
The huge hat!
FIGURE | 4–39 |
Three transformations occur to fit the hat on Max’s head: scale, move, and rotate.
FIGURE | 4–40 |
Complete the transformation by clicking the check mark on the 
Options bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
76
Note: For fun, play with the Warp option. Be sure the hat layer is highlighted in 
the Layers panel. Choose Edit > Free Transform. Select the Warp feature in the 
options bar. See Figure 4–41. Click and drag one of the nodes of the Warp mesh 
and move it to make a crazy version of the hat. Hit Esc on the keyboard to cancel 
the transformation and revert to the original version of the hat.
FIGURE | 4–41 |
For fun, play with the Warp transformation tool to distort Max’s hat.
Adding Another Clothing Item
 1. 
Choose chap04_lessons/assets. Open the pants.tif file.
 2. 
Select the white background pixels with the Magic Wand tool.
 3. 
Hit Delete to remove the pixels.
 4.  Choose Select > Inverse to get just the pants.
 5. 
Click on the Arrange Documents button in the Application bar and choose the left 2-Up 
option, so you can see both images side by side. Refer to Figure 4–35 and Figure 4–36 
again.
 6. 
With the Move tool, click on the pants and drag a copy of them to the Max document.
 7. 
Close the pants file. No need to save changes.
 8. 
On the Max file, rename Layer 1 to pants.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77
|  Chapter 4 |
 9. 
Select the pants layer and choose Edit > Transform > Scale. In the Options bar resize the 
pants numerically and proportionally. First, click on the chain icon between the Width (W) 
and Height (H) fields in the Options bar to maintain the aspect ratio of the selection. 
Then, type the number 65 in the Width field and hit Enter; automatically the Height field 
will adjust to the same scale amount. See Figure 4–42.
 10. 
Position the pants to fit on Max. Double-click on the selection to execute the 
transformation.
Note: If there are stray white pixels around the edge of the pants, you can clean 
them up. Select the pants layer, choose Layer > Matting > Defringe. For the 
Defringe Width, enter 4 (pixels). Click OK. Ahh, much nicer.
 11. 
Save your file.
Adding to and Marqueeing a Selection
 1. 
Choose File > Open and open the file boots.tif in 
chap04_lessons/assets.
 2. 
In the Layers panel, double-click on the Background 
layer to change it to a regular layer. Name it boots.
 3. 
On the document, select the white background 
pixels with the Magic Wand tool.
 4. 
Hit Delete to remove the pixels. Look closely. There 
are still some white areas that need to be removed 
within the loops of the boots. These white areas are 
enclosed by the red pixels of the boot and therefore 
were not detected by the Magic Wand tool.
 5. 
Zoom in on the boot’s loop on the far left-hand side 
of the document. See Figure 4–43. Select the Zoom 
tool from the toolbar or the Application bar.
 6. 
Select the Lasso tool and draw around the white pixels 
in the center of the boot’s loops. See Figure 4–44 and 
Figure 4–45. Close the circle shape and let go of the 
mouse to see the marching ants selection. This takes 
a steady hand, so if you find yourself selecting more 
than the white pixels, choose Edit > Undo Lasso 
and try again.
 7. 
OK, let’s add to this selection. It will take some 
coordination on your part, so be patient. Select the Hand 
tool and move the document to the left until you see the 
next boot loop. Or, alternatively, use the Navigation panel 
(Window > Navigator).
 8. 
Select the Lasso tool and position the pointer over the 
white pixels in the center of the boot’s loop. Hold down 
Shift and note that a plus (+) icon appears next to the Lasso 
pointer. Keep holding down Shift and draw around the 
white pixels within the boot loop. See Figure 4–46. Close 
FIGURE | 4–42 |
Resize the pants numerically. 
Note the chain icon between the 
width and height fields. When 
the chain is linked it indicates 
that the width and height will 
size proportionally to each other.
FIGURE | 4–43 |
With the Zoom tool, marquee the area you want to see close-up.
FIGURE | 4–44 |
Select the Lasso tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
78
the shape, then let go of the mouse to see the 
marching ants selection. See Figure 4–47.
 9. 
Keep adding to the selection. Hold down the 
spacebar to toggle to the Hand tool. Keep the 
spacebar pressed as you move the document 
window to the left until you see the last boot 
loop on the right.
 10. 
Release the spacebar to toggle back to the 
Lasso tool. Position your pointer over the 
white pixels in the center of the boot’s loop. 
Hold down Shift and draw around the white 
pixels within the boot loop. Close the shape.
 11. 
The white areas within each boot loop are 
selected. Hit Delete to remove the unwanted 
pixels.
 12. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels to view the boots 
at 100% magnification.
 13. 
To move the boots to Max’s feet, position the 
boot document and Max document side by 
side on the screen by clicking on the Arrange 
Documents button in the Application bar 
and choosing the 2-Up option. Select the 
Rectangular Marquee tool in the toolbox. See 
Figure 4–48.
 14. 
In the Options bar, verify that Normal is 
selected in the Style box. Marquee around 
the boot on the left. See Figure 4–49. With the 
Move tool, click and drag a copy of the boot 
to the Max document. Position the boot over 
his right foot.
FIGURE | 4–45 |
With the Lasso tool, draw 
around the white pixels 
within the boot loop.
FIGURE | 4–46 |
Hold down Shift to add to a selection.
FIGURE | 4–47 |
Close the shape to define the selection.
FIGURE | 4–48 |
Select the Rectangular Marquee tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

79
|  Chapter 4 |
 15. 
Select the other boot, and move a copy of it to Max’s left foot.
 16. 
Close boots.tif without saving it; you will not need it again.
 17. 
In the Layers panel, rename Layer 1 to right_boot, and Layer 2 to left_boot.
 18. 
Select the right_boot layer, and then choose Layer > Matting > Defringe. Type in 4 
(pixels). Do the same thing for the left_boot layer.
FIGURE | 4–49 |
Marquee around a boot and move it to another document.
Note: What does “Defringe” do? When you move or paste a selection, some of 
the pixels surrounding the selection border are included with the selection. This 
can result in a fringe or halo around the edges of the pasted selection. Defringe 
replaces the color of any fringe pixels with the color of pixels farther in from the 
edge of the selection that don’t contain the background color, thereby reducing 
the halo effect and creating a cleaner-looking edge.
 19. 
Move the pants layer above the boot layers. See Figure 4–50 on the next page. Position 
the boots, if necessary, to appear behind the pants.
 20. 
Save the file.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
80
Selecting a Textured Background
 1. 
Open shirt_blazer.tif in the chap04_lessons/assets folder.
 2. 
With the Lasso tool, draw a cursory selection around the blazer. Be sure to include the 
shirt and tie in the selection. See Figure 4–51.
FIGURE | 4–50 |
Rearrange the stacking order of 
layers by clicking and dragging 
a layer between two others.
FIGURE | 4–51 |
Cursorily select the blazer with the Lasso tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

81
|  Chapter 4 |
  3. 
Place the shirt_blazer.tif and Max file side by side on the screen by clicking on the 
Arrange Documents button in the Application bar and choosing the 2-Up option.
 4. 
With the Move tool, click and drag a copy of the blazer selection to the Max file.
 5. 
In the Layers panel, rename the new layer blazer and move it above the other layers.
 6. 
With the blazer layer selected, choose the Magic Wand tool.
 7. 
In the Options bar for the Magic Wand tool, enter 40 for the Tolerance. Then click the 
green textured area to select it. Note that not all parts of the textured background have 
been selected.
 8. 
Change the Magic Wand tool’s Tolerance to 65 and reselect the textured background. Do 
you get more or all of the background pixels? Play with the tolerance until all the green 
pixels are selected. You might also need to add or subtract from your selection if some of 
the green pixels are not contiguous, or try selecting an area with the Contiguous option 
deselected in the Magic Wand tool’s Options bar.
 9. 
Press Delete on the keyboard to remove the selected background pixels.
 10. 
Position and/or transform the blazer to fit Max. See Figure 4–52.
 11. 
If you’d like more practice, add the flowered red shirt image to fit Max. (To see what 
you’re doing more easily, turn off the visibility of the blazer by clicking the eye icon to the 
left of the layer.)
 12. 
Save the file. Max is dressed and ready to head off to school.
FIGURE | 4–52 |
The stages of selecting a blazer for Max (steps 6 through 9).
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
82
  IN REVIEW
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
SUMMARY
As you have learned, selecting and transforming objects is the most fundamental procedure in 
 Photoshop. Identifying the best tools for the task makes these actions easier and more efficient to 
 execute, letting you move on to more miraculous creations in the program.
1. 
Describe how the Magic Wand Tolerance setting works.
2. 
Name at least two ways to get better selection accuracy.
3. 
What selection tool is the least efficient in selecting irregular areas of an image?
4. 
What does the Contiguous option do when you are using the Magic Wand tool?
5. 
What shortcut key command lets you make straight-edged segment selections with 
the Lasso tool and freehand segments with the Polygonal Lasso tool?
6. 
Using any selection tool, what shortcut key command lets you add to a selection? Subtract from a selection?
7. 
Photoshop allows you to transform objects numerically, but that’s not your only option. 
Describe the other transforming method.
8. 
Describe the Background layer. How is it different from a regular layer?
1. 
In Photoshop, go to Help > Photoshop Help. Read the sections “Selecting and masking” 
and “Retouching and transforming” (no need to get into the retouching part of this 
section, which is covered in Chapter 6). Also, refer to the section on Keyboard shortcuts 
> Default keyboard shortcuts > Keys for selecting and moving objects.
2. 
To complement Max, select and bring a copy of Mina the kitty (chap04_lessons/assets/mina.tif) into the 
chap4L1 file you created. For an example, see the “after” picture of Max (Figure 4–31) or chap4L1_final.
psd in the chap04_lessons folder to see how I placed Mina. I removed the unwanted background 
pixels, scaled her, flipped her horizontally (Edit > Transform > Flip Horizontal), rotated her, “defringed” 
her (Layer > Matting > Defringe), and added a drop shadow (Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

83
|  Chapter 4 |
3. 
There is a quick way to execute transforms on an object without having to individually choose the 
Edit > Transform options. Select a layer with an object on it (like the hat layer on the Max file you 
just completed). Choose Edit > Free Transform (one of my favorite tools) or Command-T (Mac), 
Ctrl-T (Windows) and apply transforms with the following methods. See also Figure 4–53.
FIGURE | 4–53 |
Quick commands to execute transformations on a selected object.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Selecting and Transforming |
84
Scale
To scale, drag a handle on the transform bounding box. Press Shift as you drag a corner 
handle to scale proportionately. To scale numerically, enter percentages in the Width and 
Height text boxes in the options bar. Click the Link icon to maintain the aspect ratio.
Rotate
To rotate, move the pointer outside the bounding border (it becomes a curved, two 
sided arrow), and then drag. Press Shift to constrain the rotation to 15° increments. To 
rotate numerically, enter degrees in the rotation text box in the Options bar.
Distort
To distort freely, press Command (Mac) or Ctrl (Windows), and drag a handle. To distort relative to 
the center point of the bounding border, press Option (Mac) or Alt (Windows) and drag a handle.
Skew
To skew, press Command+Shift (Mac) or Ctrl+Shift (Windows), and drag a side handle. When positioned 
over a side handle, the pointer becomes a white arrowhead with a small double arrow. To skew 
numerically, enter degrees in the H (horizontal skew) and V (vertical skew) text boxes in the Options bar.
Perspective
To apply perspective, press Command+Option+Shift (Mac) or Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) and drag a 
corner handle. When positioned over a corner handle, the pointer becomes a gray arrowhead.
Reference Point Adjustment
All transformations are performed around a fixed point called the reference point. By default, this point is at 
the center of the item you are transforming. However, you can change the reference point or move the center 
point to a different location. This is useful if, for example, you want to rotate an arm of a character and you 
want the rotation to originate at the shoulder and not the center. See Figure 4–54. To do this click a square on 
the reference point locator in the Options bar. See Figure 4–55. You can also click and drag the reference point 
within the selected area if you need a more precise placement. To move an item based on its reference point, 
enter values for the new location of the reference in the X (horizontal position) and Y (vertical position) text 
boxes in the Options bar, or click on the X or Y icon and drag left and/or right (very swift!). See Figure 4–56.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

85
|  Chapter 4 |
FIGURE | 4–54 |
Adjust the reference point of an object to alter the origin from which a transformation occurs.
FIGURE | 4–55 |
Adjust the reference point 
location in the Option bar 
for the Free Transform tool.
FIGURE | 4–56 |
Quickly move an item by 
dragging left and/or right 
near the X and Y position 
text boxes in the Options bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Selecting and Transforming |
86
Tim Warnock
Sunset Boulevard. Tim Warnock, Matte Painter/Concept Artist
Farewell. Tim Warnock, Matte Painter/Concept Artist
About Tim Warnock
Tim Warnock has been working as an artist for 12 years. 
In that time he has done a number of different things, but 
digital tools, specifically Photoshop, have always been 
central to what he does. Working as a matte painter and 
concept artist, he had the opportunity to be a part of films 
such as Silent Hill, Babel, and The Number 23.
Tim’s post-secondary education began in the Graphic Design 
program at St. Lawrence College in Cornwall, Ontario. After 
completing his studies there he went on to the Illustration 
program at Dawson College in Montreal, Quebec. In addition 
to his college education he has taken 3D and matte painting 
training at the NAD Center in Montreal. To see more of his 
work, visit http://www.thenextside.com.
Explorer PAGES
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

87
|  Chapter 4 |
“Focus on fundamentals, perspective, color, 
lighting, scale, and all of those things. What you 
see as a mistake with a lot of young artists is 
they neglect those things. They might have really 
good 3D skills with texture and lighting, but the 
composition is terrible. Study the masters and 
even current artists who are highly regarded. 
When you master the fundamentals it’s just a 
matter of learning the tools. You can then be 
given anything and create something that’s solid.”
Learn more about this artist via an audio interview in the 
back of the book CD.
About the Work of Tim Warnock
Tim shares his work process: “Whenever I sit down to create a 
painting, research is always the first thing that I do. This could involve 
searching for images online or going out and shooting reference 
material. I have a Canon Rebel XTi that takes 10MP images. As much 
as I can, I like to use my own images because the resolution and color 
depth is greater than most of what I can find online.
“Once I’m satisfied with the research material I’ve gathered I 
set to working out my composition. This is accomplished with 
loose sketches in Photoshop. During this stage I will often begin 
playing with different photos to see what might work. This 
‘blocking in’ stage is where the perspective, color palette and 
composition get worked out.
“From this point I make decisions about how the detail is 
to be achieved. Some things can be painted. Some things 
will require photographic material. Some things will require 
3D elements. For Desert Ruin I had done a lot of research 
on Egypt for another project. I had come across so many 
interesting things that I was inspired to do this piece. 
Following the process above I combine many images to 
create one seamless image. This is where an understanding 
of perspective and color is critical. Special care is given to 
color values to create depth and ensure that everything is 
sitting in the same space. These color changes are made by 
using QuickMask to isolate sections of the image and then 
color correcting with tools like Curves or ColorBalance. I like 
to choose one image to be my main reference for lighting and 
values and refer to it often to ensure I’m headed in the right 
direction. Paint work is mainly done with standard Photoshop 
brushes, but I do occasionally create custom brushes for 
things like leaves and grass.
“The final application of the painting is a 2.5D matte painting 
incorporating a crane camera move that starts fairly low to 
the ground and finishes with this composition. To do this 
the painting is constructed on layers in Photoshop and then 
mapped onto rudimentary geometry in XSI (3D software) 
using camera projections. The end result is fairly realistic 
parallax and perspective shifts that couldn’t be easily 
accomplished with a 2D compositing approach.”
Desert Ruin. Tim Warnock, Matte Painter/Concept Artist
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
| Working with Color |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

WORKING WITH COLOR
5
89
charting your course
In Chapter 4 you selected and transformed pixels. Now you get to change the color of pixels. This 
chapter covers some fundamental concepts of color, such as how color is reproduced, color modes, 
and a hands-on study with color models that will pique your interest as a designer. I will also get 
into some important aspects of color specifically related to Photoshop, such as tips for managing 
color, dealing with channels, and using the color application tools.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Understand the concept of a color gamut
 
▶
Get acquainted with color models
 
▶
Know what color mode to use
 
▶
Apply color to pixels
 
▶
Explore the color features and tools
 
▶
Make gradients
 
▶
Study, hands-on, the use of color models and tonal value
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
90
OPTICAL MIXING
Step away from your computer for a moment and find a painting somewhere. Look 
very closely at the painting. Examine how the brush strokes blend and how the 
mixing of pigment produces varied effects and transitions of color. When a color 
is blended with white, it produces a lighter version (tint) of the color, and, when 
blended with black, it produces a darker version (shade) 
of the color. This method of blending—mixing paint 
to produce colors—is different from how a computer 
produces color. In digital image-making, each individual 
color produced is contained in its own pixel area. See 
Figure 5–1. The effect of color blending, as occurs in 
a traditional painting, is only an illusion manifested 
by our eyes, often referred to as optical mixing.
Optical mixing is found in traditional painting and drawing and is often known as 
pointillism. Pointillism is a method of painting or illustration in which tiny dots (or 
shapes) of color are combined with such precision that, when viewed from a certain 
distance, the pattern forms a complete picture. Post-impressionist painter Georges 
Seurat (1859–1891) codified the technique of pointillism. Whereas other artists were 
blending paint colors on their canvases, he was creating the same effect by applying 
pigment in small dabs or points of color.
From Understanding Art (Seventh Edition), by Lois Fichner-Rathus, “Upon close 
inspection, the painting (Seurat’s) appears to be a collection of dots of vibrant hues—
complementary colors abutting one another, primary colors placed side by side. 
These hues intensify or blend to form yet another color in the eye of the viewer who 
beholds the canvas from a distance.”
t
p
b
FIGURE | 5–1 |
The image looks like a smooth 
gradient of color, but when we 
zoom in close to a selection, 
we see that each pixel contains 
its own shade of color.
FIGURE | 5–2 |
A Sunday Afternoon on 
the Island of La Grande 
Jatte, by Georges Seurat. 
Using a technique called 
pointillism, Seurat painted 
this picture with hundreds of 
thousands of dots of color.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

91
|  Chapter 5 |
FIGURE | 5–3 |
Image with and without 
antialiasing. The top circle has 
antialiasing applied and appears 
smoother. The bottom circle 
does not have antialiasing and 
appears “pixelated.”
FIGURE | 5–4 |
The visual, screen, and print gamuts.
Chuck Close, a modern painter and photographer, uses this type of illusionary picture-
making. He combines detailed pattern shapes into famous portraits. The method of 
creating patterns by sewing colored patches together in quilting is also a form of optical 
mixing. In what other ways might you think images are formed optically? See Figure 5–2.
When we look closely at a digital image, each pixel is a single color. When we view 
multiple pixels from a distance, they appear to be a completely blended image. Digital 
images produce form through optical mixing. One technique that facilitates this 
illusion is antialiasing. Antialiasing smoothes the jagged edges of a digital image by 
softening the color transition—with gradations of color or shades of gray—between 
edge pixels and background pixels. In other words, it makes an object that is composed 
of square pixels appear rounded, smoothed, or curved, not “pixelated.” See Figure 5–3.
SPECTRAL ILLUSION
OK, we learned our eyes have an uncanny way of optically mixing colors to form 
recognizable images. Now, discover that our eyes view different colors depending on 
where we are and the conditions under which we are looking. Every device that has 
the capability to reproduce color, such as a computer screen, a printer, or a TV, has its 
own color range (or limit), which is defined as its color space or gamut. For example, 
although today’s monitors can reproduce millions of colors, what we see on a computer 
screen is not all the colors available in our universe. In fact, our human color device—
our eyes—can perceive many more colors than any type of digitized screen or printer 
device can reproduce.
Take a good look at Figure 5–4. The chart indicates 
the visual (human), computer screen (RGB), and print 
(CMYK) color gamuts. (You will learn about RGB and 
CMYK in the next section.) Notice the marked areas 
indicating the gamuts. All of the gamuts overlap; each is 
able to view some similar color shades. However, the print 
(CMYK) gamut, indicated by the smallest gamut area, has 
the least amount of viewable color possibilities.
So, when you pick a color for your digital image in 
Photoshop—which, by default, uses the RGB screen gamut—
and print it, you might find that color to be different from the one you picked. Most likely, 
the color you picked in Photoshop is not available in the printer’s gamut. It gets even 
more particular. For example, a CRT monitor and an LCD monitor will show the same 
color blue differently, as will a PC monitor versus a Macintosh monitor. No doubt this 
can be very frustrating, but once you understand why it happens there are many ways to 
achieve the result you want (this is what is referred to as “Keeping colors consistent” in the 
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
92
Photoshop Help file—Help > Photoshop Help > Contents). In fact, this is just another of 
Photoshop’s many features: the ability to simulate for users what colors will eventually look 
like when they are reproduced on different devices. We cannot cover all the ways in this 
chapter, but we will get you started with some explanation of color models and modes and 
provide you with some additional reading in the Exploring on Your Own section.
CHOOSING A COLOR MODEL
A color model is a system for describing color. You use color models when 
choosing, creating, and controlling colors in your digital images. All color models 
use numeric values to represent the visible spectrum of color. For instance, the 
truest red color on a screen is indicated as 255 Red, 0 Green, 0 Blue (or 255,0,0). 
There are many different color models, but in computer graphics and specifically in 
Photoshop, we will look at the following: Grayscale, RGB, HSB, CMYK, and Lab.
GRAYSCALE
The Grayscale color model is used to select tints of black ranging in brightness 
from 0% (white) to 100% (black). When you convert color images into grayscale 
in Photoshop the luminosity (tonal level) of each color in the artwork becomes 
a representation of a shade of gray (you will get a taste of this in the upcoming 
lesson). To select colors in grayscale, choose Window > Color (if not already open) 
and, from the panel’s Options menu, choose the Grayscale Slider. See Figure 5–5.
FIGURE | 5–5 |
The Color panel with the 
Grayscale model selected.
FIGURE | 5–6 |
The RGB color model.
RGB
The RGB model represents the primary colors of visible light: red, green, 
and blue (RGB). The mixing of red, green, and blue light in various 
proportions and intensities produces a wide range of colors in our visual 
spectrum. RGB color is also referred to as additive color. When R, G, 
and B lights are combined equally they create white, which is what you 
see when all light is reflected back to the eye. (The absence of colored 
light is black—what you get when you wander down a cave without a 
flashlight.) When R, G, and B overlap, they create cyan, magenta, and 
yellow. See Figure 5–6. Devices that reproduce color with light are using 
the RGB color model. Examples are your TV, the miniscule screen on 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

93
|  Chapter 5 |
your PDA, and, of course, your computer 
monitor.
Each component (red, green, or blue) 
in the RGB color model is given a value 
ranging from 0 to 255. This means you 
can have a total of 256 shades of red, 256 
shades of green, and 256 shades of blue, 
and any combination thereof (a lot of 
colors!). For example, the most intense red 
color is represented as 255 (R), 0 (G), 0 (B), 
and a shade of deep purple is represented 
as 137 (R), 95 (G), 137 (B). See Figure 5–7.
Photoshop also includes the Web Color 
model, a modified RGB model that 
indicates a spectrum of colors most 
appropriate for use on the Web. The color 
components in the Web Color space are 
measured using hexadecimal, a number/
letter system used to represent colors. 
For example, the same shade of deep 
purple from Figure 5–7 in hexadecimal is 
indicated as #895F89. See Figure 5–8.
HSB
Color can also be defined as levels of HSB—hue, saturation, and brightness. Hue 
identifies a main color property or name, such as “blue” or “orange.” It is measured by 
a percentage from 0 to 360 degrees, as if picking colors from a standard color wheel. 
(See the Exploring on Your Own section of this chapter for color wheel 
examples.) Saturation is the strength or purity of color. It is measured as an 
amount of gray in proportion to the hue, ranging from 0% (gray) to 100% 
(fully saturated). Brightness is the relative lightness or darkness of a hue, 
measured as a percentage from 0% (black) to 100% (white). See Figure 5–9.
CMYK
In contrast to the RGB color model, which reproduces color based on light, 
the CMYK model reproduces color based on pigment or ink. The colors 
of CMYK—cyan (C), magenta (M), yellow (Y), and black (K, or key)—are 
called subtractive, because when you add these pigments to a white page or 
canvas, they subtract or absorb some of the light, leaving what is left over 
to reflect back to your eyes. When the colors overlap, interestingly, they 
produce red, green, and blue (RGB). See Figure 5–10.
FIGURE | 5–7 |
The Color panel with the 
RGB model selected.
FIGURE | 5–8 |
The deep purple shade from 
Figure 5–7 in hexadecimal is 
indicated as #895F89.
FIGURE | 5–9 |
The HSB color model in the 
Color panel.
T
T
T
FIGURE | 5–10 |
The CMYK color model.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
94
The “black” part of the CMYK color model is a bit elusive. To print a true black color 
on white, a higher percentage of cyan is mixed with magenta and yellow; it is not 
really an equal amount of each color as Figure 5–10 might lead you to believe. An 
equal mix of cyan, magenta, and yellow would actually result in muddy brown, not 
black, because of the absorption that occurs when ink hits paper. This is why black 
ink is used in addition to the subtractive primaries cyan, magenta, and yellow in four-
color printing.
Each color component of the CMYK model is represented by a 
percentage ranging from 0% to 100%. To produce a shade of mauve-
colored paint, for example, you mix 51% cyan, 70% magenta, 24% 
yellow, and 3% black. See Figure 5–11. In the print industry, this 
combining of the CMYK colors is called four-color process (or full-
color printing). The individual colors produced by the mixing of any 
of these four colors are appropriately identified as process colors. 
In addition to process colors, another color type used in printing is 
spot colors. These are special colors composed of premixed inks that 
require their own printing plate other than the ones used for four-color 
processing. You will run into process and spot color types as you work 
with colors in Photoshop, but don’t worry about them right now. Preparing an image for 
a professional print job can easily become an advanced topic beyond the scope of this 
book. A good start is to know that if your Photoshop graphic is going to go to print, you 
should choose colors in the CMYK model. If the project is destined for the WEB, using 
the RGB model is more appropriate.
LAB
In Photoshop, color can also be defined as Lab, based on the human perception of 
color—the colors seen by a person with normal vision. The primary color components 
of Lab include lightness (or L) and two chromatic components: “a” for green and red 
and “b” for blue and yellow. See Figure 5–12. Interestingly, Lab color is not often used 
by the average Photoshop user. However, it plays a vital role behind the scenes. Lab 
describes color by how it looks to the human eye rather than through 
the lens (limited color range) of a particular device (a monitor, digital 
camera, or desktop printer). That is why Lab is considered a device-
independent color model, which makes it a great color mode for 
Photoshop to use when it needs to convert colors based on a user’s 
specified color management system. You could think of it as the color 
system used to adjust colors between color systems. If we just lost you 
there, don’t worry. It is good to know Lab exists, but it’s not necessary 
to completely comprehend it in the initial stages of your Photoshop 
study.
FIGURE | 5–11 |
The CMYK color model selected 
in the Color panel.
|
|
FIGURE | 5–12 |
The Lab color model.
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

95
|  Chapter 5 |
GETTING IN THE MODE
Although you can select colors from various color models, ultimately you will want 
to set up your Photoshop image to a specific color mode or working space depending 
on the artwork’s intended purpose. A color mode 
determines how your artwork will be output, 
either for display on the screen (RGB) or for print 
(CMYK). When you create a new document in 
Photoshop, you must specify the color mode. You 
can do this when you first create the document 
or by switching modes while working on the 
document. See Figure 5–13. The main color modes 
are Bitmap, Grayscale, RGB Color, CMYK Color, 
and Lab Color.
Photoshop also includes specialized modes (such 
as Duotone, Multichannel, and Indexed Color) that 
you can delve into on your own. You can change between the CMYK and RGB Color 
modes at any time by choosing Image > Mode on the menu bar. There are a couple 
of reasons you might want to change color mode: you want to use one of Photoshop’s 
tools or filters, which can only be applied when the document is in RGB Color mode, 
or you change your mind about where you want to output your artwork. Be aware 
that moving between modes can cause significant shifts in the colors you see on the 
screen, and it can degrade the color accuracy of the image if you switch modes too 
many times.
Why all this color mode business? Well, remember, when it comes to color 
reproduction, what you see is not necessarily what you will get from print to screen and 
screen to print, but it doesn’t hurt to try every means possible to come close. Setting 
the proper color mode is one of those means; you specify the mode when you first 
make the document (File > New) or while working on the document (Image > Mode).
APPLYING COLOR
Applying color in Photoshop starts out easily enough. First choose the color you 
want, and then apply it to a selected area with a command or tool. The hard part 
comes in trying to decide what color you want. There are, of course, numerous 
“theoretical ways” in which to pick colors that work well together. One suggestion 
is to use a standard color wheel to identify complementary colors; colors that are 
opposite each other on the color wheel, such as blue and orange. (For examples and 
more information on color wheels, see the Exploring on Your Own section at the 
end of this chapter.) The use of color models or wheels to mix and choose a color 
FIGURE | 5–13 |
Set the color mode of a document.
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
96
can help to identify color based on a numeric system, but for 
the inquisitive artist, it might be just as well to play with colors 
until you see something you like. Just remember that the color 
you see on the screen might not visually reproduce exactly 
as the same color in another medium, such as on paper.
In Photoshop, you choose colors for either a foreground 
or background. The foreground color is used to paint, 
fill, and stroke selections, while the background 
color is used to make gradient fills and fill in the 
erased areas of an image. See Figure 5–14.
Color is applied using the Paint Bucket tool or a drawing or 
brush tool, or by choosing Edit > Fill or Stroke. See Figure 5–15. 
You can also take a sample of an existing color within an image 
with the Eyedropper tool. See Figure 5–16.
You can choose colors in the Color panel, the Color Picker 
(accessed by clicking the foreground or background 
color selection box in the toolbox), or the Swatches 
panel. You can also create graduated blends of color 
using the Gradient tool. Each of these color selection 
options is described in the sections that follow.
THE COLOR PANEL
The Color panel (see Figure 5–17) allows you to choose various 
color models and to switch between choosing and adjusting colors 
on either the foreground or background of a selected object.
THE COLOR PICKER AND COLOR LIBRARIES
The Color Picker (see Figure 5–18) is a sophisticated 
version of the Color panel, offering the option to view, 
select, and adjust colors from a number of color models 
in one window. It can be a little overwhelming, so we 
will break it down for you in the following figures.
At the top of the window, the Color Picker title appears 
followed by the words Foreground Color or Background 
Color to make you aware of the color being changed (refer 
to Figure 5–18). You choose colors on the left side of the 
Color Picker. See Figure 5–19. The spectrum bar on the right is where you pick 
the hue, such as red, blue, or green. The large box to the left allows you to adjust 
the hue’s saturation (moving horizontally) and brightness (moving vertically).
FIGURE | 5–14 |
The upper image indicates options for the foreground 
and background selection area of the toolbox. The 
lower image shows how erasing an image reveals the 
background color (white).
FIGURE | 5–15 |
Select the Paint Bucket tool to fill in selections.
FIGURE | 5–16 |
Select the Eyedropper tool and take a sample of 
color from an image.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

97
|  Chapter 5 |
The area shown in Figure 5–20 is where you preview the colors you are selecting 
in the Color Picker. Your current color selections are updated automatically in the 
top area of the box, while the lower part indicates the original color of the current 
foreground color. Gamut warnings appear next to the color indicator if you have 
chosen a color that is outside either the Web-safe (the 3D box icon) or the CMYK 
FIGURE | 5–17 |
Go to Window > Color (if not 
already open) to open the Color 
panel.
FIGURE | 5–18 |
Full view of the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 5–19 |
The left side of the Color Picker is for 
choosing colors.
(alert triangle icon) gamut. When you click on the 3D box icon, the color shifts 
to the closest Web-safe color. Similarly, when you click on the alert triangle, the 
color shifts to the closest CMYK (print) color. This is a really handy feature!
On the right side of the Color Picker (see Figure 5–21 on 
the next page) you can adjust colors numerically in any 
of the four color models: HSB, RGB, CMYK, and Lab. 
The hexadecimal color code (#) for selected colors is 
provided for artwork intended for Web pages.
By choosing the Color Libraries button at the top right 
of the Color Picker (refer to Figure 5–18), a whole new 
FIGURE | 5–20 |
In the Color Picker, there is an 
area to preview a color you have 
chosen above the original color 
of the current foreground color.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
98
FIGURE | 5–21 |
Adjust colors numerically on the right side of the 
Color Picker.
FIGURE | 5–22 |
Color Libraries area of the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 5–24 |
Click on a swatch to use that color in your image.
|
|
|
|
world of color possibilities emerges. This area (see 
Figure 5–22) lets you choose predefined color libraries, 
equivalent to those in printed swatch books, such as 
PANTONE or TRUMATCH.
THE SWATCHES PANEL
After you spend long hours picking your favorite 
colors, it is good to know you can save them in the 
Swatches panel. See Figure 5–23. To apply your saved 
colors to selected objects, click on your saved swatches 
in the Swatches panel window. See Figure 5–24. 
You can make swatch libraries to reuse in other 
documents or use one of the many already 
provided for you. The Swatches panel will not 
only save and load your specific color selections, 
but also will load other custom color libraries.
THE GRADIENT TOOL AND GRADIENT PANEL
Gradients are graduated color blends. They are used to create 
smooth transitions of color within an object or across multiple 
objects, giving them a more dimensional look. Gradients come 
in several varieties, including linear, radial, angle, reflected, and 
FIGURE | 5–23 |
The Swatches panel.
w
F
e
P
T
A
c
c
i
Y
d
p
|
|
T
o
i
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

99
|  Chapter 5 |
FIGURE | 5–25 |
Gradient Options bar and 
examples of the different 
gradient blends.
FIGURE | 5–26 |
To modify or create 
new gradients, use the 
Gradient Editor.
diamond, any of which you can choose from the Gradient tools Options bar. See 
Figure 5–25. Gradients are created in the Gradient Editor (see Figure 5–26) and then 
applied with the Gradient tool (see Figure 5–27) in the toolbox. To get to the Editor, 
select the Gradient tool in the toolbox, and then click inside the gradient sample area in 
the Options bar to open the Editor and edit the gradient (refer to Figure 5–26 for steps).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
100
FIGURE | 5–27 |
Gradient tool.
Solid gradients are the most common Gradient Type to choose in the Gradient 
Editor, but you can also have fun with Noise gradients, a more random blending 
of color with variable roughness, and create gradients from opaque color to 
varying levels of transparency. Expect to spend a lot of time in the Editor making 
and saving new gradients. You will get some practice in the next lesson.
ADJUSTING COLOR
A big part of dealing with color in Photoshop is adjusting colors that are already in an 
image. There are a multitude of image adjustment options (Image > Adjustments) that 
can absorb your time and creativity, including options to change the tonal quality of a 
photograph (highlights, shadows, and midtones) and a photograph’s hue and saturation 
levels. You will get into adjusting color extensively in Chapter 6. But first, let me explain 
two important concepts related to color adjustment: channels and bit depth.
ABOUT CHANNELS AND BIT DEPTH
We cannot skip the concept of channels and the effect of bit depth when working with 
color in Photoshop. Inevitably, you will run into both. When you really start getting 
into the intricacies of color correction and manipulation, channels will provide the 
necessary clues to attain the result you want. Channels are grayscale images that store 
information about each primary color of a color model. For example, the RGB model 
contains a red channel, a green channel, a blue channel, and a composite channel 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

101
|  Chapter 5 |
(which is all three channels combined and what you normally see when 
you view the image). To view the channels available in any document, 
choose Window > Channels, if not already open. See Figure 5–28.
Each channel can be edited separately, giving you full control over 
specific ranges of color in the image. For example, if your photograph 
is too red, you can lessen the amount of red in the image with the 
Channel Mixer (Image > Adjustments > Channel Mixer). See 
Figure 5–29. You can also create additional channels, such as a spot 
color to be used in the printing process or an alpha channel, which 
stores a specific selection or mask (these will be covered in Chapter 8).
The more channels in an image, the larger the image file size, which is 
where bit depth comes in again. Remember, in Chapter 3, we mentioned 
that the larger an image’s bit depth (accumulation of zeros and ones), 
the more variations of color an image can contain. Moreover, the more 
variations, the larger the image file size. All of this bit depth information is 
stored in channels. A black-and-white image, also called a one-bit image or 
bitmap, has one channel and a bit depth of 1, with the possibility of holding 
only two colors: black and white. See Figure 5–30. The same image saved in 
CMYK color, which has four channels and more room to store colors, has a 
file size of 351.1K as compared to only 11K for the black and white—heavy! 
See Figure 5–31.
There actually is method to this madness, but at this point all you need 
to understand is that bit depth, channels, and color models are all 
interrelated:
 
▶Bitmap images have one channel and contain 
1 bit of color (black and white).
FIGURE | 5–28 |
The Channels panel.
FIGURE | 5–29 |
Adjust the red pixels in the image using the 
Channel Mixer.
|
|
FIGURE | 5–30 |
A one-bit image (or bitmap) has one channel, which supports 
a bit depth of two colors, black and white. The file size of this 
image is 11K.
FIGURE | 5–31 |
An image saved in the CMYK Color mode has four channels and 
more room to store colors. The file size of this image is 351.1K.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
102
 
▶Grayscale images have one channel that contains 8 bits of color, which produce 
256 different shades of gray.
 
▶RGB images have three channels of color that contain 8 bits of color per 
channel, which can produce 256 shades for each of the colors red, green, and 
blue. Remember that each bit contains two possible values: 0 or 1. To calculate 
the total possible number of shades within a single color, take 2 to the 8th 
power (8 bits): 2  2  2  2  2  2  2  2  256 shades. To calculate 
the total number of colors in an entire RGB image, take 256 shades to the 
3rd power (red, green, and blue): 256  256  256  16.7 million colors.
 
▶CMYK images have four channels of color that contain 8 bits of color per 
channel, which can produce 256 shades of each of the colors cyan, magenta, 
yellow, and black. You do the math!
Note: Catering to the “more is better” world that we seem to live in, Photoshop 
also offers the capability of creating images containing 16 bits (65 thousand 
shades) or 32 bits (four billion shades) of color per channel, expanding the amount 
of color variations that can be stored in the image. Why so many? The need is 
specific depending on the area of computer graphics. For instance, in the realm of 
digital photography, photographers use HDR, or high-dynamic range, to pull out 
details and nuances in their photos that may be invisible to the naked eye. HDR is a 
term often associated with 32-bit images. In contrast, 8-bit and 16-bit images are 
considered LDR, or low-dynamic range. (Note that there are many fine details 
that differentiate an HDR from an LDR image that go well beyond the scope of 
this book.)
LESSON: PLAYING WITH COLOR MODELS
In this lesson, you’ll play with pairing complementary colors, blending them with 
gradients, and switching to grayscale. Refer to Figure 5–32.
FIGURE | 5–32 |
Lesson example shown 
in grayscale.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

103
|  Chapter 5 |
Setting Up the File
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > Open. Open 
the file chap5L1.psd in the chap05_
lessons folder.
 2. 
Save a copy of this file in your lessons 
folder: choose File > Save As and name 
your file chap5L1_yourname.psd. This 
file contains a template and guides for you 
to build the color models lesson. Be sure to 
chose Reset > Essentials at the top right of 
the Application bar to reset your workspace 
to the default setting. Refer to figure 5–33.
Note: If you do not see the guidelines, 
choose View > Show > Guides. Also, make 
sure Snap is checked under View > Snap.
  3. 
Open the Layers panel, if it is not already 
open (Window > Layers). Select Layer 1 
and name it red.
Creating True Opposites
 1. 
Click on the foreground color swatch in the toolbox to open the Color Picker.
 2. 
In the RGB model settings fields, enter 255 for red, 0 for green, and 0 for blue. Red 255 is 
the truest red color you can create on the screen. Click OK. See Figure 5–34.
 3. 
Select the Rectangle tool in the toolbox. See Figure 5–35. 
FIGURE | 5–33 |
To reset to the Essentials workspace, choose Reset Essentials from the 
Workspace options found on the Application bar. 
FIGURE | 5–34 |
Select a true red in the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 5–35 |
Select the Rectangle tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
104
 4. 
In the Options bar, select the Fill pixels option. See Figure 5–36.
 5. 
In the Options bar, select the Geometry options pop-up to display the options for the 
Rectangle tool (the second down-pointing arrow from the left of the Options bar). In 
the Rectangle Options box, choose Fixed Size. For W, enter .62 in. and for H, enter .66 
in. See Figure 5–37.
Note: As an alternative to setting a fixed size for the rectangle, you can 
choose Unconstrained and draw the rectangle free-form using the guides and 
template as positioning markers.
 6. 
Click on the down-pointing arrow of the Geometry options pop-up again to close it.
 7. 
Place your cursor in the upper-left corner of the first rectangle  or shape indicated in 
the file. Then, click once to place the fixed-size rectangle—or click and drag down if 
you are creating an unconstrained rectangle. See Figure 5–38.
FIGURE | 5–38 |
Place the rectangle on the document.
 8. 
Select the Move tool, and place the pointer over the red rectangle you just created.
 9. 
Hold down Option/Alt, and then click and drag to the right to make a copy of the 
rectangle. Place it right next to the first rectangle. Now you have what appears to be a 
red rectangle.
Note: As you drag the duplicate, also hold down Shift to constrain its horizontal 
positioning.
 10. 
Note that when you make a duplicate it creates a new layer in the Layers panel (red 
copy). Rename this layer cyan.
FIGURE | 5–36 |
Select the Fill pixels option in the 
Rectangle tool’s Options bar.
FIGURE | 5–37 |
Set a fixed size for the rectangle in its Options bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

105
|  Chapter 5 |
 11. 
With the cyan layer selected, choose Image > Adjustments > Invert to create the 
complement (invert or dyad) of the red color, which is cyan.
Note: In the Exploring on Your Own section of this chapter, study the color 
wheels. Identify the red section in the wheel, and note the cyan section directly 
opposite it. Interestingly, the RGB and CMYK color models overlap in the color 
wheel to create a full spectrum of colors.
12. 
Create a new layer (Layer > New > Layer) and name it green.
 13. 
Click on the foreground color box in the toolbox to open the Color Picker.
14. 
In the RGB model settings fields, enter 0 for red, 255 for green, and 0 for blue.
Note: You can also set this color using the Color panel (Window > Color). In the 
Color panel, if not already selected, choose the RGB Sliders option from the panel's 
options menu.
15. Select the Rectangle tool in the toolbox.
16. 
Click on the upper-left corner of the boxed area next to the cyan rectangle to create a 
green rectangle, or drag a box approximately the same size as the others. See Figure 5–39.
17. 
Select the Move tool, hold down Alt/Option, and create a duplicate of the green box 
right next to itself.
18. 
Rename the duplicate layer magenta, the complement (invert or dyad) of green.
19. 
Choose Image > Adjustments > Invert—or press Command-I (Mac) or Ctrl-I 
(Windows)—to convert the color to magenta.
FIGURE | 5–39 |
Create another colored 
rectangle on a new layer.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
106
 20. 
Click on the foreground color box in the toolbox to open the Color Picker one more 
time.
 21. 
In the RGB model settings area, enter 0 for red, 0 for green, and 255 for blue.
 22. 
Create a new Layer and name it blue.
 23. 
Create a blue rectangle in the boxed area next to the magenta rectangle.
 24. 
Duplicate the rectangle using the Move tool.
 25. 
Rename the duplicate layer yellow.
 26. 
Invert the color. See Figure 5–40.
 27. 
Save your file.
FIGURE | 5–40 |
Lesson with inverted colors.
FIGURE | 5–41 |
Select the Gradient tool.
FIGURE | 5–42 |
To open the Gradient Editor, click inside the gradient sample in the 
Options bar.
|
|
|
|
Be sure to click inside the gradient sample area, 
not on the down-pointing arrow next to it. The 
options under the down-pointing arrow only give 
you the currently saved gradients, not the full 
Gradient Editor window.
  DON’T GO THERE
Creating a Gradient Between Two 
Complements
 1. 
Select the Gradient tool in the toolbox. See 
Figure 5–41.
 2. 
Click inside the gradient sample in the Options bar to 
open the Gradient Editor. See Figure 5–42.
 3. 
Let’s create a custom gradient using the red and 
cyan complements. This will blend the hues between 
the two, including chromatic gray in the center. 
Reposition the Gradient Editor by dragging from its 
toolbar, so you can see the red and cyan rectangles 
on the document.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

107
|  Chapter 5 |
 4. 
In the Gradient Editor, select the color stop in the left-hand bottom corner of 
the gradient ramp (it will highlight in black). See Figure 5–43.
 5. 
Position the pointer over the red rectangle in your document and note 
that the pointer changes into an Eyedropper tool. Click on the red to take 
a sample of the color. The sample is automatically placed into the selected 
color stop of the gradient ramp. See Figure 5–44.
 6. 
Select the color stop on the right-hand bottom side of the gradient ramp.
 7. 
Take a sample of the cyan-colored rectangle in the document. The gradient 
between the two colors is created.
FIGURE | 5–44 |
Take a sample of color to apply 
to the selected color stop.
FIGURE | 5–45 |
Set the opacity stops at 100%.
FIGURE | 5–46 |
Add color stops to create more color blends.
|
|
FIGURE | 5–43 |
Select a color stop to apply a color to 
the gradient.
Note: A wonderful thing you can do with gradients is 
change the opacity settings (levels of transparency) of any 
color in the gradient. In this example, we want the gradient 
color at full opacity, so be sure both opacity stops are set at 
100%. See Figure 5–45. Also, for future reference, you might 
want to add more colors to your gradient. To do this, click 
in the lower part of the gradient ramp to create more color 
stops. See Figure 5–46. To remove color stops, click and drag 
them down and away from the ramp and, amazingly, they 
disappear.
 8. 
Select New to define (save) the gradient in the gradient sample area. Click OK to close 
the Gradient Editor.
 9. 
OK, you have made the gradient, now let’s 
apply it to the document. Create a new 
layer and name it gradient1.
 10. 
Select the Rectangular Marquee tool in the 
toolbox—be sure it is the Add this as step 
#11, and rename steps after Marquee tool, 
not the Rectangle tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
108
11. 
Choose View > Snap To > Guides, so that the selection will 
snap nicely to the guides in the next step.
 12. 
Select the rectangle area below the red and cyan boxed areas. 
Marching ants should appear, indicating the selection.
 13. 
Select the Gradient tool in the toolbox. Verify that the Linear 
Gradient effect is selected in the Gradient tool options bar. See 
Figure 5–47.
 14. 
Hold down Shift, click and drag the tool from left to right in 
the selected area, and then let go to apply the gradient. See 
Figure 5–48.
 15. 
Create a new layer and name it gradient2.
 16. 
Follow steps 1–15 to create and apply another new gradient 
using green and magenta under the green and magenta 
boxed areas.
17. 
Ditto for the blue and yellow area. See Figure 5–49.
 18. 
Save your file.
FIGURE | 5–47 |
Select the Linear Gradient option in the Gradient tool Options bar.
|
|
FIGURE | 5–48 |
Apply the gradient. Click and drag with the tool from left 
to right.
|
|
FIGURE | 5–49 |
The lesson with gradients applied.
|
|
Exploring Complementary Hues
 1. 
Let’s do a little experiment. First, choose View 
> Show > Guides to turn off the guides in the 
document and get a better look at what you 
are doing.
 2. 
In the Layers panel, select the top layer 
(gradient3), hold down Shift, and then click 
on the lower layer (red). This action selects all 
the layers between gradient3 and red. See 
Figure 5–50. Do not select the template layer 
set and/or Background layer.
 3. 
In the Layers panel, click on the down arrow 
with four bars in the upper-right corner of the 
panel to access more layer options. Choose 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

109
|  Chapter 5 |
FIGURE | 5–50 |
Merge linked layers.
FIGURE | 5–51 |
All the layers are merged and 
renamed.
Merge Down to combine the selected layers. See Figure 5–50. Rename the layer top_
color_set. See Figure 5–51.
 4. 
It’s not a bad idea to save your file with a new name, preserving the original file 
with all layers intact; you never know when you might need to access those layers 
again. Choose File > Save As and save the file in your lessons folder as chap5L1_ 
yourname_merge.psd.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
110
 5. 
Make a duplicate of the top color set using the Option/
Alt key and the Move tool. Drag this duplicate below 
the top color set on the document. See Figure 5–52.
 6. 
In the Layers panel, rename  the copied layer bottom_
color_set.
 7. 
Select the top_color_set layer and then choose Window 
> Adjustments to open the panel. Next, click on the 
Hue/Saturation option in the Adjustments panel. See 
Figure 5–53. Slowly drag the Hue slider all the way to the 
right and watch how the colors change through all the 
complementary hues. Move the Hue slider all the way to 
the left and you get the same result. Set the Hue slider to 
around 40 to see the intermediate complementary colors 
within the spectrum. See Figure 5–54 and Figure 5–55. 
These sets of colors are good starting points for creating 
colors that go well together.
 8. 
While you are in the Hue/Saturation dialog, play with the 
Saturation and Lightness settings. Saturation increases or 
decreases the intensity (vibrancy) of the colors. Lightness 
lightens and darkens the colors. Click OK.
 9. 
Save the file.
FIGURE | 5–52 |
Duplicate the color set layer.
FIGURE | 5–53 |
Select the Hue/Saturation option in the Adjustments panel.
FIGURE | 5–54 |
Adjust the Hue slider to see the shift of complementary colors.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

111
|  Chapter 5 |
FIGURE | 5–55 |
Example of lesson with shifted, 
complementary hues.
Go Grayscale
 1. 
Every color in the spectrum has an equivalent gray tone. To identify the gray tones in the 
image, choose Image > Mode > Grayscale. Choose OK (or the Don’t Flatten option) to 
preserve the layers in the document. If the window pops up, click on the Discard button 
to discard the color in the image.
Note: Once a file is converted to grayscale, it completely discards all color 
information. Notice the variations of shades in the grayscale image. You can go 
back to RGB or CMYK mode at any time to add more color, but the parts originally 
converted to grayscale will remain that way. With this in mind, it is a good idea to 
keep a saved version of your file in full color before converting to grayscale.
 2. 
Choose File > Save As and save a copy of this file as chap5L1_yourname_gray.psd. 
That’s all for now.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
112
  IN REVIEW
1. 
Describe how optical mixing works.
2. 
What is antialiasing in digital imaging?
3. 
Define color space, or gamut. Name some devices that use gamuts.
4. 
What is the distinction between a color model and a color mode?
5. 
RGB is considered an additive color model; CMYK is subtractive. Why?
6. 
Why is the Lab color model considered device-independent?
7. 
What are gamut warnings in Photoshop and where do you find them?
8. 
What kind of information is stored in channels?
9. 
What is a complementary color?
10. 
Where do you find and use color stops in Photoshop?
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
1. 
Using a color wheel to choose colors that visually work well together can be very useful. See examples 
of color wheels in Figure 5–56 and Figure 5–57. To learn more about color wheels and color theory:
 
▶Color Matters: http://www.colormatters.com/colortheory.html
 
▶Download some color wheels from Tigercolor: http://www.tigercolor.com/color-lab/color-wheel/
color-wheels.htm
SUMMARY
Now that you know how color performs in Photoshop—optical mixing, digital style—and how to apply it, 
hopefully your world is coming up rainbows (or spinning color wheels and spectrum arrays, at least). There 
is a definite correlation between where color is reproduced and how it appears to us visually. Lucky for us, 
Photoshop has the distinctive capability to translate different modes of color, preparing our artwork for all 
types of output.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

113
|  Chapter 5 |
 
▶Use the Color Schemes Generator from colorschemedesigner.com to pick colors quickly: 
http://colorschemedesigner.com/
 
▶Create your own color wheel using Photoshop: http://homepage.ntlworld.com/tim.ross/
ColourWheel/
2. 
Go to Photoshop Help (Help > Photoshop Help > Contents) and look up the topics “Color” and “Color 
management.” You will find a lot of interesting information about how to best set up your work area and 
document, so you achieve consistency of color when you reproduce the image on different devices and 
platforms. You might find yourself ready to absorb some of it. You might wait to read other parts once you start 
feeling more comfortable with using the program.
3. 
Practice saving and loading a swatch library. The commands to do this are located in the Swatches panel 
drop-down options menu.
4. 
Create a Georges Seurat Pointillism effect in Photoshop. Open any photograph and choose Filter > Pixelate > 
Pointillize.
5. 
Create and publish your own color schemes using Adobe Labs dynamic color selector program at 
Window > Extensions > Kuler from Photoshop’s main menu bar or at http://kuler.adobe.com/
FIGURE | 5–56 |
An example of a color wheel.
FIGURE | 5–57 |
Another type of color wheel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Working with Color |
114
Explorer PAGES
Natascha Roeoesli
About Natascha Roeoesli
Besides the fact that her parents are photographers, 
Natascha has not had any specific art education. She did 
consider attending art school in Switzerland but felt it was 
not good enough, even though she did pass the acceptance 
test. Most of her knowledge comes from observing her 
surroundings. She loves to try to figure out why something 
works the way it does. Physics is an important part of 
understanding how colors work, how we see shapes, and 
much more. Being self-educated is, in her opinion, a great 
advantage because it forces you to really understand what 
you are painting instead of learning theory. “However, there 
are books,” Natascha notes, “… like Exploring Photoshop 
CS5 or theory books, that help you fill in the gaps you might 
not have elsewhere.”
Natascha has worked for over two years for the game 
industry, several fantasy authors, and private clients.
In the tutorials section of her Web site (http://www.tascha.
ch/), Natascha shares her techniques for creating such 
effects as the silky fabric on the female character in Wax 
Dragon.
To view more of her work, visit http://www.tascha.ch/.
About the Work of Natascha Roeoesli
In her own words, Natascha shares her artistic process in the 
creation of Can’t Stand the Light:
“Can’t Stand the Light started as normal pencil sketch where 
I brainstormed a few compositions and character tryouts.”
“Once I had the general idea, I used Adobe Photoshop and 
my Wacom tablet to rough in some guidelines to work 
Wax Dragon. Compliments of Natascha Roeoesli.
In the tutorials section of her website (http://www.tascha.ch/), 
 Natascha shares her techniques for creating such effects as the 
silky fabric on the female character in Wax Dragon.
from using a hard-edged brush, which imitates a ball pen 
or ink pen.”
“I am much more of a painter than a drawer and think more 
in shapes than lines. This is the reason I am normally not 
taking much time for sketches. The lines, however, help me 
to not make big anatomical mistakes and stay somewhat true 
to my initial idea.
“Once I do have the rough layout, I copy this layer and hide it 
as a backup and create a new background layer, which I fill 
with the color I want to use for my ambient light (green for 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

115
|  Chapter 5 |
forest, blue for sky, and so on). The original sketch layer now 
gets painted on, starting with roughing in color using a brush 
with special settings, like 80% flow. This helps with not 
painting full opacity and lets the background color get mixed 
into everything I paint (most important: skin color). Switching 
the brushes during painting is also quite important.”
“My paintings develop a lot while I work. They constantly 
change as I am trying out different hairdos or clothing 
combinations for my characters. Even the color scheme 
for this changed drastically during the process. Using 
Photoshop’s amazing color adjustment tools, I shifted the 
colors of the almost-finished painting and then worked some 
more with the changed color scheme.”
Can’t Stand the Light. 
Compliments of Natascha Roeoesli.
Summer. Compliments of Natascha Roeoesli.
“Using the Color Picker is something I do almost without a 
break. Picking colors from my background and mixing them 
ever so slightly with the main objects (or the other way 
around) helps to unify the painting.”
“I also use a lot of layers, mainly to keep the background, 
foreground, and main objects separated from each other. 
In this case I was able to correct a compositional error and 
move the character slightly more to the right from where 
she started out. I did this to give more focus to the hand and 
more space to the left.”
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
| Image Correction |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

IMAGE CORRECTION
6
117
charting your course
It is no surprise that Photoshop is used widely for correcting photographs. After all, it was 
the fascination of brothers John and Thomas Knoll with darkroom photography and computer 
programming that brought Photoshop into existence and into the hands of consumers in 1990. Like 
any great inventor, John kept asking questions: how can the personal computer save photographs 
into other formats or adjust the contrast (lights and darks) in a photographic image? In all their 
simplicity—or complexity, depending on how you look at it—the answers are now at your fingertips 
in the form of Photoshop CS5.
This chapter presents fundamental techniques in the image-correction process. A photograph’s tonal 
and color quality, not to mention its subject matter, is unique, and in so many ways is subject to 
the judgment of the artist. However, there are some general steps we can use as a springboard for 
understanding the image-correction process. Let’s take a look at them.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Discover six basic steps for image correction
 
▶
Learn how to use Levels to affect brightness and contrast in an image
 
▶
Explore the use of adjustment layers
 
▶
Get familiar with the image retouching tools, such as Clone Stamp, Smudge, Dodge, and Sharpen
 
▶
Add an effect to a photograph
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
118
SIX STEPS OF EN“LIGHT”ENMENT
So, you have a photograph and it needs correction. It is too dark, too light, the color 
is off, something is missing, or something has to go. It’s all so overwhelming that you 
wonder where to begin. When I teach students Photoshop’s capabilities for image 
correction for the first time, I start with six basic steps: import, resize, enhance, 
retouch, effect, and save. Depending on the photograph, you might choose to use some 
or all of them. Let’s review the steps and then you can explore them in the lesson.
IMPORT
To get your photographic image into Photoshop, it must be in a digital format. You 
can get the image from a digital camera, or cellphone, scan it, copy it from a CD, 
or download it from the Internet. Try to get the highest-resolution image possible. 
It is better to have more pixels to work with than fewer, which is why downloading 
images from the Internet should be your last option; those images are small and 
of low resolution. You could also obtain images from a stock image distributor, 
such as Corbis, Comstock, or PictureQuest, but those kinds of images are usually 
already corrected and will not need much tonal adjustment. To import an image into 
Photoshop, choose File > Open and browse for the image on your system.
RESIZE
It is unlikely your image will be the exact size and/or orientation you desire for its 
final output. You might need to change its dimensions and resolution, add more or 
less area to the overall canvas, or crop out unnecessary parts. Whatever you do, save a 
copy of the original image in case you want to use it again.
Image Dimensions, Resolution, and Mode
First you will want to check the image’s resolution and size to be sure it contains 
enough pixels to complete the task you have chosen. For example, if you want the 
image to be printed on a fine magazine cover, you will want the resolution to be 
about 300 pixels per inch (ppi). If it is going to be printed in a newspaper, 150 ppi will 
suffice. For the Web or another digital environment, 72 ppi will work. (If you need to 
review the section on the relationship between resolution and the size of an image, see 
Chapter 3.) To adjust the size and resolution of an image, go to Image > Image Size. 
Remember you can sample down (reduce) the resolution of an image without losing 
detail in the image, while sampling it up will degrade the image’s quality.
You should check what color mode the image is in (Grayscale, RGB, CMYK) and set 
it to the mode you would like to work in (review color modes in Chapter 5). Be aware 
that you can do certain things in some modes and not in others. For example, if you 
change to Grayscale mode, all color will be discarded from the image and cannot be 
restored. If you choose RGB, you can work with the many effects and filters in the 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

119
|  Chapter 6 |
FIGURE | 6–1 |
The Canvas Size dialog box. 
You can use several types of 
measurements (such as pixels, 
inches, and percentages) 
to determine the size.
program that are unavailable in other modes. Remember, when your image is almost 
complete, it is important to set the mode for its intended output. In general, use RGB 
for screen display and CMYK for print.
Canvas
You may want to add some more blank canvas area around the image, perhaps to 
include some text, a border, or other elements. To adjust the canvas size, choose 
Image > Canvas Size. See Figure 6–1 and Figure 6–2.
FIGURE | 6–2 |
The canvas of an image resized 
by 20 pixels all the way around.
Cropping
When the composition of your photograph is not right or it was not aligned properly 
during the scanning process, it is time to bring out the Crop tool. Reminiscent 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
120
of a bout of spring cleaning, the Crop tool 
can put everything in its place and remove 
unwanted or unusable areas. To crop an image, 
select the Crop tool and click and drag over 
the area of the image you want to keep. Once 
the area is defined you can readjust or rotate 
the Crop selection more precisely before 
committing to the crop action. See Figure 6–3.
ENHANCE
Enhancing is where you begin to get into 
the heart of image correction, which 
includes adjustments to an image’s tonal 
levels (brightness and contrast) and color 
balance. Under Image > Adjustments in the main menu, you will find many 
commands that relate to tonal and color balance editing. See Figure 6–4. 
Photoshop features auto-correction commands for quick fixes to photographs 
(Auto Tone, Auto Contrast, Auto Color). However, if you want to apply more 
precise correction to specific pixels and their tonal quality, experiment with the 
Levels, Curves, and Channel Mixer options. See Figure 6–5 and Figure 6–6.
FIGURE | 6–3 |
Specify and adjust a 
crop selection.
FIGURE | 6–4 |
Options available for image enhancements.
FIGURE | 6–5 |
An image before adjustments to its tonal range.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

121
|  Chapter 6 |
Note: Alternatively, you can find similar adjustment options under Layer > 
New Adjustment Layer in the main menu or the Adjustments panel (Window > 
Adjustments). What’s the difference between applying an adjustment from the 
Image > Adjustments list versus Layer > New Adjustment Layer’s list or Adjustments 
panel? From the Photoshop Help files: “An adjustment layer applies color and 
tonal adjustments to your image without permanently changing pixel values. For 
example, rather than making a Levels or Curves adjustment directly to your image, 
you can create a Levels or Curves adjustment layer. The color and tone adjustments 
are stored in the adjustment layer and apply to all the layers below it. “See Figure 6-7. 
You can discard your changes and restore the original image at any time.  You will 
explore working with adjustment layers in the “Correcting the Mike Photo” lesson. See 
also the Exploring on Your Own section at the end of this chapter.
RETOUCH
It can be a full-time job retouching photographs—fixing the very large or very minute 
blemishes. There definitely is an art to retouching so it looks invisible 
to the viewer, but Photoshop makes it easier—quite painless, really—
with such tools as the Clone Stamp, Healing Brush, Spot Healing 
Brush, Pattern Stamp, Patches, Red Eye, Smudge, Blur, and Sharpen. 
See Figure 6–8 and Figure 6–9 (on the next page).
EFFECT
Once the photograph is adjusted to your liking, you can consider adding 
something more, such as an effect, a text element, a frame or border, or a 
filter or color enhancement. See Figure 6–10 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 6–6 |
An image after adjustments to 
its tonal range. For more precise 
control over the shadows, 
mid-tones, and highlights of an 
image, adjust the histogram 
(graph of the total distribution 
of colored pixels in an image).
FIGURE | 6–7 |
A Levels adjustment 
layer is located above the 
layer(s) it affects. To edit 
the levels, double-click on 
the histogram thumbnail 
in the adjustment layer.
A
(
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
122
SAVE
Hopefully, you save your document frequently as you work on image 
correction, but consideration should be given to output and creating 
copies of the work for its intended purpose. This might include 
saving the image in a compressed JPEG format for Web publication 
or in TIFF format to send to the printer or page layout program.
FIGURE | 6–8 |
Use the Clone Stamp tool 
to take sampled areas of 
an image to use in place 
of unwanted areas.
FIGURE | 6–11 |
The lesson before and after. 
Original photo compliments 
of Bruce and Linda Lord.
FIGURE | 6–9 |
The Dodge tool quickly 
lightens areas of an image.
FIGURE | 6–10 |
Using feathering, a soft effect 
is added around the image.
LESSON: CORRECTING THE MIKE PHOTO
In this lesson you will follow the six basic steps of image correction, and then you will 
be on your way to correcting and enhancing your own photographs. See Figure 6–11.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

123
|  Chapter 6 |
Import
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > Open. Open the file chap6L1.psd in the chap06_lessons 
folder. Be sure the Essentials workspace is selected.
 2. 
Save a copy of this file in your lessons folder. Choose File > Save As and name it 
chap6L1_yourname.psd.
 3. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels to see the document at 100% magnification. This is a 
photograph taken of my friend’s brother, Mike, during the Vietnam War. You can see the 
photo is faded and worn. Let’s take it through the six image-correction steps. The first 
step, import, has already been completed.
Resize
 1. 
The photograph is in RGB Color mode, but for simplicity—in 
this lesson—change it to Grayscale. Choose Image > Mode 
> Grayscale. A dialog box asks if you would like to discard 
all color information in the photo. Choose Discard, and rest 
assured that you have a backup copy of the color version on 
the lessons CD.
Note: Another option for making more precise 
adjustments to the blacks, whites, and grays of an image 
is Image > Adjustments > Black & White. This adjustment 
leaves the image in RGB Color mode, yet it offers different 
photographic filters and color channel adjustment options 
to adjust the grayscale image. See Figure 6–12. For a review 
of channels, see the section on “Adjusting Color” in Chapter 
5. For further study of color balance, you can explore the 
color version of the photo in the Exploring on Your Own 
section of this chapter.
 2. 
Choose Image > Image Size. The photo’s resolution is currently 
set to 300 ppi. At this resolution, if the photo goes to print it 
will be approximately 2.7 by 2.3 inches. Uncheck the Resample 
Image option if it is checked (see Figure 6–13) and enter 
150 ppi for the Resolution. The overall print dimensions 
increase. For most print jobs 150 ppi is a good resolution; a 
higher resolution is needed for high-quality magazine covers 
and similar media, which you will learn about in Chapter 10. 
Click OK.
 3. 
Choose View > Print Size to see the exact dimensions of the 
photograph if it were to be printed. Choose View > Actual 
Pixels to see the size of the image on screen—almost twice 
FIGURE | 6–12 |
Make subtle adjustments to a grayscale image 
using the Black and White adjustment feature.
FIGURE | 6–13 |
To know what you are working with, always check the image size 
of your document. Uncheck Resample Image if you want to change 
the resolution and keep the highest visual quality of the image.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
124
as big because the screen views at about 72 ppi. (If I just lost you here, review the section 
on resolution in Chapter 3.)
 4. 
OK, you have set the image size, but as you can see the image is crooked on the canvas, 
which can happen in the scanning process when the image is not properly aligned on 
the scanning bed. Select the Crop tool in the toolbox (fifth tool down). Click and drag 
an area around the photograph inside the tattered black border that approximates the 
dimensions of the photograph. (It won’t be exact; we will fix that next.) Use the Crop tool 
and the selection handles to scale and rotate the photograph, just as you would using 
Edit > Transform (see Figure 6–14), and then execute the crop (see Figure 6–15).
 5. 
Choose File > Save As. Name your new file and click Save.
FIGURE | 6–14 |
Using the transform handles, 
adjust the crop selection 
around the image.
FIGURE | 6–15 |
Choose the check mark on the 
Options bar to execute the crop.
Enhance
 1. 
Now for the fun stuff. Choose Image > Adjustments > Levels. In the Levels dialog box be 
sure the Preview option is checked, then choose the Auto option. Note the automatic 
tonal correction made to the image. See Figure 6–16. It is looking better already. Choose 
Cancel to go back to the uncorrected image. Let’s try a different method—something 
with more control and using an adjustment layer to make the corrections instead 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

125
|  Chapter 6 |
of altering the actual photo. (If you’re wondering, “What’s an 
adjustment layer?,” review the Enhance section of this chapter).
 2. 
In the menu bar choose Layer > New Adjustment Layer > Levels. 
Keep the Levels 1 layer name and click OK. A histogram comes 
up in the Adjustments panel. This is a graph that shows the 
distribution of shadows, mid-tones, and highlights in an image. 
The far-left marker at the bottom of the graph indicates the end 
range for the darkest (shadow) pixels in the image. The far-right 
marker indicates the end range for the lightest (highlight) pixels 
in the image. The marker in the middle adjusts all chromatic 
gray pixels in between. The higher the graph in a particular 
area, the more instances of that particular shade in the image. 
See Figure 6–17.
 3. 
A quick way to find a good tonal balance in the image is to 
move the black (shadow) marker on the histogram inward until 
it aligns with the first vertical stretch of pixels in the histogram. 
Do the same with the white (highlight) marker. Note the changes 
occurring directly on the document. Adjust the mid-tones 
marker to the right or left to see how much control you have 
over the photo’s brightness and contrast. Refer to Figure 6–17.
 4. 
Open the Layers panel. Notice that the adjustment layer you 
created in step #1 is automatically created above the mike_photo 
layer.
5. 
OK, let’s add some color back into the image—a sepia tone. First 
change the image mode back to RGB via Image > Mode > RGB 
Color. Select the Don’t Merge option.
FIGURE | 6–16 |
Select the Auto option to quickly 
correct the levels of an image.
FIGURE | 6–17 |
Adjust the levels by moving the 
shadow, mid-tone, and highlight 
markers. Be sure to preview the 
document as you make changes.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
126
 6. 
Be sure the mike_photo layer is highlighted in the Layers panel, 
and then choose Layer > New Adjustment Layer > Photo Filter. 
Name the new layer Sepia, and choose OK. The options for the 
photo filter open in the Adjustments panel. Select the Sepia filter 
from the drop-down menu. Try a Density setting of about 75%. 
Click OK. What do you think? Feel free to try the other filters if 
sepia is not your color. See Figure 6–18.
 7. 
Let’s work with the Sharpen feature. This next enhancement 
is optional, but it is sometimes necessary on images that have 
gone through a scanning process, which tends to blur some 
images. Sharpening is also a good idea when you want to bump 
up the readability of text in a photo. Select the mike_photo 
layer, and then choose Filter > Sharpen > Sharpen and note the 
subtle clarity in the image. (If you did not catch this the first time, 
choose Edit > Undo Sharpen, zoom in closer to the image, redo 
the step to see the shift in image detail, and then zoom out to 
see that it is, indeed, an improvement.)
 8. 
Save your work.
Note: Unsharp Mask and Smart Sharpen are also available 
in the Sharpen filters. They work like the Sharpen feature but 
give you more control over the effect. Give it a try, if you like. 
You can always undo the effect in the History panel: use Edit 
> Step Backward a few times, or File > Revert to go back to 
your last saved version.
Retouch
 1. 
OK, on to some real magic. The Mike photo is well-worn. Note 
the stains and scratches on the photo, particularly those on the 
left-hand side. See Figure 6–19.
FIGURE | 6–18 |
Colorize the photograph with a photo filter.
FIGURE | 6–19 |
The circled areas indicate 
scratches and stains in the 
photo.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

127
|  Chapter 6 |
 2. 
Change the tool icons to look more like brushes and work more accurately: choose 
Photoshop > Preferences > Cursors (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Cursors (Windows). 
Under Painting Cursors, choose Normal Brush Tip (if it is not already selected). Click OK.
 3. 
Select the Clone Stamp tool in the toolbox. See Figure 6–20.
 4. 
In the Options bar, click on the brush thumbnail to 
open the brush options. Click on the arrow inside 
a circle in the upper right corner of the drop-down 
menu to open further options. Choose to view the 
brushes with Small Thumbnails. See Figure 6–21. 
The Clone Stamp tool takes a picture of an area of 
an image that can then be duplicated elsewhere on 
the image. The brush size determines the size of the 
picture area. Choose the Soft Round Pressure Size 
brush and set its size to 27 pixels. See Figure 6–22 
(on the next page). Click the down arrow in the 
Brush options to close the panel, or hit Enter (Mac) 
or Return (Windows) on the keyboard.
 5. 
Place the Clone Stamp tool over an unstained, 
lighter area on the left-hand side of the image. See 
Figure 6–23 (on the next page). Hold down Alt/
Option and click to take a picture (sample) of that 
pixel area (zoom in if necessary).
FIGURE | 6–21 |
Select to view the brushes in small thumbnails.
FIGURE | 6–20 |
The Clone Stamp tool.
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
128
 6. 
Position the pointer over one of the stained areas of the image, 
and click once to apply the saved picture over the stained area. 
Click and drag (brush) lightly over the stained area to blend it 
into the background pixels. See Figure 6–24. Note that when 
you click and drag over an area, a crosshair comes up. The 
crosshair indicates the area that is being copied by the brush in 
another area. Huh? Frankly, at first this relationship between the 
crosshair and the brush can be somewhat confusing, but once 
you understand how the tool works, it does make sense. The first 
picture taken with the Clone Stamp tool (when you hold down 
Option/Alt) is applied to a new area when you click elsewhere on 
the image. The crosshair indicates the relative starting point of 
what it will continue to pick up as you click and drag (brush) over 
the area. See Figure 6–25.
 7. 
On the menu bar, go to Window > Clone Source to open the 
Clone Source panel. See Figure 6–26. This panel lets you save 
samples in the upper five squares by the one of them and setting 
a clone source (when you hold down Alt/Option) in the image. 
FIGURE | 6–23 |
Position the Clone Stamp tool over an area, hold 
down Option/Alt, and click to take a picture (sample) 
of the pixels.
FIGURE | 6–22 |
The Brush options—choose the 
Soft Round Pressure Size brush 
and set its size to 27 pixels.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

129
|  Chapter 6 |
FIGURE | 6–26 |
Options in the Clone Source 
panel.
FIGURE | 6–24 |
Blending the area into the background pixels.
FIGURE | 6–25 |
First picture applied to a new area. 
Note the crosshair on the boy’s nose. 
The pixels in this area are being 
applied by the brush above and to 
the left.
The first square already has a saved sample from our first attempt at cloning. Also, the 
Show Overlay at the bottom of the panel will reveal a ghost image of the clone source 
(the crosshair) over the original image.
 8. 
Continue to take samples of clean areas of the image and apply them to the stained or 
scratched areas. You might want to change your brush size, depending on the area size 
you are sampling. To do this quickly, click on the right and/or left bracket keys on the 
keyboard. Once you have made your adjustments to the brush, press Enter to exit the 
menu. See Figure 6–27 (on the next page). The bracket [ ] keys offer another quick way of 
changing brush sizes. The [ key decreases the size of the brush while the ] key increases it.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
130
FIGURE | 6–29 |
Hiding blemishes with the 
Smudge tool.
|
|
FIGURE | 6–30 |
The Dodge tool in the toolbox.
9. 
Select the Zoom tool and zoom in on the scratch on the boy’s 
knee on the left side of the photo.
 10. 
For another retouch tool that might do the trick, select the 
Smudge tool in the toolbox. See Figure 6–28.
 11. 
Gently blend the darker pixels of the boy’s knee into the light 
scratched area. See Figure 6–29.
 12. 
Zoom out to 100% magnification—to do this quickly, double-
click on the Zoom tool in the toolbox. Note that Mike’s face is 
dark under his hat. Zoom in on his face.
 13. 
Select the Dodge tool in the toolbox (see Figure 6–30) and in 
the Options bar set Exposure to 5%. In the Options bar, also 
adjust your brush size, if necessary (we chose 5 for the brush 
size—quite small).
 14. 
Gently brush the Dodge tool over Mike’s cheeks to lighten them 
slightly.
 15. 
Zoom out to 100% magnification to see the subtle result. If you 
dodged too much, either undo actions in the History panel or 
use the Burn tool (under the Dodge tool in the toolbox) to redo 
the darker effect.
FIGURE | 6–28 |
The Smudge tool is located 
under the Blur tool in the 
toolbox.
FIGURE | 6–27 |
Adjust brush size with Ctrl-click 
(Mac) or right-click (Windows) 
or using the bracket keys.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

131
|  Chapter 6 |
 16. 
Using your newly found tools, retouch other areas of the photo. See also Exploring on 
Your Own, item #4, at the end of this chapter for an explanation of more retouching 
tools that you can play with.
Note: When working with the retouch tools, individual clicks or very short drags 
with the tools can be more successful than brushing over large areas all at once.
 17. 
Save your document.
Effect
 1. 
With the Effect step you can add any sort of inspiration to a photo. For the Mike photo, 
let’s make a frame. See the after version of Figure 6–11, for example.
 2. 
In the menu bar, go to Layer > Flatten Image. This will unite the Levels 1 and Photo 
Filters 1 layers and the mike_photo layer into one layer.
 3. 
Select the Elliptical Marquee tool in the toolbox. Position the cursor on Mike’s belt 
buckle, hold down Shift and Option/Alt, and then click and draw from the center a circle 
around the three figures. If you wish to reposition the selection, click inside the selection 
area with the Marquee tool still active  and move it.
 4. 
Choose Select > Inverse to inverse the selection area; marching ants appear around the 
edges of the photo.
 5. 
Choose Edit > Stroke, select a color to your liking, and choose 4 pixels. See Figure 6–31. 
Click OK.
FIGURE | 6–31 |
Add a stroke to the photo frame.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
132
 6. 
While the selection is still active, choose Filter > Texture > Texturizer. The Photoshop Filter 
Gallery window appears with Texturizer options open. In the Texturizer menu, choose 
the Canvas option (see Figure 6–32) and set the Scaling and Relief to your liking. Click OK 
when completed.
FIGURE | 6–32 |
Add a texture to the 
selected frame area.
Note: You can preview the changes being made directly on your document 
without closing the Texturizer Filter Gallery.
 7. 
Choose the Hue/Saturation option in the Adjustments panel. See Figure 6–33. Adjust the 
Hue slider to any color you wish.
Save
 1. 
Save a Photoshop version of your corrected image (maybe even two or three versions 
along the way). Choose File > Save As and save a final .psd version in your lessons folder.
 2. 
Let’s save two more versions for different output. For print, choose File > Save As and 
under Format, select TIFF. Click Save. In the TIFF Options box, select NONE for Image 
Compression and select Discard Layers and Save a Copy for Layer Compression. (The 
Discard Layers and Save a Copy option will save a flattened copy of your image, but the 
image you are currently working on is still the “original.”) See Figure 6–34.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

133
|  Chapter 6 |
FIGURE | 6–33 |
Add a color to the frame using a Hue/Saturation adjustment.
FIGURE | 6–34 |
Save the file in the TIFF format.
 3. 
Let’s save another version for the Web. Choose File 
> Save As, Format: JPEG. Click Save. Set the Image 
Options Quality to 8, so there is some compression 
placed on the image, but not enough to ruin its 
quality. Click OK.
Note: You can also choose File > Save for Web 
& Devices to save in JPEG format. However, this 
opens up another big dialog box of choices you 
don’t have to deal with right now. We will get into 
that in Chapter 11.
You’re done with the image-correction process.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
134
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
A whole new world—blemish-free—has opened up to you in this chapter. With the powerful 
 image- correction tools and processes available in Photoshop, every photograph has the potential 
for  perfection.
1. 
What are the six basic steps for image correction?
2. 
Why is it important to check the resolution setting of an imported photograph or image?
3. 
Why might someone choose the RGB Color mode over other modes?
4. 
What are you adjusting when you move the sliders in the Levels histogram?
5. 
What keyboard command must you press to take a pixel sample with the Clone Stamp tool?
6. 
When working with the retouching tools, why would viewing your cursor as Brush Size be helpful? 
Where do you go to make this setting?
7. 
What is the advantage of using an adjustment layer to make color or tonal corrections on an image?
8. 
Why would you save backup copies of the original photograph before retouching it?
1. 
Play further with the Adjustments panel and image-correction presets. 
Open a photograph that you have that needs some tonal correction 
(some examples can also be found in the chap06_lessons/samples/
color_tonal folder). Select the Essentials workspace. Docked in 
the panels on the right is the Adjustment panel (if you don’t see 
it, choose Window > Adjustments). See Figure 6–35. A list of icons 
is located at the top of the panel. Roll over each icon to reveal its 
adjustment type Levels, Color Balance, Exposure, etc.). We explored 
the Hue/Saturation adjustment in previous lessons. Click on an 
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
FIGURE | 6–35 |
Roll over the icons in the Adjustments panel to reveal its text equivalent.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

135
|  Chapter 6 |
FIGURE | 6–37 |
Click on an adjustment layer to reveal its options in the 
Adjustments panel.
adjustment and play with its options. To get back 
to the adjustments list, click the back arrow in the 
lower left corner of the panel. See Figure 6–36. Also 
experiment with the Presets located in the lower 
portion of the Adjustments panel (see Figure 6–35). 
Finally, go to the Layers panel and note how each 
adjustment made has its own adjustment layer. To 
remove an adjustment, delete its layer. To edit an 
adjustment, click on the adjustment layer and the 
information related to that adjustment appears 
in the Adjustments panel. See Figure 6–37.
2. 
In the Photoshop Help files (Help > Photoshop 
Help), expand your knowledge of levels and 
discover the wonders of curves. See the sections 
on “Making color and tonal adjustment.”
FIGURE | 6–36 |
Click the arrow to go back to the adjustments list.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
136
3. 
Explore color correction using a color 
version of the Mike photo. Using the 
Channel Mixer, remove the red overcast in 
the chap6L1 file. For information on using 
the Channel Mixer, consult the Help files.
4. 
As you learned in the lesson, the Clone 
Stamp tool can correct imperfections or 
duplicate areas of an image by sampling 
pixels elsewhere on the image or from 
other images. There are three other photo 
retouching tools that work similarly to the 
Clone Stamp tool, but with slight variations 
in effect: Healing Brush, Spot Healing Brush, 
and Patch tool. The Patch tool is best for areas 
without a lot of detail. See Figure 6–38.
 
Executed like the Clone Stamp tool, the 
Healing Brush tool matches the texture, 
lighting, transparency, and shading of the 
sampled pixels—determined by the size of 
the brush you choose—to the pixels being 
healed. As a result, the repaired pixels blend 
seamlessly into the rest of the image. The 
Spot Healing Brush tool offers the same effect 
as the Healing Brush tool. However, there is 
no requirement to specify (take a snapshot 
of) a sample spot to apply elsewhere. The 
Spot Healing Brush tool automatically 
samples the pixels by Proximity Match 
(by assessing the pixels that surround the 
edge of the retouched area), or by Create 
Texture, using the pixels in the selection 
to create a texture in which to fix the area. 
It’s amazing, really! See Figure 6–39.
 
The Patch tool works just like the Healing 
tools, but instead of defining a retouch 
area with a chosen brush size, you draw a 
selection around the source or destination 
area you want to sample and then repair 
that selection from another area or 
pattern. The Patch tool is best for areas 
without a lot of detail. See Figure 6–40.
 
To practice these tools, retouch the 
photo of a dilapidated shack in chap06_
lessons/samples/patch.jpg.
5. 
Found in the same area of the toolbox 
as the Healing and Patch tools, the 
FIGURE | 6–39 |
1. Photo before retouching with the Spot Healing Brush. 
2. Photo after correcting pixels with the Spot Healing Brush.
FIGURE | 6–38 |
Other photo retouching tools to explore.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

137
|  Chapter 6 |
Red Eye tool is worth a try. To quickly remove red eye from flash-photographed people, or the white 
and green reflections in flash photos of animals, select the Red Eye tool and click on the unwanted 
area. For practice with this tool, use the red_eye.jpg in the chap06_lessons/samples folder.
6. 
Another tool to play with in the Photoshop toolbox is the Color Replacement tool. Using brush 
strokes, this tool simplifies replacing specific colors in your image. Select the tool (see Figure 6–41), 
choose a brush size in the Options bar, select a foreground color or take a sample of color (Alt/
Option) in the image, then brush the color onto the area of the image you would like to modify.
FIGURE | 6–40 |
1. Photo before using the Patch tool.
2. Photo after using the Patch tool.
FIGURE | 6–41 |
The Color Replacement tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
138
DESIGN
adventures
IN
PHOTOMERGE
P
hotoshop’s Photomerge command smartly 
combines several photographs into one continuous 
image. For example, you can take several 
overlapping photographs of a landscape, and then 
assemble them into a panorama. It can assemble photos 
that are tiled horizontally as well as vertically.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT EXAMPLE
I was asked to assemble three overlapping photos taken 
at Monhegan Island in Maine to be printed on a large 
canvas. See figure A–1. For Photomerge to properly detect 
and blend the contiguous area of a series of images, 
the original photos taken must overlap sufficiently—
represented by the color overlays in figure A–1.
FIGURE | A–1 |
To view all the photos at once, the 
3 Up option was chosen from the 
Arrange Documents command in 
the Application bar. Note the areas 
in the three photos that overlap 
(highlighted in transparent yellow 
and red).
T
A
t
(
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

139
|  Chapter 6 |
First step in the process was to choose File > Automate > 
Photomerge in Photoshop, select the Auto Layout option 
and browse to find the photos needed. The photos can 
have any file name and can be selected in any order and 
Photomerge will automatically detect the order in which 
they should be assembled. See Figure A–2.
If there is a discrepancy in how Photomerge detects the 
blend and it doesn’t look quite the way you want it, you 
can select the blended pieces individually in the Layers 
panel and transform them as you would any other object. 
For the Monhegan Island photos, a seamless composition 
FIGURE | A–2 |
The Photomerge dialog box. There are many layout types to choose from (Auto, Perspective, Cylindrical, etc.). I chose the Auto option and it 
worked wonders for my project.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Image Correction |
140
FIGURE | A–3 |
In the Layers panel each assembled piece can be selected and modified, if necessary.
was created and no transformations needed to be done. 
See Figure A–3.
Then, although Photomerge correctly blended the three 
photos, I had to do some retouching and color correction on 
the final panorama. I cropped the image, then saved it. Then, 
I flattened the image and from the Adjustments panel applied 
an auto levels correction. See figure A–4. I then blended the 
color of the sky with the Clone tool. See final_merge.psd in 
aid_examples/photomerge_examples on the CD.
YOUR TURN
Using the sample files left.jpg, middle.jpg, and right.jpg 
in the aid_examples/photomerge_examples folder found 
in the lessons folder on the back of the book CD, you will 
assemble your own panorama.
Photomerge Project Guidelines
 1. Choose File > Automate > Photomerge.
 2. In the Photomerge dialog box, under Layout, 
choose Auto. For Source Files select the Files 
option. Browse for the left.jpg, middle.jpg, 
and right.jpg in the aid_examples/photomerge_
examples folder. Be sure the Blend Images 
Together option is selected at the 
bottom and choose OK.
 3. Photoshop will think for a bit and then 
the assembled images will appear as 
an “untitled” file. Save the file.
 4. At this point, feel free to crop and enhance 
the panorama as you see fit.
Things to Consider
For future explorations with the Photomerge command, 
consider the following:
Your source photographs play a large role in panoramic 
compositions. To avoid problems, follow these guidelines 
when taking pictures for use with Photomerge (extracted 
from the Photoshop Help files):
 
▶Overlap images sufficiently Images should overlap 
by approximately 25–40%. If the overlap is less, 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

141
|  Chapter 6 |
FIGURE | A–4 |
Color correction (Auto Levels) and retouching were done on the panorama to improve its final appearance.
|
|
Photomerge may not be able to automatically 
assemble the panorama. However, keep in mind that 
the images shouldn’t overlap too much. If images 
overlap by 70% or more, Photomerge may not be 
able to blend the images. Try to keep the individual 
photos at least somewhat distinct from each other.
 
▶Use one focal length If you use a zoom lens, don’t 
change the focal length (zoom in or out) while 
taking your pictures.
 
▶Keep the camera level Although Photomerge 
can process slight rotations between pictures, 
a tilt of more than a few degrees can result 
in errors when the panorama is assembled. 
Using a tripod with a rotating head helps 
maintain camera alignment and viewpoint.
 
▶Stay in the same position Try not to change your 
position as you take a series of photographs, 
so that the pictures are from the same 
viewpoint. Using the optical viewfinder with 
the camera held close to the eye helps keep 
the viewpoint consistent. Or try using a tripod 
to keep the camera in the same place.
 
▶Avoid using distortion lenses Fish-eye and other 
distortion lenses can interfere with Photomerge.
 
▶Maintain the same exposure Avoid using the 
flash in some pictures and not in others. 
The advanced blending feature in Photomerge 
helps smooth out different exposures, but 
extreme differences make alignment difficult. 
Some digital cameras change exposure 
settings automatically as you take pictures, 
so you may need to check your camera settings 
to be sure that all the images have the same 
exposure.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Image Correction |
142
Michael Dwyer
“With design it’s not a pure art . . . it’s not self-expression 
totally. You are fulfilling a purpose for a client, which is 
business. You must blend the art and business together. And 
you have to have a thick skin to take criticism . . . even if 
you know in your heart it’s wrong. You have to educate your 
clients, but at some point you have to bend to their vision . . . 
adapt, compromise with the client and the design.”
Learn more about this artist via an audio interview 
found on the book’s CD.
About Michael Dwyer
Michael Dwyer studied fine art at SUNY Purchase and the 
School of the Museum of Fine Arts (Tufts) in Boston, MA. 
On the road of sculpture and public art he took a detour 
to graphic design. During the last 14 years he has worked 
for large corporations and small studios, most notably 
YOE! Studio in Peekskill, N.Y. At YOE! he designed logos, 
packaging, ads, magazines, Web sites, and animations for 
clients such as the Discovery Channel, Pepperidge Farms, 
Golden Books, Mudd Jeans, Cartoon Network, and AOL.
Currently he is the creative director at EZ Marketing Group 
(EZMG) in Harrison, N.Y. EZMG’s clients include the New 
York Times, Universal News, and Nuttin’ But Stringz.
Michael teaches graphic design courses online for the Art 
Institute of Pittsburgh and Westwood College. In his spare 
time he produces short documentaries, including his most 
recent, Mom and Pop Shop.
To see more of his work, visit http://www.crackanegg.com.
About the Work of Michael Dwyer
In his own words, Michael shares his experience working 
with the Discovery Channel:
“One of the most successful and fun clients I have had the 
opportunity to work with has been the Discovery Channel’s 
Crocodile Hunter program. When Discovery first approached 
Package design by Michael Dwyer.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

143
|  Chapter 6 |
Newsletter cover for a dental practice transition company. 
Compliments of Michael Dwyer.
Print ad for a guitar magazine. 
Compliments of Michael Dwyer.
the studio they had a very popular show and a logo, but that 
was about it as far as a brand or defined image of the show. I 
developed three possible ‘looks’ or directions that they could 
pursue. One approach emphasized the dangerous elements of 
the show, the second had a comic book/superhero feel, and 
the third focused on the environmental aspects of Steve Irwin’s 
work, which is ultimately the direction they chose to develop.”
“Once the basic direction had been chosen I worked with 
a team of designers and an illustrator to develop an entire 
style guide for the client. I prefer working in a collaborative 
environment where all the designers can feed off each 
other’s ideas. An atmosphere of sharing makes the project 
seem more like play than actual work.”
“A style guide typically includes logos, a color panel, fonts, 
type treatments, patterns, textures, and final art. The style 
guide allows other artists or third parties to create any 
variety of merchandise and still maintain a cohesive and 
coherent brand.”
Poster design for Discovery Channel. 
Compliments of Michael Dwyer.
f
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
| Drawing and Painting |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

DRAWING AND PAINTING
7
145
charting your course
So far, we have spent a lot of time working with photographs in Photoshop—cropping, selecting, 
and transforming them, and altering tonal values and color. In this chapter, you get an introduction 
to the drawing and painting tools. These tools advance the possibilities of what you can do in 
Photoshop to another creative level. With little doubt, as you play with the Brush, Pencil, Pen, and 
Shape tools—not to mention path and type options—you may get lost in what can be a complex 
amalgamation of colors and shapes. It’s like looking into a kaleidoscope, where complex patterns 
and designs allure you into amazement.
If you were to take the kaleidoscope apart, however, you would find that this amazing eye candy 
is but an artifact of a simple design—a few reflective mirrors, some light, and a myriad of objects: 
confetti, beads, jewels, glass, and pressed flowers. The same goes for drawing and painting in 
Photoshop, except instead of spinning objects making these dazzling images, it is another type of 
back-lit object. Yes, you guessed it: pixels.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Master pixel painting with the Pencil and Brush tools
 
▶
 Recognize how vectors serve as a temporary mold for more flexible and free-form drawing and offer 
cross-compatibility support between pixel-based and vector-based programs
 
▶
Make geometric and free-form shapes using paths, fills, and strokes
 
▶
Draw a nonrepresentational art piece
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
146
PIXELS—A CONTEMPORARY 
ART MEDIUM
With pixels, you can simulate art styles through the use of the Pencil and Brush 
tools (and filter effects, discussed later in this chapter). Want to paint with 
watercolors or an airbrush? Draw with charcoal or chalk? With a mouse or 
pressure-sensitive digitizing tablet, you can. In addition, you can paint other 
elements, such as textured grass, scattered leaves and flowers, swirls, and patterns 
using the brush libraries. And with custom brushes you can paint just about 
anything else. You can change brush sizes, opacity, blending modes, and flow 
attributes. (If you are the doodling type, you may never get beyond this chapter!)
USING THE PENCIL AND BRUSH TOOLS
The Pencil and Brush tools are found in the toolbox. See 
Figure 7–1. These tools let you paint with any foreground color 
you choose. In general, the Pencil tool creates hard-edged, 
freehand lines of color, and the Brush tool creates soft strokes of 
color. To compare and contrast the same styles used with both 
the Pencil and Brush tools, see Figure 7–2 and Figure 7–3.
I recommend that you set your cursor preferences to reflect the 
brush size you are using. To do this, go to Photoshop > Preferences 
> Cursors (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Cursors (Windows) and, 
FIGURE | 7–1 |
Pencil and Brush tools in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 7–2 |
A small sampling of pencil styles and sizes.
FIGURE | 7–3 |
A small sampling of brush styles and sizes.
|
|
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

147
|  Chapter 7 |
FIGURE | 7–4 |
The Brush tool’s Options bar (Pencil tool options are similar).
FIGURE | 7–5 |
The Brush panel (also used with 
the Pencil tool). On the left-hand 
side you can click on an effect 
name to bring up its properties 
(i.e., for Color Dynamics 
choose the Color Dynamics 
title). To apply the effect to 
your brush, check the box to 
the left of the effect’s name.
under Painting Cursors, choose Normal Brush Tip. There are several places to 
make adjustments and add variations to your Pencil or Brush tool; for example, 
look in the Options bar (see Figure 7–4), in the Brush panel (Window > Brush, 
Figure 7–5), and in the context menu when you Ctrl-click (Mac) or right-click 
(Windows) over an area with the tool. See Figure 7–6 (on the next page).
|
|
T
t
(
t
y
t
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
148
In the chapter lesson, you will get to practice with the Pencil and Brush 
tools, but that is still a few pages away and the temptation to start messing 
around with these tools is usually urgent. So, let’s do it—pronto!
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > New and create a document of any size.
 2. 
Check the preferences to make sure that under Cursors, the Normal Brush Tip painting 
cursor is selected.
 3. 
Set a foreground color in the toolbox or the Color panel. This is the color you will draw 
with.
 4. 
Select the Pencil tool in the toolbox. See Figure 7–1. In the Options bar, click on the 
second inverted arrow to open the Brush (also Pencil) Preset picker. Choose a pencil in 
the scrolling list and set a size of between 10 to 20 pixels. See Figure 7–7.
Note: Alternatively, you can go to Window > Brush and open the Brush panel, 
which contains these options and more.
 
 
For future reference, you can also adjust the Pencil tool’s blending modes and opacity in 
the Options bar. Hold off on exploring these options until you feel comfortable with the 
basic settings.
 5. 
Place the cursor over your blank document. Click and drag to start drawing.
Note: To create straight lines, click with the Pencil tool, hold down Shift, and then 
click in another place on the document. (Do not click and drag, just click-click-
click . . . while holding down Shift. If you do not hold it down, you’ll just make dots. 
Try it and see!)
 6. 
Draw to your heart’s content, changing colors and pencil attributes.
FIGURE | 7–6 |
Context menu for the Brush 
tool. As you paint, you can 
quickly change the tool’s 
diameter, hardness, or style.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

149
|  Chapter 7 |
 7. 
To erase, use the Eraser tool. See Figure 7–8. Like the Pencil tool’s diameter 
(size), the Eraser tool’s diameter can be set in the Options bar. Remember that 
the bracket keys will increase or decrease the diameter of the selected drawing 
tool on the fly. The background color you have chosen in the toolbox is the 
color the Eraser tool reveals. So, if your document started out with a white 
background, make sure white is set in the background color swatch of the 
toolbox (select D on the keyboard) to completely remove whatever you are 
erasing.
Note: You can undo your strokes in the History panel.
 8. 
Select the Brush tool in the toolbox.
 9. 
Select a Brush Preset in the Brush Presets panel (Window > Brush Presets). For more 
options (not that you need them right now), click the arrow with four horizontal lines 
in the upper-right corner of the panel and, from the drop-down Options menu, choose 
another brush library from the list at the bottom (i.e., from Dry Media Brushes or Special 
Effect Brushes). To add the brush library to the current list of brushes in the Brush panel, 
select Append when the dialog box comes up. See Figure 7–9.
FIGURE | 7–7 |
Open the Brush (also Pencil) 
Preset picker. Note that in the 
Options submenu for the Preset 
picker, the view in this example 
is set to Stroke Thumbnail.
FIGURE | 7–8 |
The Eraser tool. The color 
it reveals is determined by 
the background color.
FIGURE | 7–9 |
Choose Append to add brushes 
to your existing brush style list.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
150
Note: In the Brush panel’s Options submenu are settings for how you might like 
to view the brush styles in the Panel window. Such settings include Text Only, 
Small or Large Thumbnail, Small or Large List, or Stroke Thumbnail.
 10. 
Paint with your chosen brush. Alter the brush options in the Options bar. Change the 
brush tip size and colors, and experiment with the Opacity and Flow settings. See Figure 7–10. 
FIGURE | 7–10 |
Adjust the Flow setting of the 
brush and see what effect 
this has when you paint.
FIGURE | 7–11 |
Adjust settings for the Scattering 
effect in the Brush panel.
 11. 
Play with the adjustments in the Brush panel; try Scatterings, for example. Click on the Scattering 
option on the left-hand side of the panel (it highlights in blue and a check mark appears in its 
checkbox). Then adjust its settings in the options area to the right. See Figure 7–11. To turn off 
Scattering, click on the checkbox to the left of the Scattering option.
Note: From the Photoshop help files: Opacity sets the transparency of color you 
apply. Flow sets the rate at which color is applied as you move the pointer over an 
area. As you paint over an area, pressing the mouse button, the amount of color 
will build up based on the flow rate, up to the opacity setting.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

151
|  Chapter 7 |
MAKING A CUSTOM BRUSH
Photoshop has provided a plethora of brush styles, but inevitably, there will 
be a need for something more and different. This is where making custom 
brushes comes in handy. A sample selection from any image or photograph 
can be used as a custom brush. First, marquee the area of the image you 
would like to use as a brush (be sure the correct layer in the Layers panel is 
selected), choose Edit > Define Brush Preset, and give your brush a name.
The custom brush shows up in the Brush Presets list (Window > Brush Presets). 
See Figure 7–12 and Figure 7–13. You can also draw or paint a pattern or shape, 
select it, and then choose Edit > Define Brush Preset. See Figure 7–14.
FIGURE | 7–12 |
Need a brush of zebra stripes? Make a selection of part of a zebra picture and save it as a custom brush.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
152
FIGURE | 7–13 |
The zebra brush is saved in 
Brush Presets (Window > Brush 
Presets). Note that this screen 
shot shows the Brush Preset 
window set to Small Thumbnail 
view. To set the view, click 
the arrow with four horizontal 
lines in the upper-right corner 
of the panel and select a view 
option (Small Thumbnail, Large 
Thumbnail, Small List, etc.) 
from the drop-down menu.
FIGURE | 7–14 |
Draw your own shapes (i.e., 
crazy flowers) and make 
them into custom brushes.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

153
|  Chapter 7 |
VECTORS—A GUEST APPEARANCE
I wish I could make it simple and tell you it is all black and white when learning 
this program, but there are gray areas to be addressed. Even though Photoshop 
is the pixel master, it can work with vectors on a minimal level—enough to use 
as a temporary solution for creating more flexibility in your drawing and for 
compatibility purposes when importing and exporting between programs. It is 
temporary in the sense that you can draw and make shapes using vector attributes, 
where no pixels are associated with the paths drawn, but that is only until the 
objects become rasterized (turned into pixels) with a fill or stroke color.
Note: For a review of the differences between vectors and bitmaps, see Chapter 3. 
In several places and processes within the program, vectors make a guest 
appearance, such as when you use the Pen tool and create paths, with vector 
masks, with type, and when you save in vector-supported file formats.
PATHS
Paths are vector lines you draw in Photoshop. They are used to 
define areas of an image and make new shapes or selections. 
You make paths using the Pen tool (see next section) or 
Shape tools, or by converting a selection into a path. To see 
created paths, go to Window > Paths. See Figure 7–15.
Let’s make some paths so you can experience how they work.
 1. 
Create a new document, and make it about 500 by 500 pixels in size.
 2. 
Press Shift-Tab to hide unneeded panels, if necessary.
 3. 
In the toolbox, set your foreground and background colors to their 
defaults (black foreground, white background) by pressing the D key.
 4. 
Choose Window > Paths to open the Paths panel, if not already open 
in the Essentials workspace. Note that no paths are indicated in the 
panel—yet.
 5. 
Select the Freeform Pen tool in the toolbox. See Figure 7–16.
Note: The ways of the Pen tools are vast and somewhat 
complicated (see the next section). For now, using the Freeform 
Pen tool is a good way to start.
 6. 
In the Options bar for the Freeform Pen tool, choose the Paths shape 
option, which is the second icon (the square with the Pen symbol in the 
middle). See Figure 7–17 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 7–15 |
The Paths panel.
FIGURE | 7–16 |
Select the Freeform Pen tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
154
7. 
Click and drag the Freeform Pen tool on your blank canvas, making a random, closed 
shape. To close a shape, approach the beginning of the path; an O-shape will appear near 
the tool. The shape is indicated as a work path in the Paths panel. See Figure 7–18. 
A work path is temporary. Unless you save it, it will be replaced when you draw another 
path.
8. 
Before you save a path, first replace the work path with another path. Try this: select the 
Rectangular Marquee tool. Click and drag on your canvas to define the rectangle. Right 
now, it is considered a selection (indicated by marching ants). In the Paths panel, click on 
the arrow with four lines in the upper-right corner to open its options, and then choose 
Make Work Path. See Figure 7–19. Set the Tolerance (smoothness) of the path to 2.0. Note 
in the Paths panel that the work path you made before has been replaced by a new, 
rectangular work path. Congratulations, you just created a path made from a selection!
FIGURE | 7–17 |
Choose the Paths shape option.
FIGURE | 7–18 |
A path is indicated as 
a temporary work path 
in the Paths panel.
FIGURE | 7–19 |
In the Paths panel, change a 
selection into a work path.
 9. 
With a work path you can modify the path freely (using vectors) before committing to 
the final, bitmapped version. Choose the Direct Selection tool in the toolbox. This tool 
lets you select individual points on the path to modify it. See Figure 7–20. Click on a line 
of the rectangular work path to select it. Note the points on each corner (called anchor 
points). Click and drag one of the corner points to modify the rectangular shape into a 
triangular shape. See Figure 7–21. The work path is updated in the Paths panel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

155
|  Chapter 7 |
 10. 
From the Paths panel’s options (click on the 
arrow in the upper-right corner of the panel), 
choose Save Path. Name it mytriangle.
 11. 
Let’s rasterize this shape—cast it in stone, 
so to speak. Choose Window > Layers, 
if not already open. Double-click on the 
Background layer to release it to a layer that 
can be edited.
 12. 
Go back to the Paths panel and select the 
mytriangle path. From the panel’s options, 
choose Fill Path. See Figure 7–22. Click OK. 
A copy of the triangle path becomes a 
permanent bitmap object in the current layer. 
In other words, you cannot use the Direct 
Selection tool to select individual points on 
the filled shape. In the Paths panel, however, 
the mytriangle work path is still available for 
modification. See Figure 7–23.
FIGURE | 7–20 |
Choose the Direct Selection 
tool in the toolbox to 
select individual anchor 
points on a path.
FIGURE | 7–21 |
Move an anchor point to 
create a triangular shape out 
of a rectangular shape.
FIGURE | 7–22 |
Make a work path a bitmapped 
object by filling the path.
FIGURE | 7–23 |
A path becomes a bitmap 
object in the Layers panel.
A
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
156
THE PEN TOOL
Ahh, the Pen tool, an instrument that either wreaks havoc or invokes joy, 
depending on your experience with it. I am not going to delve into the intricate 
workings of this tool in this book. While it is an available option for drawing 
in Photoshop, it is best utilized in a vector-robust program, such as Adobe 
Illustrator. In fact, it is such an important tool in that program that I spend almost 
a complete chapter on the Pen tool in my book Exploring Adobe Illustrator CS5.
In brief, the Pen tool lets you draw straight and curved 
vector segments and paths, defined by anchor points. 
With each click of the tool, anchor points are deposited 
and can be selected and modified with the Direct 
Selection tool (what you experienced in the last section 
on Paths). Through direction lines and direction points 
(together called direction handles), anchor points 
define the position and curve attributes of each line 
segment. See Figure 7–24. Because it is so precise, 
the Pen tool is excellent for tracing around complex 
shapes. In the following steps, practice drawing straight 
and curved lines with the tool, first randomly to get a 
feel for it and then more precisely to trace images.
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > New and make a new, 
blank document (any size).
 2. 
Select the Pen tool in the toolbox. See Figure 7–25.
 3. 
As if you are doodling on a piece of paper, randomly 
click to place anchor points on the document. To create 
straight-line segments, click the Pen tool and then pick 
it up and click somewhere else; keep clicking to make 
straight lines.
 4. 
To end the path, Command-click (Mac) or Ctrl-click 
(Windows) away from all objects, or click on the first 
point of your path to close it.
 5. 
To make curved lines, click and drag, keeping the 
mouse button pressed. Continue to click and drag to 
make curves. Fun, huh?
 6. 
With no objective, continue to make straight and 
curved lines. Use the Direct Selection tool to select and 
modify individual anchor points. Use the Path Selection 
tool (see Figure 7–26) to select a complete path, so you 
can move it or delete it with the Delete key.
FIGURE | 7–24 |
Anatomy of a path.
FIGURE | 7–26 |
Select the Path Selection tool.
FIGURE | 7–25 |
Select the Pen tool in the toolbox.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

157
|  Chapter 7 |
 7. 
Now for more precision drawing. Open pen_practice.psd 
from the chap07_lessons folder.
 8. 
In the Layers panel make sure drawing_layer is highlighted. 
See Figure 7–27.
 9. 
Select the Pen tool in the toolbox.
 10. 
In the Options bar for the Pen tool, choose the Paths shape 
option. See Figure 7–28.
 11. 
Click once on a corner of one of the diamonds in the first 
shape. This action makes an anchor point. Click the next 
corner, then the next, and then close the shape by clicking 
on the first anchor point again. See Figure 7–29. If you make 
a mistake (which is likely when you first attempt to use this 
tool), select the previous step in the History panel or choose 
Edit > Step Backward. If you are a perfectionist and want 
perfect, straight-line segments between anchor points, hold 
down Shift as you click on each point to constrain them to 
45-degree angles.
 12. 
Practice creating straight-line segments on the other three 
diamond shapes. Choose Window > Paths to view the work 
paths you have created.
 13. 
On the next tile shape (resembling a sunburst), click once with 
the Pen tool on a tip of one of the teardrop shapes, and then 
click and drag horizontally on the rounded head of the tear-drop to 
create a curve. (With your finger still on the mouse you can continue 
to drag the direction lines out to create a rounder curve and also move 
the direction handle up-down or in-out to make the line tangent with 
the tracing image.) See Figure 7–30 (on the next page). Click again—do 
not drag—on the anchor point at the bottom of the teardrop to close the 
shape. 
Continue tracing the other teardrop shapes, and the circle in the middle. 
For fun: can you draw the circle in the middle using only two anchor 
points?
 14. 
Continue your Pen practice on the flower shape.
 15. 
Change your vector shapes into bitmapped shapes. First, choose a 
foreground color for the fill. Next, select the Work Path layer in the Paths 
panel. Click on submenu in the upper-right corner of the Panel window, 
choose Fill Path, and click OK.
 16. 
See pen_practice_final.psd in the chap07_lessons folder for a 
completed version of this exercise. View the work paths in the Paths panel. 
The paths were stroked with a brush style with color dynamics turned on. 
To apply the stroke to your own work, choose Stroke Path from the Paths 
panel’s options menu or click on the shortcut at the bottom of the Panel 
window. See Figure 7–31 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 7–27 |
The drawing_layer selected.
FIGURE | 7–28 |
Choose the Paths shape option 
in the Options bar.
FIGURE | 7–29 |
Each time you click with the Pen 
tool, you create an anchor point.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
158
VECTOR MASKS
Since I am currently covering the different 
ways to work with vectors, I want to briefly 
mention vector masks. Masks in Photoshop 
are a way to hide and reveal areas of an image 
without permanently changing it. They are 
very useful in image editing and can create 
interesting effects (see Chapter 8).
Vectors produce graphics with clean, harp edges (not pixelated). To take advantage 
of this attribute, Photoshop offers you the ability to create vector masks. On a 
layer, vector masks produce a sharp-edged shape that is useful when you want 
to add a graphic element with clean, defined edges or when you wish to export 
your image into a vector-based program, such as Adobe Illustrator. The vector 
mask is defined in the Layers and Paths panels. See Figure 7–32. Use the Pen or a 
Shape tool (see later section in this chapter) to draw a work path, and then define 
its vector mask by choosing Layer > Vector Mask > Reveal All or Hide All.
FIGURE | 7–31 |
To quickly apply a stroke to a work path, 
select the shortcut at the bottom of the 
Paths panel.
FIGURE | 7–32 |
A vector mask is defined in 
the Layers and Paths panels.
FIGURE | 7–30 |
Create a curved-line segment 
by clicking and dragging 
with the Pen tool.
TYPE
Have you ever noticed that when you print a text document from a word processing 
program, such as Microsoft Word, that the text is very clean and crisp looking, and 
no matter what size you make it—12 pt or 60 pt—it always looks great? On the other 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

159
|  Chapter 7 |
hand, when you print a piece of clipart that was scaled really big on the 
document, it looks kind of blurry and pixelated. Why? Well, the type 
contains vector data that keeps the letter shapes sharp and that can be 
scaled large or small because, as you discovered in Chapter 3, vectors 
are not dependent on resolution. Therefore, when type is printed on 
a printer that supports this vector data, it’s perfect and easily readable. 
In contrast, the clipart is constrained by its resolution (because it is 
composed of pixels) and must remain a particular size to preserve its 
crispness when printed.
Type in Photoshop works very much like type in a word processing 
program. When first created, it is placed on its own layer. It also contains vector data, 
so you can easily modify it without worrying about how good it is going to look when 
printed. To apply type to a Photoshop document, select the Horizontal Type tool 
(see Figure 7–33), click within the document, and begin typing.
You can adjust a type’s font, size, orientation, and color in the Options bar, similar 
to editing type in a word processing program. Alternatively, choose Window > 
Character and Window > Paragraph for more formatting choices. See Figure 7–34.
FIGURE | 7–33 |
The Horizontal Type tool in the toolbox.
Although I have compared how type works in 
Photoshop to how it works in a word processing 
program, I do not recommend using Photoshop 
as a word processing program, especially if 
you need large bodies of text in an image or 
layout. For adding headlines and body copy, 
use a layout program, such as Adobe InDesign 
or QuarkXPress. These programs support 
type characteristics much better. Use type 
only as a design element in Photoshop.
  DON’T GO THERE
FIGURE | 7–34 |
Format text in a Type 
tool’s Options bar and 
Character panel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
160
FIGURE | 7–35 |
When saving in EPS, the vector data can be preserved 
(indicated by a check mark), but note the warning. It 
will not be preserved when reopened in Photoshop, only 
when opened in a fully vector-supported program, such 
as Adobe Illustrator.
|
|
FIGURE | 7–36 |
This EPS-formatted version of a file was saved 
in Photoshop and opened in Illustrator. When 
you click on the grouped item, you can see the 
editable, individual anchor points that comprise 
vector objects.
FIGURE | 7–37 |
This JPEG-formatted version of a file was saved 
in Photoshop and opened in Illustrator. Because 
JPEG does not support vector data, when opened 
in Illustrator or Photoshop it is composed of 
bitmapped pixels only.
VECTOR COMPATIBILITY
As presented in Chapter 3, some image formats support vector 
data and some do not. When you work in Photoshop’s native 
format (PSD), any vector masks, work paths, and type you 
create is preserved in that state until it is rasterized, which 
you might need to do to add certain effects and filters to the 
object. When you save your work, however, you must decide 
whether you want to keep the vector data in the file. This 
depends on where it is headed. If you save a file in the EPS 
or PDF formats, the vector data is preserved when the file is 
opened in a vector-based program, such as Adobe InDesign 
or Illustrator (see Figure 7–35). You can select and edit 
individual objects and the anchor points that define them.
If saved in a TIFF or JPEG format and opened in a vector-
based program, the vector data is rasterized (flattened into 
pixels). See Figure 7–36 and Figure 7–37. The chap07_lessons/samples folder 
contains several saved versions of an image in different formats. If you have 
Adobe Illustrator, for instance, you can import these versions into the program 
and then select the image or image parts to see what vector attributes of the 
image have remained. You can also open each version in Photoshop and see 
what happens. Does the vector data remain intact, or is everything rasterized?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

161
|  Chapter 7 |
MAKING SHAPES
In almost any art class you learn how to draw geometric shapes, and in previous 
chapters you have made shapes. However, now that you have learned about the 
characteristics of drawing with vectors and bitmaps, you can better 
understand the shape-making tools and options. One way to make 
shapes quickly is to make a selection (i.e., draw with the Marquee or 
Lasso tools) and then fill or stroke the shape by choosing Edit > Fill 
(or Stroke). There is also a set of Shape tools (see Figure 7–38) that 
provides you with selections to choose from in the Options bar. See 
Figure 7–39. Such selections include the type of shape (shape layers 
or vector masks, paths, or fill pixels), the characteristics of each of 
which were covered in the last sections on drawing with vectors versus 
pixels. And depending on what shape type you choose, you also have 
the ability to add, subtract, exclude, and intersect shapes as well as add 
styles (premade effects).
The following steps will familiarize you with the Shape tools.
 1. 
Create a new file about 500 by 500 pixels in size. Make sure the 
background content is white.
 2. 
Select the Rounded Rectangle tool in the toolbox. See Figure 7–38.
 3. 
In the Options bar, select the Fill pixels style option. See Figure 7–40.
Note: In the Options bar, you can modify the geometric options 
for the selected shape by clicking on the second inverted arrow. 
See Figure 7–41.
FIGURE | 7–38 |
The Shape tools available in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 7–39 |
The Shape tool’s Options bar.
FIGURE | 7–41 |
You can alter the geometric 
options for a selected shape in 
the Options bar.
|
|
|
|
FIGURE | 7–40 |
Select the Fill pixels option to make rasterized 
shapes.
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
162
 4. 
Set a foreground color in the toolbox.
 5. 
Click and draw a rounded rectangle on the blank canvas.
 6. 
Open the Layers panel. Note that the rectangle is a rasterized image on the Background 
layer.
 7. 
Select the Paths style option in the Options bar. 
See Figure 7–42.
 8. 
Select the Polygon tool.
 9. 
Draw a polygon on the document. It is a 
temporary work path you can alter.
 10. 
Open the Paths panel to see the work path.
 11. 
Select the Shape layers style option in the Options 
bar. See Figure 7–43.
 12. 
Choose a new foreground color.
 13. 
Select the Custom Shape tool and, in the Shape 
Options drop-down menu, choose a custom 
shape. See Figure 7–44.
Note: You can also make your own custom shapes to add to these choices. See 
the Photoshop Help files for details.
FIGURE | 7–42 |
Select the Paths style option.
FIGURE | 7–43 |
Select the Shape layers style option.
 14. 
Draw the shape on the document. Note in the Layers panel a new layer appears 
containing the shape and its vector mask.
 15. 
Select Subtract from shape area in the Options bar, and then draw another custom 
shape overlapping the first custom shape you made. See Figure 7–45 and Figure 7–46. 
FIGURE | 7–44 |
Select a custom shape.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

163
|  Chapter 7 |
16. 
Select a Style option from the Options bar. See Figure 7–47. The selected shape is 
updated with the style. Pretty slick, eh?
FIGURE | 7–45 |
Select Subtract from shape 
area in the Options bar.
FIGURE | 7–46 |
The shape of one object 
subtracted from another.
FIGURE | 7–47 |
Select a shape style.
Explore the other shape modification options, such as adding, intersecting, or 
excluding a shape from another.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
164
LESSON: NONREPRESENTATIONAL ART CREATION
You will be surprised to find that this lesson contains very little step-by-step 
instruction.
Since painting and drawing can be such an exploratory medium, I thought I would 
leave most of this lesson to your imagination. Using the various tools and techniques 
you learned in this chapter, create a nonrepresentational digital art piece—an art 
creation that doesn’t reference anything in nature or reality. See Figure 7–48.
As described in the book Artforms (Revised Seventh Edition), by Duane Preble 
and Sarah Preble (revised by Patrick Frank), “Nonrepresentational art (sometimes 
called nonobjective or nonfigurative art) presents visual forms with no specific 
references to anything outside themselves. Just as we can respond to the pure sound 
of music, we can respond to the pure visual forms of nonrepresentational art.”
 1. 
In Photoshop, use the toolbox to set the background color to any color of your choice.
 2. 
Create a new file about 500 by 500 pixels in size. Set Color Mode to RGB Color, and the 
resolution to 150 ppi. For Background Contents, choose Background Color, which is the 
color you specified in the first step.
 3. 
Open the Layers panel.
 4. 
Make a new layer and name it painting.
FIGURE | 7–48 |
An example of 
nonrepresentational 
art using Photoshop. 
See also the chapter 
opening image.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

165
|  Chapter 7 |
 5. 
Select the Brush or Pencil tool. Set the brush style to your liking and start to paint on 
your canvas. It does not matter what you paint—if you don’t like it, there is always the 
History panel. Open the Brush panel (Window > Brush) to explore more options.
 6. 
Create another layer and name it shapes.
 7. 
Create any number of fill shapes using the Shape tool.
 8. 
Make other shapes, using vector shape layers and paths.
 9. 
Save your file, if you have not already (save often!).
 10. 
Add some text as a graphic design element to the canvas.
 11. 
Use Layer styles on any of the layers you have created, such as Drop Shadow, Bevel and 
Emboss, and Pattern Overlay. To do this, highlight the layer you want to affect in the 
Layers panel, and choose Layer > Layer Style from the menu bar or by clicking on the 
fx icon at the bottom of the Layers panel.
 12. 
If you recall how from previous lessons, place blending effects and filters on any of the 
layers you have created. (For more specifics on the “what” and “how” of blending effects 
and filters, see Chapter 9.)
 13. 
Create another layer and name it frame. Draw or construct (using the Shape tool 
options, such as Subtract or Intersect) a frame around your masterpiece.
 14. 
Save your file in the JPEG format, set the quality amount to about 8, and e-mail your art 
to a friend.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
166
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
After this chapter, there should be no such thing as a blank Photoshop canvas. Usually it only takes a quick introduc-
tion to the drawing and painting tools and processes in this program to initiate a creative spark.
1. 
What is the main difference between the Pencil and Brush tools?
2. 
Name at least three features in the Brush panel.
3. 
Does the Eraser tool erase with the foreground color or background color?
4. 
Why would having some vector support in Photoshop be useful for drawing and painting?
5. 
Name three areas (features/tools) in Photoshop that incorporate the use of vector technology.
6. 
What is the difference between a “click” action and a “click and drag” action when you are using the Pen tool?
7. 
What are paths in Photoshop? How do you make them? What tools do you use to select a complete 
path or parts of a path?
8. 
What file formats preserve vector data?
9. 
In what three styles (ways) can you create shapes in Photoshop?
10. 
Describe nonrepresentational (nonobjective) art.
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
1. 
Create your own custom brush out of your signature. See Figure 7–49.
 
▶Make a new document. For Background Contents, choose Transparent.
 
▶Select the Pencil tool in the toolbox.
 
▶Choose a brush style with a small diameter (1 to 5 pixels in size).
 
▶Choose a foreground color.
 
▶Write your signature on the document.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

167
|  Chapter 7 |
FIGURE | 7–49 |
Use the Scattering option in the Brush panel 
with your new custom signature brush.
FIGURE | 7–50 |
Text on a path—yeah!
 
▶Choose Edit > Define Brush Preset, 
and name your custom brush.
 
▶Set your brush settings in the Brush 
panel (look for your custom brush 
in the Brush Tip Shape area).
 
▶Paint with your signature.
2. 
In the Photoshop Help files (Help > Photoshop 
Help), do a search for “brush dynamics” 
and find out what this feature does.
3. 
In the Help files, find out what the 
Convert Point tool does.
4. 
Using the Pen tool, trace around the images 
(goose.tif or peacock.jpg) provided in 
the chap07_lessons/samples folder.
5. 
Practice creating some type on a path.
 
▶Using the Pen tool, draw a simple path on 
your document.
 
▶Select the Type tool, and set the typeface and font size in the Options bar.
 
▶Click with the Type tool (the little I-beam) on the path and start typing some text.
 
▶Adjust the type by selecting it and modifying its formatting options in the Options bar.
 
▶Adjust the path the type is on and 
the starting point of the type by 
using the Direct Selection tool. See 
Figure 7–50.
6. 
Discover the wonder of kaleidoscopes. 
Visit these sites:
 
▶Amazing Software Kaleidoscopes: 
http://bindweed.com/kaleidoscopes.htm
 
▶Kaleidoscopes Heaven: http://
kaleidoscopeheaven.org/
 
▶Kaleidoscope Collector (how they work): 
http://www.kaleidoscopesusa.com/how.htm
 
▶Make your own Kaleidoscope: 
http://familycrafts.about.com/cs/
toystomake/a/blconnkaleid.htm
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
168
7. 
Try the Rotate View tool.
 
The Rotate View tool is located in the Tools panel, underneath the Hand tool. See Figure 7–51. Select 
the tool, then click and drag on an image (a compass should appear on top of the image). The OpenGL 
performance of Photoshop provides the performance necessary to display the image view in a rotated 
state, including rapid updates during drawing and painting. This tool is great for tablet sketch artists 
who prefer to rotate an image view to match the more natural arrangement of pencil and paper.
FIGURE | 7–51 |
Select the Rotate View tool.
8. 
Watch a video on the use of Content Aware technology - now available on a minimal 
level in CS5. Go to www.youtube.com and do a search for “Content Aware”.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

169
|  Chapter 7 |
DESIGN
adventures 
IN 
light pencil strokes and finger smudging to make the egg 
look somewhat realistic, rather than flat or oddly deformed. 
Using the Dodge and Burn tools in Photoshop, the digital 
art professional has a more, shall we say, quick and dirty 
solution to breathing life into a flat image or photograph.
Figure B–2 is a photograph of some eggs. There are 
obvious lights and darks in the photo, but what happens 
if we enhance these tones for an even more dimensional 
look? With the Dodge tool and a soft-tipped brush (or 
airbrush), areas of the eggs can be further lightened. 
See Figure B–3. Moreover, with the Burn tool and a 
soft-tipped brush (or airbrush), areas of the egg can 
be further darkened. See Figure B–4. The result is two 
DODGE AND BURN
I
n traditional photography, “dodge and burn” is a 
technique whereby, using light, a photographer can 
selectively darken (burn) areas in a photograph and 
selectively lighten (dodge) shadowed areas to bring out 
details. In glorified form, this technique is provided for you in 
Photoshop with the Dodge and Burn tools. Using any selected 
brush tip, these tools offer the artist localized and precise 
tonal control of the pixels in an image. See Figure B–1.
FIGURE | B–1 |
The Dodge and Burn tools 
(along with the Sponge 
tool) offer localized tonal 
control on a photograph.
FIGURE | B–2 |
A digital photograph 
of some eggs without 
photo retouching.
In the toolbox, the Dodge and Burn tools are grouped with 
another tonal control tool: the Sponge tool. These tools are 
great for localized manipulation of the highlights, mid-tones, 
and shadows in a photograph. For more global control, use 
the Levels or Curves command. It is a wonderful thing to 
be able to use the Dodge and Burn tools to create subtle 
adjustments to the brightness and contrast in a photograph, 
and it’s a simple way to paint more spatially enhanced 
objects. With these tools you can paint dimensional illusions 
quickly, as you will see in the next section.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT EXAMPLE
If you have ever taken a traditional drawing or painting 
class (which I wholeheartedly recommend!), you have 
probably been assigned the onerous task of rendering an 
egg—in all its proportionally rounded splendor—using hard 
and soft lead pencils, charcoal, or a paintbrush. It sounds 
easy enough; after all it is only an egg. However, after some 
initial sketches, you might realize—at least I did—that 
rendering an egg involves a very subtle play of dark and 
FIGURE | B–3 |
With a soft-tipped brush, lighten areas of a 
photograph with the Dodge tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Drawing and Painting |
170
“golden-looking” eggs. See Figure B–5. This same 
technique can be applied without a photo reference. Start 
with a gray-toned elliptical shape and build the shadows 
and highlights with varied brush strokes and tip sizes. See 
Figure B–6.
YOUR TURN
Using the sample file eggs.psd in the aid_examples/
dodge_burn_examples folder, you will paint your own 
realistic eggs with a metallic sheen. If you like, you can 
further enhance the image with layer styles and/or artistic 
brush stroke or sketch filters.
FIGURE | B–4 |
With a soft-tipped 
brush, darken areas of 
a photograph with the 
Burn tool.
FIGURE | B–5 |
A photograph of two 
eggs made more 
“golden-looking” 
using the Dodge and 
Burn tools.
FIGURE | B–6 |
Go from flat to spatial. 
Draw a dimensional-
looking egg shape using 
the Dodge and Burn tools.
t
Dodge and Burn Project Guidelines
 1. Open the eggs.psd file from the aid_examples/
dodge_burn_examples folder.
 2. View the Layers panel, and be sure the overlay_
adjustment_layer is selected. See Figure B–7. 
This is the layer you will paint on with the 
Dodge and Burn tools. It is a special layer filled 
with a 50% gray background and set with an 
Overlay blending mode, located above, thus 
protecting the original photo you are about to 
enhance.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

171
|  Chapter 7 |
FIGURE | B–8 |
Set options for the Dodge or Burn tools, such as Brush Size, Range, and Exposure.
 3. Select the Burn or Dodge tool in the toolbox, 
and set your brush tip size. For starters, I 
suggest a soft brush with a diameter of about 
45 pixels. For Range in the Options bar of the 
tool, select Midtones. See Figure B–8. You 
can also play with the Exposure setting to 
adjust the amount (or intensity) of lightness or 
darkness applied with each brush stroke.
 4. After enhancing the egg photo, save your file in 
your lessons folder. Then hide overlay_adjustment_
layer and egg1 in the Layers panel. This reveals 
another egg example: flat, elliptical shapes.
 5. Expand the other_egg_samples layer set by 
clicking on the triangle next to the folder icon, 
and select the hand_drawn_egg1 layer.
|
|
 6. Use the Burn and Dodge tools with soft-tipped 
brushes to bring the egg to dimensional life.
 7. Add a drop shadow for further spatial impact via 
Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow.
 8. Enhance the other egg example in the hand_
drawn_egg2 layer.
 9. Save your golden eggs.
Things to Consider
For future explorations with drawing and painting, as 
featured in this “Adventures in Design,” consider the 
following:
▶Whenever possible, use an adjustment layer to 
work on over your original image to protect it. When 
working with localized tonal control tools, create a 
new layer with a 50% gray fill and set to the Overlay 
blending mode (as in the egg.psd file). To make 
global tonal adjustments, such as Levels and Color 
Balance, choose Layer > New Adjustment Layer.
▶There are hundreds of artist’s tips and techniques 
for using Photoshop. Step-by-step instructions 
are plentiful on the World Wide Web. Do a global 
search for “Photoshop tips and techniques” or a 
more refined search for the name of a Photoshop 
tool or function, such as “dodge and burn.” Also, 
a helpful book to consider is Best Practice: The 
Pros on Adobe Photoshop, by Toni Toland.
FIGURE | B–7 |
Select the overlay_adjustment_ 
layer.
| B 7 |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Drawing and Painting |
172
Kevin Burke
“When I can get to the point where the tools seem to 
disappear from the process, creativity can flow more readily.”
Jazz at Pink’s Alley #1. Courtesy Pawblo LLC and Kevin Burke.
About Kevin Burke
Kevin Burke was born in Rapid City, SD and raised in 
Springfield, MA. As a grade school and high school student, 
he was always intrigued by graphic arts. How someone could 
get a whole story in one logo amazed him. A two-year stint in 
the Army made it possible to attend Keene State College in 
Keene, NH, focusing in printmaking, sculpture, and ceramics. 
While at Keene State, he attended the College of York St. 
John in York, England, where—through a miscommunication 
about academic courses—he studied only ceramics and 
printmaking. Shortly after returning from England, he began 
working as a production potter for a local pottery. After a 
couple of years, he began showing his work in galleries in 
New England and Europe.
Snowboarding came along and Kevin started to get involved 
with judging snowboard events and eventually coaching 
these athletes. He is presently a Snowboard Coach with 
Okemo Mountain School, where he also teaches computers 
and is the resident techie.
Kevin, after a few years of changing jobs and starting a couple 
of non-art-related businesses, decided it was time to get 
back into focus with his art. Starting Pawblo LLC in 2000, this 
became the vehicle to begin working in technology and the 
arts. In 2004, he attended Marlboro College Graduate Center 
in Brattleboro, VT, and received a Masters of Science degree in 
Information Technology Management. During this time it 
became apparent that the bug for graphic design never left, 
and so he started concentrating on merging art and technology.
Kevin now resides in Wardsboro, VT, with his wife, Jenna. 
He is building a studio where he will teach technology to all 
levels of learners. The primary focus will be to teach art skills 
to techies and techie skills to artists.
See more of Kevin’s work at http://pawblo.com
About the Work of Kevin Burke
Kevin shares his process working on the Women’s Film 
Festival poster: “The Women’s Film Festival is a non-profit 
group that raises money for the Women’s Crisis Center in 
Brattleboro, VT. I volunteered my time to do this piece, as well 
as the brochure, catalogue, postcards, and website. Domestic 
violence is something we still need to bring awareness to. 
This piece was done entirely in Photoshop. The process is not 
complex. There are many layers with some gradients as well 
as the use of the resize/warp tool.
“The main image came from a still in the movie Companeras. 
The face and the sombrero were irresistible but because of 
the horizontal nature of the image, I was wondering how 
to get the poster into a vertical layout without losing the 
image. While looking at Apple’s ‘flow’ display in iTunes, the 
reflection made perfect sense. The rest was organizing the 
information around this so as to enhance the picture and still 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

173
|  Chapter 7 |
get the information across. I came up with about 5 variations 
and this one won.”
Kevin speaks of his love for drawing: “I have been drawing 
ever since I can remember, but deliberately from when I was 
about 9 years old. My tools have always been the traditional 
tools of pencil, paper and eraser.
“As soon as computers became fast enough, I began 
experimenting with drawing, using a Wacom pen tablet and 
Photoshop. Drawing usually depends on the light, not only 
for the subject, but to be able to see the paper, so drawing 
in dark places on paper is sort of a pain, but with a backlit 
screen on my computer, life is much easier and I can now 
draw in the dark. One of my favorite pastimes is to go and 
listen to live jazz at Pink’s Alley in Manchester [Vermont], 
and draw while the band plays. This is a great exercise for 
getting proficient at Photoshop because I like to get the 
drawings done fairly quickly. I am getting to the point where 
the keyboard commands make life so much easier, and I no 
longer have to think about where the tools are.”
Women’s Film Festival Poster. 
Courtesy Pawblo LLC and Kevin Burke.
Jazz at Pink’s Alley #2. Courtesy Pawblo LLC and Kevin Burke.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
| Masking |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

MASKING
8
175
charting your course
When the power of masking in digital illustration and design was first developed, people wondered 
how they managed so long without it. Masking is a technique for hiding or revealing areas of an 
image. Similar to how masking tape protects window trim as you paint around it, a digital mask 
reveals or hides areas of an image as you apply effects to unmasked areas.
Masks are used often in animation and digital video editing. A scene transition where one frame 
wipes away another is a moving mask. A computer-generated character interacting with a human 
actor is superimposed into a scene using masks. There are several types of masks in Photoshop for 
use in digital imagery. Each contains specific attributes for different purposes.
In this chapter, I cover how a mask works and the various types of masks that can be created in 
Photoshop, including layer and vector masks, type masks, clipping masks, and quick masks.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Learn what a mask is and discover how it works and is used in Photoshop
 
▶
Explore the types of masks available in Photoshop
 
▶
Paint full and partial selections using quick masks
 
▶
Hide and reveal content with layer and clipping masks
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
176
UNMASKING MASKS
How does a mask work? First, I will give you an overview, and then I will describe it in 
depth. Examine the four steps in Figure 8–1. Step 1 shows an original photograph taken 
at the rustic Palmela castle in Portugal. Step 2 shows part of the photo with a layer mask 
applied. My face in the cardboard character was selected with the Elliptical Marquee tool, 
and then Layer > Layer Mask > Hide Selection was chosen. Step 3 indicates the layer 
(a picture of Max from Chapter 4) that will be affected by the mask created in Step 2. In 
Step 4 the “Max” layer is placed below the mask layer, whereby Max’s face replaces mine. 
All of this magic was done without damaging the original photo.
To clarify a few things for you—or maybe to confuse you further—let me give you a 
closer look at the characteristics of a mask. Masks get easier to grasp when you actually 
FIGURE | 8–1 |
This four-part example shows 
how a mask can replace an 
area of a photograph with 
another photograph behind 
it. The mask “protects” the 
original image—so it appears 
as if you have cut out (deleted) 
selected parts of an image 
without actually destroying 
it. It is just an illusion.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

177
|  Chapter 8 |
play with them (like anything else, of course!). So when you reach the end of this chapter 
and have had some experience with masks, you might want to review this section.
When Step 2 was executed on the photo example (see Step 2, Figure 8–1), the 
mask became attached to the photo’s layer in the Layers panel. Now note the mask 
thumbnail in the layer cardboard_character in Figure 8–2.
FIGURE | 8–2 |
The layer mask thumbnail located on the same 
layer in which the mask is applied.
FIGURE | 8–3 |
Unlink the mask layer from the original object it 
was masking.
Check it out for yourself! Open example_mask.psd in the chap08_
lessons/samples folder. Then open the Layers panel and take a 
look. The black dot in the layer mask thumbnail shows the part of 
the mask that’s to be transparent; in other words, the selected area 
is hidden. An important distinction to make here is that the mask 
is not deleting the selection but hiding it. You can disable or delete a 
mask and still keep the original photo or artwork intact. To do so in 
this example, click on the mask thumbnail in the Layers panel (it will 
have a black outline around it when selected), and then choose Layer 
> Layer Mask > Disable (a big X appears over the thumbnail). 
To turn it back on, choose Layer > Layer Mask > Enable. Here are a 
few other things to do with masks:
 
▶Unlink and move a mask to hide other areas of an image 
or photograph: In the example layer mask, unlink the 
mask thumbnail in the Layers panel from the photo it 
was masking by clicking the link icon, selecting the layer 
mask thumbnail, and moving it to a different location 
using the Move tool. See Figure 8–3 and Figure 8–4.
 
▶Disable or delete a mask without damaging 
the original work. See Figure 8–5.
FIGURE | 8–4 |
Move an unlocked mask elsewhere on the image.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
178
 
▶Make masks out of any selected 
shape. See Figure 8–6.
 
▶Load and save a selection from a mask: You can 
store and reload selections as alpha channels. Alpha 
channels are located in the Channels panel, and 
they have many uses. See “Note” on page 181. When 
you examine an alpha channel in Photoshop (see 
Figure 8–7), the black indicates the area you can see 
through the mask (like a window, it is transparent), 
and the white is the opaque area. Figure 8–8 shows 
how the black and white areas of an alpha channel 
can hide or reveal (mask) areas of an image. There 
can also be semitransparent masks at all different 
levels of transparency, which is indicated by 
varying shades of gray. See Figure 8–9. You will 
learn how to create these soft transparency effects 
using a quick mask in the section “Quick Masks.”
FIGURE | 8–5 |
Disable or delete a mask without 
damaging the original image.
FIGURE | 8–6 |
Make masks out of any selected shape, 
like that of Max’s body.
FIGURE | 8–7 |
An alpha channel, saved in the Channels panel, can be used to mask out areas of 
an image.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

179
|  Chapter 8 |
FIGURE | 8–8 |
On the left, the background 
is revealed (black) and Max 
remains isolated from the mask. 
On the right, the background 
is revealed through Max 
(black) and the rest of the 
background remains protected.
FIGURE | 8–9 |
A gradient of grays can 
become a mask—each level 
of gray creating more or 
less transparency. Here, the 
ostrich is softly being revealed 
through the gradient mask.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
180
Some file formats, such as TIFF, will support an alpha channel in an image. 
This is useful when you want to use an alpha channel (i.e., a mask) in another 
program (other than Photoshop) that supports the use of alpha channels, such 
as Adobe InDesign, Illustrator, Flash, or After Effects. See Figure 8–10.
FIGURE | 8–10 |
The option to preserve an alpha channel appears when you save a file to the TIFF format.
TYPES OF MASKS
Although the concept of masking in Photoshop is consistent, there are different types 
of mask you can use, including layer and vector masks, clipping masks, type masks, 
and quick masks.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

181
|  Chapter 8 |
Note: A little more about alpha channels: You can get into some sophisticated 
image editing and manipulation with alpha channels—something to look into in 
your more advanced studies of Photoshop. For now, keep in mind that channels, 
and alpha channels in particular, have these properties (taken directly from the 
Photoshop Help files):
 
▶Each image can contain up to 56 channels, including all color and alpha channels.
 
▶You can specify a name, color, mask option, and opacity for each channel. 
(The opacity affects the preview of the channel, not the actual image.)
 
▶All new channels have the same dimensions and 
number of pixels as the original image.
 
▶You can edit an alpha channel using painting tools, 
editing tools, and filters (see Figure 8–11).
 
▶You can convert alpha channels to spot color channels.
FIGURE | 8–11 |
From left to right: alpha channel without filter effect, alpha channel with filter effect, and result 
of alpha channel as a mask on the Max photograph (the edges of his body are transparent and 
appear “alien-like”).
LAYER AND VECTOR MASKS
Layer masks let you create a mask that is linked to an object on the same layer, 
which, therefore, directly affects the object. A layer mask was used in our first 
example, shown in Figure 8–1. Vector masks are a variation on layer masks. 
They are created in much the same way. However, because vector masks 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
182
consist of vectors, the edges of a selection being used for the mask are much 
more crisp and clean-looking. To quickly make and edit a layer or vector 
mask, you can try these steps (or just review them for later reference):
 1. 
Select an area on an image or photograph using any shape Marquee tool or Lasso tool. 
Note that if you select the Background layer, you must double-click on the layer to turn it 
into a standard layer (Layer 0) for the next step to work.
 2. 
Choose Layer > Layer Mask or Layer > Vector Mask, and determine whether you want 
the mask to reveal or hide the selection.
 3. 
To edit a mask, Command-click (Mac) or Ctrl-click (Windows) on the layer mask 
thumbnail in the Layers panel to load the mask shape as a selection.
 4. 
Turn on Edit in Quick Mask Mode in the toolbox. Add or subtract from the selection with 
the painting tools (details to follow in the section on quick masks).
CLIPPING MASKS
Clipping masks are a quick way to attach a sequence of layers to be masked by 
another layer. Here is how it is done:
 1. 
Decide what item you want to use as a mask—text, shape, any filled object—and place 
it on its own layer.
Note: When using shapes, be sure the Fill pixels option is selected in the Options bar.
 2. 
Place items you want to be revealed through the mask in their own layers above the 
mask layer.
3. 
Hold down Alt/Option and place the cursor between these two layers. A funky icon of 
two circles, one atop the other, appears. Click on this edge line and the top layer will 
indent above the lower layer. The clipping mask has been executed. See Figure 8–12. 
Alternatively, you can select the items you want to be revealed through the mask and 
choose Layer > Create Clipping Mask.
FIGURE | 8–12 |
Create a clipping mask.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

183
|  Chapter 8 |
Note: A clipping mask can be applied to several layers.
HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL TYPE MASK TOOLS
You can make masks out of type with the Horizontal Type Mask or Vertical Type 
Mask tools. It is quite easy:
 1. 
In the toolbox, choose either the Horizontal Type Mask or the Vertical 
Type Mask tool. See Figure 8–13.
 2. 
Set the type’s formatting options (font, size) in the Options bar.
 3. 
Click on the document and type a word or phrase. While you type, 
you will be sent into Edit in Quick Mask Mode, indicated by the 
transparent red overlay.
 4. 
Press Enter on the numeric pad (not the main keyboard) or click on a 
selection tool to create the type selection.
 5. 
Create a new layer in the Layers panel. Note that the type becomes 
a selection—but only temporarily—on the document for you to fill, 
add effects to, and use as an object for layer or clipping masks. See 
Figure 8–14.
FIGURE | 8–13 |
The Horizontal Type Mask and Vertical 
Type Mask tools in the toolbox.
FIGURE | 8–14 |
The selected text is filled, has a 
layer effect added to it, and is 
assigned a clipping mask that 
reveals a photographic texture 
through the letter forms.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
184
QUICK MASKS
As mentioned in Chapter 4, there is a direct relationship between selections and color 
in Photoshop. The dynamics of this relationship allow very versatile and sophisticated 
mask-making with the use of Photoshop’s quick mask feature. A quick mask is not 
really a mask but a temporary mode in which to define and edit selections with the 
Painting tools, or even a Photoshop filter effect. Paint with white to select more 
areas of an image; paint with black to deselect areas; paint with an opacity setting 
or shade of gray to create a semitransparent mask that is useful for soft-edged, 
feathered effects. (You can also uniformly soften selection edges with the Feathering 
option, accessed via the selection tool’s Options bar or Select > Modify > Feather.)
Note: When you paint with black and white, the selection is either indicated or 
not by marching ants once you exit Quick Mask mode. But, when you paint with 
an opacity setting or a tonal color, a selection may or may not be visible. A dialog 
box might appear. See Figure 8–15. However, although you cannot always see the 
marching ants of a semitransparent selection, the selection will be indicated by a 
level of gray when viewed as an alpha channel (saved mask).
FIGURE | 8–15 |
The “selection edge not visible” warning.
When I designed the Max lesson in Chapter 4, I 
used a quick mask to extract the background from 
the photograph, so I could replace it. The original 
background was composed of many shadows and 
highlights, so, regrettably, I couldn’t just click on it with 
the Magic Wand tool and be done with it. Moreover, 
I was determined to protect Max’s body from the 
extraction. See Figure 8–16.
To get into Quick Mask Mode, I cursorily selected 
as much of the background as I could with the Lasso (or Magic Wand) tool. Then I 
chose Edit in Quick Mask Mode in the toolbox. See Figure 8–17.
Photoshop covers the nonselected areas of the image in a translucent color, 
which by default is red, like rubylith. (I could change this color by double-
clicking on the Edit in Quick Mask Mode icon in the toolbox. See Figure 8–18.) 
I then selected the Brush tool in the toolbox. The swatches in the toolbox 
automatically become black and white, ready to edit by color my selected or 
nonselected areas when I paint. I painted with white to add to my selection 
(remove the translucent color) and black to delete areas of my selection 
(add the translucent color). Flipping between Edit in Standard Mode and 
Edit in Quick Mask Mode (toggle between the two modes by clicking on the 
Edit in Quick Mask Mode button or typing the letter Q) allows me to see 
how I was doing—showing what areas were selected. See Figure 8–19.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

185
|  Chapter 8 |
In Standard Mode, I saved a permanent version 
of my final selection to an alpha channel (in 
case I wanted to use it again or edit it later) 
by choosing Select > Save Selection. Last, I 
created the layer mask out of the selection, 
made a new background on a separate layer, 
and placed it below the mask layer. The result 
is shown in Figure 8–20 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 8–16 |
The original photo of Max taken near a 
window with my digital camera. Admittedly, 
not the most professional setup.
FIGURE | 8–19 |
Move between Standard and Quick Mask Modes to see how the 
selection process is going.
FIGURE | 8–17 |
The Edit in Quick Mask Mode 
option in the toolbox.
T
o
FIGURE | 8–18 |
Double-click on the Edit in Quick Mask Mode icon in the 
toolbox to get to its options.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
186
FIGURE | 8–20 |
The final Max image used in the Chapter 4 lesson. 
Compare with Figure 8–16.
FIGURE | 8–21 |
The lesson before and 
after a mask effect.
LESSON: LISBON VIEW
In this lesson, you will create a new background in a photograph 
using Quick Mask Mode and a layer mask. See Figure 8–21.
Setting Up the File
 1. 
Open the file chap8L1.psd in the folder chap08_lessons.
 2. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels.
 3. 
Press Shift-Tab to hide unneeded panels.
Making and Refining a Selection
 1. 
With the Rectangular Marquee tool, draw a rectangle covering 
the top-left open area of the window; the selection does 
not need to be perfect. Hold down Shift and keep adding to 
the selection by selecting the other window panes. For the 
window with the figure in it, select only the top area with the 
rectangular shape. See Figure 8–22.
 2. 
Click Edit in Quick Mask Mode in the toolbox. See Figure 8–23.
 3. 
Zoom in close to the window area with the silhouette figure.
 4. 
Select the Brush tool and choose a hard brush about 9 pixels in 
diameter. See Figure 8–24. Make sure the brush’s opacity setting is 
set to 100% in the Options bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

187
|  Chapter 8 |
 5. 
Make sure white is the foreground color swatch in the 
toolbox.
 6. 
Add to the selection by painting away the translucent 
areas of the open window. You might need to change 
brush tip sizes to more accurately select the corner 
crevices of the window. Leave a halo of the translucent 
color around the head and flying hair strands of the 
figure. See Figure 8–25 (on the next page).
Note: If you get overly zealous with your painting, 
you can undo brush strokes in the History panel, or 
paint with black to deselect areas. Pressing the X key 
will toggle between the foreground and background 
colors. This is a great way to switch between black and 
white instantly!
 7. 
Click the Quick Mask icon to switch to Standard Mode so 
you can see what you have selected.
 8. 
To refine this selection, switch back to Edit in Quick Mask 
Mode. Set your brush to a soft, round brush about 9 pixels 
in size. See Figure 8–26 (on the next page). Adjust its 
opacity setting in the Options bar to 92%. Paint carefully 
around the edge of the figure’s head and over the flying 
strands of hair. You will not see it in the selection, but by 
using a softer brush and adjusting the opacity setting 
(or, alternatively, painting with a shade of gray), you can 
create a softer, more realistic mask effect around the hair 
(you will see this in a later step).
 9. 
Keep refining the selection with the brush tools to 
your liking. All open parts of the window should be 
selected.
 10. 
Go to Standard Mode and choose Select > Save Selection 
from the menu bar. Enter a name for the new alpha 
channel. See Figure 8–27 (on the next page).
 11. 
Choose Window > Channels to view the alpha channel 
mask you just saved.
 12. 
Save the lesson in your lessons folder.
FIGURE | 8–22 |
Select the open window areas with the Rectangular 
Marquee tool.
FIGURE | 8–23 |
Select Edit in Quick Mask Mode in the 
toolbox.
FIGURE | 8–24 |
Select an appropriately sized paintbrush.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Masking |
188
FIGURE | 8–25 |
Keep part of the translucent color around the figure’s head.
FIGURE | 8–26 |
Set the brush with a softer tip to produce subtle, 
semitransparent mask areas.
FIGURE | 8–27 |
The saved alpha channel mask is located in the Channels panel.
Create a Layer Mask
 1. 
In the Layers panel, highlight the lisbon_view layer. 
Your windows should still be selected. If not, choose 
Select > Load Selection and select the alpha channel 
you created from the Channel pop-up menu, then 
click OK.
 2. 
Choose Layer > Layer Mask > Hide Selection.
 3. 
Choose File > Open and from the chap08_lessons/
samples folder open background1.jpg.
 4. 
Click the Arrange Documents button on the 
Application bar and choose the 2 Up option.
 5. 
Move a copy of the background image to the lesson 
file: with the Move tool, drag the image over the lesson 
file and let go of the mouse to drop the copy.
 6. 
Place Layer 1 (with the new background image) below 
the lisbon_view layer by clicking and dragging it. 
Position the background image to your liking behind 
the lisbon_view layer mask.
 7. 
With the background revealed through the mask, you 
might notice your mask needs a little touch-up. Select 
the layer mask thumbnail in the Layers panel. Select 
a brush (set the opacity to 100%) and paint with 
black to reveal more of the background (the black, 
transparent area of the mask) or with white to hide 
more of the background (the white, opaque area of 
the mask).
 8. 
Save the file in your lessons folder. Feel free to try other 
background images (more are provided in the samples 
folder).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

189
|  Chapter 8 |
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
This chapter uncovered the mystery of masks. Methods for how to use layer, vector, type, clipping, and quick 
masks were examined, and practical applications for their use were revealed.
1. 
What is the advantage of using masks to hide and reveal content?
2. 
Name at least four types of masks in Photoshop.
3. 
When you save a selection, where does it go?
4. 
Describe a trick (or two) for making soft-edged effects or semitransparent masks in Photoshop.
5. 
What is the difference between a layer mask and a clipping mask?
6. 
What is the shortcut key to define a clipping mask in the Layers panel?
7. 
What first two steps must you take before you can see a quick mask?
8. 
In Quick Mask Mode, how do black, white, and gray tonal colors affect the selection process?
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
1. 
Explore your own mask effects on the sample cardboard character photographs located in the 
chap08_lessons/samples folder (cardinal.jpg, pope.tif, and explorer.jpg).
2. 
Access the Help > How to Work with Layers and Selections > Soften the edges of selections how-to in the 
menu options. Read the related topics in the how-to.
3. 
Create textured mask effects with the words earth, wind, and fire, using the Horizontal Type Mask or Vertical 
Type Mask tool.
4. 
Do an Internet search for “image masking” and find at least two examples that demonstrate the technique of 
masking.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Masking |
190
Joe Summerhays
“If I was starting again right now . . . well, everybody 
and their dog is learning Photoshop. In fact, Photoshop is 
being taught in the fourth grade. When I started out I knew 
Photoshop was huge. Someone would find out I knew it and 
would say, ’You know Photoshop? Come on in!’ So that’s the 
challenge now: to be able to distinguish yourself as a quality 
artist, as an expert user of Photoshop.”
Learn more about this artist via an audio interview on 
the book’s CD.
About Joe Summerhays
Joe Summerhays is an award-winning media designer 
for clients such as HBO, MTV, VH1, AOL, Tribeca Film 
Festival, Jazz at Lincoln Center, and other innovative media 
organizations. He has developed more than 30 software 
titles for children, written over 35 books, and produced 
broadband properties for Granada, MTV, and Comedy 
Central. Additionally, he has guided the production of 
more than 200 animated short films by young people. His 
program Animation: Minds in Motion! has been used to 
teach more than 2,000 elementary school pupils the art of 
animated filmmaking. Joe has lectured on animation, visual 
intelligence, and broadband content development. He is 
currently designing animation workshops for children for the 
Tribeca Film Festival.
About the Work of Joe Summerhays
Joe shares his process in creating the “After” animation, a 
personal project that represents the basic steps he takes in 
preparing many of his animations:
“The point of the ‘After’ bit was to have Santa relaxing 
in front of his TV after a long night of flying, only to be 
bombarded by infomercials, each addressing his myriad 
conditions (i.e., balding, wrinkles, abdominal exercise, 
Viagra). Zamphir and his pan flute is the first commercial he 
hears, which does not address one of Santa’s insecurities, 
and the bit ends with him dialing the 800 number for a 
Zamphir album.
“As always, I start with a rough sketch and scan it in. See 
Figure 1.
Figure 1: The initial idea is sketched on paper.
Joe Summerhays Productions
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

191
|  Chapter 8 |
“Then, in Photoshop, I make a new layer underneath the 
sketch layer. I turn on what is called the Multiply ink effect on 
the sketch layer, so the blacks maintain and the whites drop 
out. I also reduce the opacity of the sketch layer, allowing me 
to see the painting I’m doing on the layer below. See Figure 2.
 “After much painting I turn off the sketch layer and use 
the smudge tool to blend all my bold color strokes into soft 
gradients and painterly strokes. I also make new layers for 
arm positions to be animated later in Adobe After Effects 
(http://www.adobe.com/products/aftereffects/). See Figure 3.
Figure 2: Photoshop’s Multiply blending mode is used to clean up the sketch. 
Joe Summerhays Productions
Figure 3: Color effects are painted in. Joe Summerhays Productions
“I want the TV glow on Santa to change colors, so I keep 
the glow on its own layer above the Santa painting in 
preparation for color cycling in After Effects. [Color cycling is 
the process of rapidly changing an object’s colors to achieve 
the illusion of smooth movement.] This glow is painted in 
with bold brush strokes, then . . . good old Gaussian Blur 
helps create the haze of late night TV in a dark room. Now 
it is set; it’s ready to be imported into After Effects for color 
cycling and animation. See Figures 4 and 5.”
Figure 4: Image is now prepared to be imported into Adobe After Effects. 
Joe Summerhays Productions
Figure 5: A single frame of the final animation viewed with the Quicktime player. 
Joe Summerhays Productions
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

LAYERS, COMPOSITING, AND PROCESS
9
193
charting your course
The previous chapters have focused almost exclusively on specific concepts, tools, and ways of 
doing things in Photoshop. You learned how to get around Photoshop’s interface, how to manage 
color, select and transform pixels, retouch photos, draw and paint shapes, use type, and mask areas 
of an image. Chapter 9 covers the process and methods by which to layer, composite, link, blend, 
merge, and organize graphic elements into more complex images or graphic layouts. It includes a 
significant overview of image compositing and the design process, using layers and alignment tools, 
merging images with blending modes and filter effects, acquiring content, and producing a CD cover. 
In this chapter, you can freely utilize all that you have studied thus far in the program.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Learn workflow and organizational techniques for developing image compositions and layouts
 
▶
Gain a better understanding of the role the Layers panel plays in organizing a Photoshop project
 
▶
Review the options for content acquisition and copyright compliance
 
▶
Composite images together with blending modes, the Liquify effect, and filter effects
 
▶
Define the sequential steps of a basic design process
 
▶
Construct a mock CD cover for a client
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
194
ABOUT COMPOSITING AND 
COMPOSITION
It is important to make a distinction between image compositing and composition 
in regard to using Photoshop. In his book, Digital Retouching and Compositing: 
Photographers’ Guide, David D. Busch describes image compositing as “. . . combining 
two or more images or portions thereof, to create a new image that didn’t exist in 
that form previously.” Otherworldly images by artist Tim Warnock—found on 
the Explorer Pages in this book—are good examples of images constructed by 
compositing. Also, see in this book the Adventures in Design: From the Imagination.
Composition, on the other hand, “. . . refers to the aesthetic arrangement of elements 
within a work of art,” according to Lois Fichner-Rathus in his book Understanding Art 
(Seventh Edition). It is the artful use of design elements—line, shape, value, texture, 
and color—in a visual image or page layout, such as a Web page, brochure, or poster. 
See Adventures in Design: Wine Box Composition in this book. Exploring Adobe 
Photoshop CS5 does not cover design elements specifically, but Exploring Adobe 
Illustrator CS5 does in relation to using Adobe Illustrator. Exploring Adobe Photoshop 
CS5 places more emphasis on image compositing. However, the next section does 
provide a brief overview of the work process by which a layout or composition might 
be constructed.
A DESIGN PROCESS
As much as we might like to snap our fingers in an instantaneous epiphany and have 
an idea materialize from our heads to reality (that would truly be magic), it does not 
work that way. From thought to conception to actuality is a process; there is no way 
around it. So you might as well make the process your modus operandi. Of course, 
the process can take shape in many ways. You just need to find the one that is right for 
you as a graphic designer and fits the needs of your clients. (I am assuming your goal 
is to do work for hire, to actually make money playing with Photoshop.)
In this section, I introduce a general process by which to organize and produce an 
image composition or layout, and I share some of the tools available for organization 
and workflow. There are five parts to this process: start with an idea, make a comp 
(thumbnail sketches), gather content, assemble content, fine-tune, and output.
START WITH AN IDEA
A design starts with a vision or idea. Sometimes the idea is perfectly realized in your 
mind and it is simply a matter of making it tangible. Other times, the idea is fleshed 
out as you progress through the design process. Either way, you have to start with an 
idea, something that drives you to make it “real.”
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

195
|  Chapter 9 |
FIGURE | 9–1 |
Design comp of a Web site home page.
FIGURE | 9–2 |
Design comp of a Web site home page.
MAKE A COMPREHENSIVE LAYOUT (COMP)
Have you ever made a collage out of magazine clippings? Usually, before you permanently 
glue everything down, you take your pile of clippings and artfully arrange them. You 
move and rotate things around, group clippings based on topic or color, and inevitably 
place the most interesting clipping in the center for visual impact. What is happening at 
this stage of development is your comprehensive layout, or comp; you put thought into 
the actual design of the collage and the initial 
placement of elements. At this point, nothing is 
set in stone, but you consider multiple options 
for how something will look best.
The idea slowly forms into something 
tangible. Often, it starts as a cursory sketch, or 
several of them (often referred to as thumbnail 
sketches); it is then reproduced as a more 
detailed drawing. Many artists will sketch the 
idea on paper, scan it, and then use the sketch 
as a template for constructing the digital 
version. Others, who feel really comfortable 
drawing on the computer, construct their 
vision digitally, utilizing the flexibility of undo 
and redo and saving multiple copies. See 
Figure 9–1 and Figure 9–2. When the comp 
is arranged to your liking, or to your client’s, 
you move to the next steps: gathering the 
content to be used in the chosen design and 
assembling it into the final product.
GATHER CONTENT
The comp gives you a better idea of what 
kind of content you need for the final 
design. Gathering content for your layout 
can be the most time-consuming and 
challenging part of the process, so leave 
plenty of time for it in your project timeline. 
You may be in a situation where you must 
create all of the content—images and copy—
yourself, or procure the  content from other 
sources, such as your client or an outside 
resource (i.e., another artist or writer, image, 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
196
or font repository). At this point, you must consider the issues of copyright and 
content format.
Copyright Issues
If you create your own content or use copyright-free material, don’t worry about the 
permission process. However, to reuse others’ material, such as a company’s logo or a 
photo of a famous person, you need the correct permissions. As an example, every digital 
image in Exploring Adobe Photoshop CS5  is protected by copyright law whether explicitly 
indicated or not. As soon as it is created, copyright is automatically implied; no copyright 
notices or procedures are required to protect the image from unauthorized reproduction.
It certainly does not hurt, however, to register your work through the U.S. Copyright Office 
(that is, if you made your creation in the United States) at http://www.copyright.gov. You 
should at least put a copyright notice (©, date, your name) on your work to deter individuals 
from using it without your permission. I requested permission and/or paid for the artwork 
and photographs used in this book that I did not create myself. I also had to acknowledge 
that permission was granted (i.e., “Printed by permission of . . .” or “Courtesy of . . .”).
With the proliferation of digital content in our society, copyright protections have 
come under renewed scrutiny. It has become easier than ever to procure and edit 
content without giving thought to the original artist. In regard to the protection of 
digitized content and its use for educational purposes, laws have been enacted, such as 
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (for information, see Exploring on Your Own).
You should know about a provision in U.S. copyright law called “fair use.” Fair use 
delineates the use of creative works for educational or nonprofit purposes, such as the 
photographs provided for the lesson project in this chapter.
When determining whether to use someone else’s work as part of your own, ask 
yourself, “Will copying this image—or text, typeface, music, video, or data—make me 
money or take money out of someone else’s pocket?” If the answer is “Yes,” proceed 
with caution: get permission and credit the artist.
Format
Another aspect of content gathering is getting the content into the right format for your 
use. For example, if Photoshop is to be used as the medium for assembling your image 
(see next section), be sure the content can be successfully imported into the program. 
Are the images and photos you want to use in the correct file format for Photoshop or 
any other program you might be using? Is the written copy translatable in the digital 
environment? I am not going to go into great detail about each of the importable file 
formats supported by Photoshop. However, the available formats appear in Adobe 
Bridge, the File > Open dialog box, or the File > Place dialog box. The following is 
an abbreviated list: Photoshop, BMP, Photoshop EPS, CompuServe GIF, JPEG, PCX, 
Photoshop PDF, PICT file, PNG, Targa, TIFF, and Wireless Bitmap (WBMP).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

197
|  Chapter 9 |
ASSEMBLE CONTENT
Once you have gathered the content, you assemble it in your layout program, which 
could be Photoshop or a more layout-friendly program (i.e., Adobe Illustrator, 
InDesign, or QuarkXPress).
There are two parts to integrating content into your final layout: properly importing 
content from outside the program, and accurately positioning it within the intended 
composition using placement and organization tools.
Import
When you have the content in an importable format, you bring it into Photoshop in 
one of two ways: Use the Open or Open Recent commands, or Adobe Bridge (File 
> Browse, or click on the Bridge option on the Applications bar), or copy and paste 
between other applications. You have been taught how to open files in the lessons in 
this book, but is the quick review:
 1. 
Choose File > Open.
 2. 
Select the name of the file you want to open. If the file does not appear, select the 
option for showing all formats or documents from the Files of type (Windows) or Enable 
(Mac) pop-up menu.
3. 
Click Open. A dialog box might appear, letting you set format-specific options. If a color 
profile warning message appears, specify whether to convert the pixels based on the 
file’s color profile or not.
Note: For image preview and file compatibility options, choose Photoshop > 
Preferences > File Handling (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > File Handling (Windows).
Generally when you import native file formats—such as Illustrator (AI) or Flash (FLA)—
from one program to another, it is a hit-or-miss proposition. Sometimes the version 
of the program you are importing the file into will support it, sometimes not. Keeping 
files in more generic file formats—EPS for vector-based files, or TIFF for bitmap-based 
files—might prove a better solution, even if—on occasion—you lose some information 
in translation.
Another importing issue will occur 
if you attempt to open a newer 
version of a Photoshop file in an 
older version (i.e., CS5 to version 7). 
You usually get a dialog box looking 
like that shown in Figure 9–3. The 
conversion usually works, but you 
might lose some information. When 
you go to import artwork and cannot 
FIGURE | 9–3 |
Attempt to import a Photoshop CS5 file into Photoshop 7. It will work, but some 
information might be lost.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
198
access the file you want, even after you have chosen All Formats from the Files of type 
(Windows) or All Documents from the Enable (Mac) pop-up menu, you know the 
file has been saved in a format Photoshop cannot read.
Organizing
After importing your content into Photoshop, or creating it in the program, you 
should organize it. I emphasize the word “should” here, because it is optional 
whether you want to organize your content or not. However, I highly recommend 
it. You cannot leave all of your content in a series of unnamed layers and expect to 
find what you need quickly and without frustration. Features to keep your work 
organized while integrating content in a document include Layers, the alignment 
commands, rulers, the grid, guides, and the Snap feature.
Layers: The Layers panel is your organizational Mecca, as you have probably 
surmised from working through past lessons. You might be wondering why I have 
waited until this chapter to impart this important information. Well, the best way to 
learn how to use this panel is to practice using it, which you have had several chances 
to do in previous chapters. You have already explored using specific compositing 
techniques and effects when items are on individual layers, including layer styles 
(i.e., Drop Shadow, Bevel and Emboss blending modes, and filters). These techniques 
and effects are officially covered in this chapter. The anatomy of the Layers panel 
(Window > Layers) is labeled for quick reference in Figure 9–4.
FIGURE | 9–4 |
The Layers panel is where you 
keep track of all the images and 
text elements in a document.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

199
|  Chapter 9 |
Layers are transparent except for any filled content that is placed on 
them, making it easy to move layers above and below one another for 
dimensional reasons and for overlapping combinations of images and 
effects. See Figure 9–6.
Items on any layer can be selected as a group by highlighting the layer 
and then Command-clicking (Mac) or Ctrl-clicking (Windows) on the 
layer’s thumbnail. See Figure 9–7.
Layers can be selected and linked together temporarily to transform or align objects 
as a group. To select more than one layer, hold down Command (Mac) or Control 
(Windows). You can also merge selected or visible items into one layer, or group 
layers in subfolders, called Layer Sets. See Figure 9–8.
For more information on layers, go to Help > Photoshop Help > Layers.
FIGURE | 9–5 |
Give your layers intuitive 
names, so you can find what 
you need in the Layers panel.
FIGURE | 9–6 |
Layers can be selected and 
dragged up and down the layer 
stack, sending objects in front 
or in back of each other.
FIGURE | 9–7 |
To select all the areas on a 
layer, Command-click (Mac) 
or Ctrl-click (Windows) on 
the layer’s thumbnail.
FIGURE | 9–8 |
You can merge selected 
or visible layers into one 
layer, if necessary.
y
Note: By default, every document in Photoshop starts on the Background layer. To 
change a Background layer into a regular layer (much more versatile), double-click on 
the Background layer in the Layers panel and give the layer a name. See Figure 9–5.
Y
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
200
The Alignment Commands: The alignment commands are located in the Move 
tool’s Options bar (select the Move tool to view). They align objects on linked layers 
horizontally (right, left, or center) or vertically (top, bottom, or center). They also 
horizontally or vertically distribute content evenly on linked layers, using the objects’ 
edges for spatial reference. You can also get the alignment and distribution options by 
choosing Layer > Align or Layer > Distribute from the menu bar. If you are precision 
oriented, you will use these commands frequently. See Figure 9–9 and Figure 9–10.
FIGURE | 9–9 |
The alignment commands are located on the Move tool’s Options bar.
FIGURE | 9–10 |
Before-and-after example of using the 
alignment commands. The buttons and 
text on the right are horizontally centered, 
with a vertically centered distribution 
of space between each object.
FIGURE | 9–11 |
The Ruler Tool and Count Tool in the toolbox.
In addition to alignment commands, there are two tools for measuring 
precisely: the Ruler Tool and the Count Tool. See Figure 9–11. These 
tools are found under the Eyedropper tool in the toolbox. The Ruler tool 
(Analysis > Ruler Tool) analyzes angles and distances across the image, 
with the results shown in the Info panel (Window > Info). The Count 
tool (Analysis > Count Tool) counts off with each click of the mouse.
The Auto-Align Layers button (Edit > Auto-Align Layers) is also located 
in the Move tool’s Options bar. This alignment tool analyzes overlapping 
elements in selected layers to align similar content. This is a great way 
to create panoramic images (using Auto, Perspective, or Cylindrical 
options) or piece together scanned segments of a larger image (using 
the Reposition Only option). See Figure 9–12. Once the images are 
combined, use Auto-Blend Layers (Edit > Auto-Blend Layers) to smooth 
out any visible seams.
Rulers: Rulers are designed to accurately measure and place objects in the 
Photoshop workspace. They are toggled on and off by choosing View > 
Rulers. Both a horizontal ruler and a vertical ruler are made visible along the 
top and left edges of the document. You can change a ruler’s measurement 
by Ctrl-clicking (Mac) or right-clicking (Windows) over a ruler and 
selecting a new measurement from the drop-down menu. See Figure 9–13.
Alternatively, you can go to Photoshop > Preferences > Units & Rulers 
(Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Units & Rulers (Windows). In the upper-
left corner of the document, where the vertical and horizontal rulers meet, 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

201
|  Chapter 9 |
you can also set what is called the ruler 
origin. Setting the ruler origin is useful 
when, for example, you are working on an 
object that is 2 by 3 on an 8.5-by-11-inch 
document. You can set the ruler origin at 
0, 0 in the upper-left corner of the 2-by-3 
area, rather than the 8.5-by-11 area, for 
more precise positioning. To set the ruler 
origin, move the cursor into the upper-left 
corner of the document where the rulers 
intersect, then click and drag the crosshair 
to the new origin edge. To restore default 
settings, double-click on the upper-left 
corner where the rulers intersect.
Grid: The Grid function is located 
under View > Show > Grid. A grid 
of lines or dots appears behind your 
artwork. The grid can be used to position objects 
symmetrically. Grids do not print. To adjust 
grid settings (i.e., color, style, and subdivisions), 
choose Photoshop > Preferences > Guides, Grid 
& Slices (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Guides, 
Grid & Slices (Windows).
Guides: Guides are incredibly useful for aligning 
your work. To quickly create guides, choose 
View > Rulers and drag guidelines from the 
horizontal and vertical rulers on the sides of 
the document. See Figure 9–14. Alternatively, 
choose View > New Guide. You can lock/unlock 
and clear guides in the View menu, and show 
guides under View > Show > Guides. Guides 
do not print. To adjust guide colors and style, 
choose Photoshop > Preferences > Guides, Grid 
& Slices (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > Guides, Grid & Slices (Windows).
Snap: Snap allows for exact positioning of selection edges, shapes, and paths. Often, 
however, the Snap feature—on by default—is more a hindrance than a help, preventing 
you from properly placing items. Luckily, snapping can be enabled or disabled under 
View > Snap. With Snap enabled you can snap to particular elements, such as the grid 
(when visible), guides (when visible), and document bounds. Choose View > Snap To 
FIGURE | 9–12 |
Options for the Auto-Align Layers feature.
FIGURE | 9–13 |
Ctrl-click (Mac) or right-click 
(Windows) over a ruler to 
change the measurement.
FIGURE | 9–14 |
Drag guides from the 
horizontal and vertical rulers.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
202
Guides, Grid, Layers, Slices, or Document Bounds. To position items more accurately 
while Snap is enabled, use the arrow keys on your keyboard.
FINE-TUNE AND OUTPUT
The fine-tuning stage is where you fix the fine details of your image or layout, 
including adjusting colors, incrementally aligning items, and playing with subtle 
formatting of text (such as line and character spacing). In short, you make the 
document look as perfect as possible. At this time, you will also prepare your work 
for its intended output, including choosing the proper color mode and settings for 
either screen or print.
BLENDING MODES, STYLES, 
AND EFFECTS
If you have spent significant time playing in Photoshop, you have probably already 
found and delved into the blending modes, layer styles, filter effects, and Liquify 
function. These are easy-to-use features with high visual impact (addictive, really) 
that work miraculously with image compositing.
BLENDING MODES
Blending modes work with layers and layer sets. A blending mode is specified for a 
selected layer that affects (blends with) the layer below it or within a layer set.
Blending modes offer true compositing of images on different layers, determining 
how pixels blend with underlying pixels in an image. See Figure 9–15.
Note: Blending modes are also available for the Brush options, found in the 
Brush tool’s Options bar.
To experience pixel blends, open chap09_lessons/samples/blend.psd.
 1. 
Open the Layers panel.
 2. 
Two layers are already created for you. Highlight the layer painted-image. From the 
blending mode drop-down menu in the Layers panel, choose the Multiply blending 
mode—a blend that simulates a look of transparent markers. See Figure 9–16 (on page 
204). Explore the other modes. (Alternatively, you can get to the blending modes under 
Layer > Layer Style > Blending Options.) If you are using Photoshop on Windows, you 
can also click on the blending mode drop-down menu in the Layers panel and use the 
up and down arrow keys to cycle through the list of blending modes.
 3. 
For an overview of what each blending mode looks like and its description, examine 
Figure 9–15 and see Painting > Blending Modes > Blending Mode Examples in the 
Photoshop Help files.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

203
|  Chapter 9 |
FIGURE | 9–15 |
The blend image is 
on a layer above the 
base image, and it 
contains the specified 
blending mode. There 
are many blending 
modes to choose from.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
204
LAYER STYLES
A layer style—such as a Drop Shadow, Inner and Outer Glow, Bevel and Emboss effects, and 
Strokes—can be applied to items on any selected layer. Go to Layer > Layer Style to choose 
a style. A dialog box comes up, where you can modify and add or remove a style. To get to 
the options of any style, click on the style name on the left—not just the check mark, but the 
actual name—and the options for that style will appear on the right. See Figure 9–17.
FIGURE | 9–16 |
Multiply blending mode.
FIGURE | 9–17 |
The Layer Style dialog box—a 
lot to tinker with in here!
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

205
|  Chapter 9 |
FILTER EFFECTS
Photoshop is famous for its extensive gallery of 
filters. Filters directly distort and manipulate the 
pixels in an image. See Figure 9–18. Keep your 
image in the RGB Color mode to have the full 
range of filters available. (Once the filter is applied, 
you can change to another color mode.) To view 
all the filter choices and preview what they will 
look like on your image, choose Filter > Filter 
Gallery from the menu bar. See Figure 9–19. A 
sample file is provided for you to try out filters: 
chap09_lessons/samples/filter.psd.
FIGURE | 9–18 |
Filter examples—there are 
many to choose from!
FIGURE | 9–19 |
The Filter Gallery. Take your pick 
and preview.
The Lighting Effects filter is used often by artists and photographers and is not to be 
missed. It allows you to create different light styles and properties for your image. To 
check it out, choose Filter > Render > Lighting Effects. See Figure 9–20 (on next page).
If there comes a time when you want to change how your filters are applied to a 
layer, the answer is Smart Filters. See Figure 9–21 (on next page). Smart Filters let 
you apply filters nondestructively to a layer. This allows you to change the stacking 
order of filters by clicking and dragging, and changing any filter setting simply by 
double-clicking on the appropriate filter. To add Smart Filters, select the layer and 
choose Filter > Convert for Smart Filters. If a warning message appears, click OK to 
accept. A small icon appears in the corner of the layer’s thumbnail to show it is now 
a Smart Object. Now, feel the freedom of adding and experimenting with different 
combinations of filters without fear of damaging the original image!
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
206
LIQUIFY FUNCTION
Last in our tour of special effects is the Liquify feature—it is sweet. With Liquify you 
can distort pixels with various Liquify commands, such as Bloat, Pucker, and Warp. 
To open the Liquify menu, choose Filter > Liquify. Select tools from the toolbox to 
the left of the window and specify adjustment options at the right. See Figure 9–22 
and the sample file under chap09_lessons/samples/liquify.tif.
LESSON: CD JACKET PROJECT
Now that you have gotten a handle on using Photoshop, here is your chance to break 
from the step-by-step study, explore some of the blending and filter effects, and begin 
to flex your artistic muscle.
You have been approached by PaleoExcavators Inc., to design a CD jacket (a cover, 
both front and back) for its new comparative collection CD of skeletal remains. See 
Figure 9–23. The client has provided a few guidelines and some content (text and 
photographs) for the project but, in general, is open to the possibilities of what can be 
done. The client has also provided some examples of its previous CD jacket designs. 
See Figure 9–24 (on page 208) and Figure 9–25 (on page 208).
FIGURE | 9–20 |
The ever-popular Lighting Effects filter.
FIGURE | 9–21 |
Use of Smart Filters in the Layers panel.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

207
|  Chapter 9 |
Project Guidelines
 1. 
Required text and a selection of photographs are provided in the folder chap09_
lessons/assets/CDproject. Photographs are categorized in folders for what each 
contains: crania, femora, and pelvic skeletal remains. The text for the front and back 
covers is provided. You need to include and format the text. For text-formatting options 
in Photoshop, choose a Type tool to bring up its Options bar, and make use of the 
Window > Character and Window > Paragraph panels.
Note: For your viewing fun, some Flash SWF movies have been provided in 
the assets folder as an example of what will be on the mock CD. You will need 
the Flash Player (free from http://www.adobe.com) to view the movies on your 
computer.
 2. 
You are welcome to use a combination of your own acquired raster- and vector-based 
images.
FIGURE | 9–22 |
The Liquify tools in action.
FIGURE | 9–23 |
Skeletal remains to be 
incorporated into a CD jacket 
design. All photographs are 
courtesy of Joel Hagen, 
graphics design instructor 
at Modesto Junior College, 
California.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
208
 3. 
Dimension specifications for the jacket are the following:
 
▶Width: 9.5 inches
 
▶Height: 4.6875 inches
 
▶Resolution: 200 pixels/inch
 
▶Color mode: RGB Color (eventually to be converted to CMYK for printing)
 4. 
Before assembling the final designed piece, hone your design ideas by sketching them 
by hand or mocking them up digitally. Provide an overall potential “look and feel” for the 
jacket, including font and color possibilities and a general layout of text and images.
 5. 
Save your final work in both PSD and TIFF format.
FIGURE | 9–24 |
CD cover project 
example 1, designed 
by a Photoshop 
student at Modesto 
Junior College, 
California.
FIGURE | 9–25 |
CD cover project 
example 2, designed 
by a Photoshop 
student at Modesto 
Junior College, 
California.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

209
|  Chapter 9 |
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
  IN REVIEW
1. 
Describe image compositing. Describe composition in design. 
2. 
List five steps in the design process.
3. 
What question should you ask yourself when deciding whether to use someone else’s work?
4. 
Name at least five features of the Layers panel.
5. 
How do you change a background layer to a regular layer?
6. 
To align items on separate layers, what must you do?
7. 
Most filter effects are only available in what color mode?
SUMMARY
Chapter 9 offered the big picture of the image compositing and design composition processes. In  addition, it 
went over often-used organizational and workflow features of Photoshop, and got you hooked (I hope!) on its 
unique blending, Liquify, and filter effects. Work out that imagination muscle!
1. 
Study about copyright online:
 
▶U.S. Copyright Office (copyright basics): http://www.copyright.gov/circs/
 
▶Specifics of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act: http://www.copyright.gov/legislation/dmca.pdf
 
▶Copyright Web site: http://www.benedict.com
 
▶Stanford University Libraries, Stanford Copyright & Fair Use Center: http://fairuse.stanford.edu/
 
▶Copyright Clearance Center to access copyright permission for millions of publications worldwide: 
http://www.copyright.com/
2. 
Design a CD cover or promotional poster for a band or theater company in your area.
3. 
Create a home page design for a Web site.
4. 
Explore the Adobe design center at http://www.adobe.com/designcenter/ and vailable videos, 
http://www.adobe.com/designcenter/video_workshop/.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
210
DESIGN
adventures 
IN 
Figure C–5. Being able to change one part at a time is a 
timesaver and gives great effects. I then scaled down each 
skull and began placing them over the face layer, changing 
the opacity and using the blending tools. I left many of my 
own facial features but also used the main skull features 
and blended the two. Feathering the selections can help 
soften an image, but be careful not to feather a selection 
too much. The tool I probably used the most is the Eraser 
tool. After you place one 
layer on top of the other, you 
can erase (with a soft-tipped 
brush) what you do not want. 
See Figure C–6. The more 
comfortable you get with the 
mouse, the better you can 
blend the images.”
YOUR TURN
Using some of the tools and 
techniques recommended by Jeffrey, create your own 
freak of nature or otherworldly vision of yourself.
FROM THE IMAGINATION
P
hotoshop can bring out the mad scientist in us all. It 
is a digital laboratory where instruments are used to 
piece together pixels, rather than strands of DNA, 
into new life forms that come alive on screen or 
paper, tabloid covers, DVD or video game splash screens, 
or in this book’s Explorer Pages. Enter an adventure in 
design for the wild imagination.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT EXAMPLE
Our experiment begins with an example brought to you 
from the digital artist, “Mad Scientist,” Jeffrey Moring. 
Jeffrey reveals the secrets used to bring about his optical 
vision titled Yesterday, Today, Forever. See Figure C–1.
“The first step in creating this piece was getting the right 
digital images to work with,” said Jeffrey. “I took some 
photographs of myself, then photographed many different 
skulls. (The biology department of your school should 
have such skulls.) After picking the right digital photos, I 
brought them into Photoshop. See Figure C–2 and Figure 
C–3. The most important techniques for this kind of digital 
manipulation are selecting areas and your ability to blend 
two different images together. The tools that I used were 
the Smudge tool, the Eraser tool, and the Clone Stamp 
“tool.” See Figure C–4.
“Getting a good selection of the image you are using is 
critical,” said Jeffrey. “Each picture should be on a different 
layer when building such images. This is also critical. See 
t
t
FIGURE | C–1 |
Artist Jeffrey Moring’s 
altered self in his 
image Yesterday, 
Today, Forever. Printed 
with permission of 
Jeffrey Moring.
FIGURE | C–2 |
A self- portrait was 
taken and imported 
into Photoshop. A 
black background 
was added.
Fi
C 5 B i
bl
h
FIGURE | C–3 |
Photographs of 
skeletal remains were 
taken, brought into 
Photoshop, and their 
background pixels 
selected and removed.
FIGURE | C–4 |
Tools used to blend 
the images: the 
Smudge, Eraser, and 
Clone Stamp tools.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

211
|  Chapter 9 |
Self-Project Guidelines
1. Import a photograph of yourself into Photoshop.
2. With the Selection tools or Quick Mask 
feature, extract the background from the 
photograph and replace it with a solid 
color or fantasy-like backdrop.
3. With their backgrounds already removed, bring 
in other images (with either hard or feathered 
edges) to composite with the self-portrait. Put 
each image on its own layer. Duplicate and flip 
images you might like to use on both sides of the 
portrait (like the bat wings on Jeffrey’s image).
4. Hide and reveal areas of images using 
Layer Masks or the Eraser tool.
5. Blend images with the layer 
blending modes, if needed.
6. Add Liquify or filter effects to individual layers 
for more distorted and/or textured looks.
Things to Consider
For this Adventure in Design and future experimentations 
such as this, consider the following:
▶For photographs of objects where the 
background will eventually be removed, shoot 
the picture against a matte-finished, even-
colored backdrop. This, of course, will make 
it easier to remove the pixels in Photoshop.
▶ Take high-resolution digital photos, or scan 
in photos at a high resolution, so you have 
plenty of pixels from the beginning.
▶ Sketch some of your creature designs on paper.
▶ Practice mastering the tools (and their many 
options) you think you will use—such as the 
Smudge, Eraser, Dodge, Burn, and Clone Stamp 
tools—on a separate, blank document.
▶ Save your work often and back it up.
FIGURE | C–5 |
Each item—including each bone selection—
is placed on its own layer.
FIGURE | C–6 |
Choose the Eraser tool with a soft brush tip to 
create a seamless blend between layered images.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
212
Jim Carroll
“While the computer has offered creative people a powerful 
and seductive tool, we must remind ourselves that the 
creation does not happen in that box but rather in our minds 
and spirits. Work hard but always remember to go outside 
and play.”
About Jim Carroll
One night back in 1992, Jim had lucid dream about a machine 
that allowed him to manipulate the world all around as if 
it were made of clay. The next morning a friend called and 
asked him to come over and check out a cool new computer 
program. It was Adobe Photoshop. Jim’s background as an 
illustrator, photographer, and print maker allowed him to take 
full advantage of the new possibilities that this software 
offered.
Over the years, Jim and his artwork have been featured in 
many books and magazines including: Zoom, How, Print, and 
Communication Arts. Working primarily in the publishing field, 
Jim has been honored by the Society of Illustrators and was 
awarded first place for a book cover at the New York Book 
Awards. In 2008, the Society of Children’s Book Writer’s and 
illustrator’s awarded him the Grand Prize for his illustration 
portfolio. His work has been displayed around the world, 
including at the Leonardo da Vinci Museum of Science and 
Technology in Milan and at the United Nations in NYC.
Jim has been an instructor at The School of Visual Arts and 
The Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art. He has a 
BFA from SUNY Purchase and currently lives in upstate NY 
with his wife and three children.
Learn more about Jim at: 
http://www.jameschristophercarroll.com/
Paris 08. Courtesy of Jim Carroll
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

213
|  Chapter 9 |
Marley’s Little Sister. Courtesy of Jim Carroll
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Layers, Compositing, and Process |
214
Explorer PAGES, continued
About the Work of Jim Carroll
Jim shares his work process: “Not since the invention of 
photography has any other event been so instrumental in 
shaping the way visual artists create than the introduction 
of Adobe Photoshop. This technological ‘gift’ has not only 
changed the process of the way we work and forever altered 
the look of the pictorial landscape, it has also encouraged 
us to think in a much more comprehensive manner when 
creating. In a traditional sense this methodology is much 
like collage. The pleasure of paint on a canvas, the dusty 
charcoal that makes our fingers dirty, the sharp marks and 
lines of ink on crumpled paper, our photographs rich in 
reality or distorted with lens and atmosphere, the textures of 
leaves, bones and bike-parts, all come together digitally and 
play a role in the final picture. Certainly as much happens off 
the computer as does within it.
“This collage method is the basic approach used to create 
the image of the baby in the nest (Nuthatch). Beginning with 
a sketch to help map out my picture, I then began to collect 
the parts. Background clouds were drawn with charcoal 
on rough paper, an edge border was painted in gouache on 
glass with rubbings of Victorian lace as accents. Hills were 
built from scanned pieces of moss, a fallen robin’s nest was 
photographed, and the flower was composited from three 
different photos. The moon stars, and kite were sketched in 
pencil, while the baby grew from drawings and two separate 
photos. All of these components were brought together in 
Photoshop and then the messy magic began. The possibilities 
with filters, layer interactions, and manipulation tools are 
endless. Any detailed explanation of my process would be 
impractical.”
Nuthatch. Courtesy of Jim Carroll
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

215
|  Chapter 9 |
Bucky on the Roof. Courtesy of Jim Carroll
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
| Print Publishing |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

PRINT PUBLISHING
10
217
charting your course
Eventually, you will want to format your artwork so you can share it. Chapters 10 and 11 help 
you do that. There are many possibilities for where your digital images can appear, including on 
screen, such as in a Web page, an interactive learning environment, a kiosk, or mobile device 
(see Chapter 11); and on paper, such as in a glossy magazine ad, a flyer, brochure, or poster. 
Print media publication is what we explore in this chapter.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Learn about the different methods of printing
 
▶
Discover why color management makes a difference
 
▶
Understand the halftone and color separation process
 
▶
Learn what questions to ask when consulting a print service bureau
 
▶
Get familiar with the Print command
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
218
PRINTING METHODS
There are several ways to get your artwork onto paper: directly from a desktop printer 
or digital printing press, from a film negative that is used to create a metal plate for a 
commercial press, or in the form of a Portable Document File (PDF) or PostScript file.
Let us briefly describe each of these output methods, and then in the section, Output 
Compatibility, we will show you how to set up your print job in Photoshop’s Print 
window.
DESKTOP PRINTING
Without a doubt, you will want to print your work from a desktop printer—if not 
the final version, at least some proofs for mock-up and revision purposes. Desktop 
printers differ by manufacturer and have different levels of printing capabilities. A 
low-end ink jet printer, for example, deposits ink onto a page much differently than 
does a high-end laser printer. You should read the specifications for your particular 
desktop printer, so you can accurately gauge whether a printer problem is something 
you can fix on the Photoshop side of things or is unavoidable with your type of 
printer.
You also need to know what resolution your printer will support and what will give 
you the best quality, which can vary depending on the type of printer and the paper 
used. Much of the process of determining this is trial and error—print it and see 
how it looks. In general, laser printers have a resolution of about 600 dots per inch 
(dpi). For printers, dpi is the resolution measurement, whereas for computers the 
measurement is pixels per inch (ppi). Ink jet printers have a resolution of between 300 
and 2880 dpi.
Note: If you need to review the subject of resolution, or want to know more 
about it related to Photoshop, go to Help > Photoshop Help and do a search for 
resolution. Also, refer back to Chapter 3.
DIGITAL PRINTING
A digital printing press is a beefed-up version of a typical desktop printer. As digital 
printing technologies improve, digital printing services are becoming a more 
prevalent alternative to traditional offset printing. Digital printers can yield quality 
output with a quick turnaround, because they rasterize PostScript data (print directly 
from a computer file) rather than go through the intermediary film or metal plate 
stage (see next section, Commercial Printing). Digital printing is ideal for targeted 
printing jobs and short-run projects that need to be done quickly, but at a much 
higher quality than a desktop printer can offer. The resolution needed to properly 
print from a digital printing press is the resolution of the particular output device. 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

219
|  Chapter 10 |
Consult the printing service for the resolution 
at which your document should be set.
COMMERCIAL PRINTING
The traditional method for getting your virtual 
work to hard copy is using a commercial 
or mechanical printing press, the most 
common being offset printing. A digital file 
is transferred to a film negative, which is then 
used to “burn” a metal printing plate. The 
metal plate carries the image the press transfers 
to paper. If you are printing a photograph or 
illustration with more than one or two colors 
in it, things get a little more complicated and 
expensive. To simulate a full range of colors 
(four-color process printing), mechanical 
printers deposit the four ink colors (CMYK) 
dot-by-dot, called halftones. See Figure 10–1.
To create continuous-tone color using the 
halftone method, each color must be inked 
and pressed separately to the paper. In short, 
the colors are separated and then layered back 
together. To do this, each color must have its 
own metal plate (one plate inked with cyan, 
one with magenta, one with yellow, and one 
with black). The plates are produced from four 
separate files or film negatives. This is the process of color separation.
The individual colors produced by the mixing of CMYK colors are called process 
colors. You can also print with spot colors or custom inks. Spot colors are special 
colors composed of premixed inks that require their own printing plate(s) in addition 
to the ones used for four-color processing.
For pr]inters using the halftone procedure, Photoshop provides options in the Print 
dialog box for preparing your image for color separation and the subsequent printing 
process.
PORTABLE DOCUMENT FILE (PDF)
With Photoshop you can also print a file as a Portable Document File (PDF)—a 
popular, PostScript-based format developed by Adobe that supports vector and 
bitmapped data. Printing to PDF is a convenient way to maintain all attributes of 
FIGURE | 10–1 |
Magnifying a section of the parrot, you see its color is produced 
by halftone dots composed of CMYK ink colors.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
220
your original Photoshop file in a cross-platform compatible format. Often, print 
service bureaus will request a PDF version of your file. To set the PDF options, 
choose File > Save As, specify a file name, and choose Photoshop PDF as the file 
format. Click Save. The Save Adobe PDF dialog box appears (see Figure 10–2), where 
you can indicate compression, output, and security options. For information on these 
settings, visit the Photoshop Help files, Saving and exporting images > Saving PDF 
files.
OUTPUT COMPATIBILITY
If you were to travel to the moon, you’d need to prepare for the change in atmosphere. 
This means wearing a special space suit with weighted boots so you stay on the moon’s 
surface, as well as a pressurized helmet shaped like a fish bowl so you can breathe. Just 
as you must give consideration to the outer space environment, you must assess the 
printing environment when you decide to take your Photoshop work and land it on 
a piece of paper, so to speak. In general, three areas need to be considered when you 
FIGURE | 10–2 |
The Save Adobe PDF dialog box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

221
|  Chapter 10 |
are going to print: the image’s color, resolution (size and quality), and format. This 
applies if you are outputting to a printing device (see section Printing Methods) or are 
importing into another program first (i.e., one that works with page design, such as 
Adobe InDesign and QuarkXPress).
Note: Programs specifically designed for page layout are quite savvy in setting 
up your document properly for print. Although Photoshop is able to do this, 
programs such as Adobe InDesign and Illustrator are more appropriate for this 
kind of translation.
I have discussed color, resolution, and formats in previous chapters, but 
understanding them is so important I need to mention them again (and again in 
Chapter 11) as they relate to the printing process.
COLOR
If you recall from Chapter 5, different devices (whether screen- or print-based) 
have different color gamuts—the range (or limits) of color that can be reproduced. 
Therefore, it is important to prepare your image to match the specific color profile of 
whatever device or other application to which you are going to output. This workflow 
process is called color management. Admittedly, it is impossible to match colors 
between a monitor and a printer perfectly; one is using light to make colors, the other 
is using ink. However, you can get close by creating profiles for your monitor, printer, 
and printer papers. With these color spaces set, Photoshop’s built-in color management 
system can correctly transform the color from one working color space to another. You 
can explore the fine points of color management to a great extent in the Photoshop help 
files (you can even purchase complete volumes on the subject), but for now, you will be 
well on your way if you learn how to set up color profiles and calibrate your monitor.
About Color Profiles
A printer’s output quality is determined by its color profile—sometimes called 
destination profile or output profile. This profile determines how many colors and 
to what degree of color accuracy a given device can produce. There are many types 
of color profiles you can work with, usually identified by the name of the company 
that designed them or the country that has standardized them, such as Adobe RGB 
(1998), U.S. Web Coated (SWOP) v2, or Euroscale Uncoated v2. You determine what 
profile you need by consulting the specifications of your particular printer or, if you 
are printing commercially, ask your prepress specialist. If you are not sure what to 
do, stick with Photoshop’s default working color space. When working in RGB, and 
eventually converting to CMYK and going to print, this would be the Adobe RGB 
(1998) setting. Use this space when you need to print work with a broad range of 
colors. See Figure 10–3 (on the next page).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
222
There are several places in Photoshop where you will encounter options for setting 
color profiles. Let’s open an image and visit each place.
1. 
In Photoshop, be sure the Essentials workspace is set and then open the file swing.psd 
in the folder chap10_lessons/assets. Note that the status tab at the top of the image 
indicates that it is set in the RGB Color mode. See Figure 10–4.
 2. Choose View > Print Size to see what dimensions the image will be when printed. For 
exact dimensions and resolution, choose Image > Image Size. See Figure 10–5.
 3. 
Let’s indicate global color settings for the current document and any new document 
you create. Go to Edit > Color Settings. Choose the More Options button. Then, under 
the Settings option, choose North America Prepress 2. Note in this pop-up window the 
other presets available. See Figure 10–6.
FIGURE | 10–3 |
To set your specific 
working space, 
choose Edit > Color 
Settings.
FIGURE | 10–4 |
At the top of any open file you can check what color mode it is in.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

223
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | 10–5 |
To get the exact dimensions 
of a document, dependent 
on its resolution, go to 
Image > Image Size.
FIGURE | 10–6 |
Indicate a color profile preset in 
the Color Settings dialog box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
224
 4. 
Under Working Spaces, note that each color mode (RGB, CMYK, Gray, and Spot) has 
its own profile. As mentioned previously, when in doubt about where your document 
will eventually be printed, keep your file in RGB Color mode with the Adobe RGB 
(1998) setting. To read a description of this mode and any other setting in the Color 
Settings dialog box, move your cursor over the item you want described and view the 
description at the bottom of the dialog box. Click OK.
5. 
Choose Edit > Assign Profile to open the Assign Profile dialog box. See Figure 10–7. In 
this box you can choose color management options specific to the selected image. The 
options include using Don’t Color Manage This Document, keeping it at the setting you 
chose in the Color Settings dialog box, or selecting a specific profile for the particular 
printer and paper quality you will be using. For now, keep the profile the same as what 
was chosen under Color Settings—Working RGB: Adobe RGB (1998). Click OK.
 6. 
To set your document to print a proof of a color profile other than the image’s assigned 
profile, choose File > Print. Under Color Management on the right side, choose 
Photoshop Manages Colors under Color Handling. Then make a selection under Printer 
Profile. (See the section, Print Command.)
 7. 
Close swing.psd. Hopefully, now you have a better idea of the color profile settings in 
Photoshop.
Note: If you choose to embed a different profile in Assign Profile than what is 
indicated in Color Settings, be aware that a dialog box will come up the next 
time you open this document reminding you of this setting and asking what you 
would like to do next. See Figure 10–8. If no Color Settings have been indicated 
(Missing Profile), you will get a dialog box asking what you would like to do with 
the document’s settings. See Figure 10–9.
FIGURE | 10–7 |
Assign a profile for your selected document. Note here that one profile I can choose is Canon printer software Canon 
MP470/MX300/MX310 series SP4 because that’s the type of printer I have. Depending on your brand of desktop 
printer, there will be different profiles available.
Note: Keep in mind that there are also color profiles for input devices (sometimes 
called a source profile), such as digital cameras and scanners. Creating an input 
profile to match your working space can get complicated, and there is the question 
of whether it is essential for producing consistent color. For information on this 
topic, see Help > Photoshop Help and search in the index for color management, 
working with color profiles, and about monitor calibration and characterization
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

225
|  Chapter 10 |
Monitor Calibration
Monitors are the lighted windows through which you view your digital work. Like 
printers, they need to be identified with a particular color profile that, ideally, is 
consistent with the profiles you have set in Photoshop. Although identifying and 
changing the color profile of your monitor—through calibration—was not the first 
thing I talked about in the color management process (I wanted to explain what a 
color profile was first), it should be the first profile you create—even before choosing 
FIGURE | 10–8 |
Dialog box indicating a file has an embedded profile mismatch, and asking what you would like to do.
FIGURE | 10–9 |
If no color settings have been indicated for a document, a dialog box will appear 
indicating the missing profile and asking what you would like to do.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
226
color settings in Photoshop. To do this you can use a visual calibrator provided as part 
of your computer’s operating system, such as Monitor Calibrator for the Mac OS, or 
products from other manufacturers like Color Wizzard (for Windows), or Pantone 
Huey (for Mac or Windows). See Figure 10–10.
RESOLUTION
Argh! Here we are again on the topic of resolution—that elusive concept that 
pretty much determines everything about your image’s final quality and size (both 
dimensionally and in file size). For output to printers using halftone dots to render 
images (see the section, Commercial Printing), consideration must be given to the 
number of dots to be printed within a given area or screen—in other words, the dpi 
or resolution. This process is like working with the resolution of bitmap images, 
which, similarly, are composed of a given amount of pixels on a bitmapped grid. In 
Photoshop, you specify halftone screen attributes before producing a film or a paper 
output of the image. This applies particularly when you are working with commercial 
FIGURE | 10–10 |
Example of the calibrating program provided as part of my Mac’s operating system (System Preferences > Display > Color). These programs 
will take you through the calibration process.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

227
|  Chapter 10 |
printers. Consult your print specialist for the recommended resolution and screen 
(frequency, angle, and dot) settings.
Halftone dots are deposited on paper based on a screen ruling—the amount of lines or 
rows within a given screen. Screen rulings for halftones and separations are measured 
in lines per inch (lpi). The frequency, angle, and size of dots are determined by the 
screen ruling. More lpi create smaller, tighter dots, like those seen in a glossy magazine 
or slick brochure. Fewer lpi create larger, rougher-looking dots that are easier to print, 
such as on newsprint. A general rule is that the resolution (ppi, or dpi, when referring 
to halftone printing) of a given piece of artwork is about 1.5 times and no more 
than 2.0 times the screen frequency. Did I just lose you here? Let me clarify. After 
consulting with your print specialist, you discover that the screen ruling for the glossy 
flyer you want to print is 150 lpi and needs to be in the TIFF format (an uncompressed 
bitmap format). This information gives you an idea of what resolution your TIFF file 
should be; somewhere between 225, and 300 dpi or ppi (hence, 150 lpi × 1.5 = 225 
and 150 lpi × 2 = 300). Keep in mind that the resolution of an image and its screen 
frequency directly relate to what kind of paper it will be printed on and at what quality.
 
▶Newspapers, or similar highly porous, coarse papers use screens of 85–100 
lpi. Therefore, the artwork resolution should be at least 128–150 dpi or ppi.
 
▶News magazines or company publications with medium coarseness use screens 
of 133–150 lpi. Therefore, the artwork resolution should be at least 
200–225 dpi or ppi.
 
▶Fine-quality brochures, books, and magazines with slick paper surfaces 
use screens of 150–300 lpi. Therefore, the artwork resolution should 
be at least 225–450 dpi or ppi.
Note: Photoshop has a nifty little feature that will automatically suggest a 
resolution for an image based on a screen frequency. Go to Image > Image Size and 
choose the Auto option. Enter a Screen frequency and Quality setting (Draft, Good, 
Best), and the resolution will be updated for the document. This option only specifies 
a resolution for a suggested screen frequency. To determine the final halftone screen 
ruling for printing, use the Halftone Screen dialog box, accessible through the Print 
command—select Output from the drop-down on the top right side (the default is 
set to Color Management), then select the Screen button at the bottom of the panel.
FORMAT
Final output compatibility should be in the format in which the image is saved. Most 
likely you have been working on the image in Photoshop’s native PSD file format, which 
maintains all of your layers and effects. Now you must save a copy of the file in a format 
specific to its output needs. For bitmapped images, TIFF is the best option because it 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
228
uses minimal or no compression on the image (resulting in higher quality), flattens 
your layers in a more conveniently sized package (TIFF also gives the option to preserve 
layers), and will preserve alpha channel information. To preserve both vector and 
bitmapped data that might be in an image, the EPS format is a good choice. This format 
is especially useful when you plan to import an image into a vector-friendly program, 
such as Adobe Illustrator. More recently, print specialists prefer to save their images in 
the cross-platform compatible PDF format (see the section, Portable Document File).
You will quickly find there are many different formats in which to save your image. 
Each format has specific characteristics, depending on where it is going. As for Web-
based formats, that is reserved for Chapter 11. An overview of common formats is 
also provided in Chapter 3. For practice, here are the steps for saving an image in the 
print-friendly TIFF format:
 1. 
Open the file swing.psd from the folder chap10_lessons/assets.
 2. 
Choose Image > Mode > CMYK Color to set the image into the CMYK color space. If you 
get a warning message that begins “You are about to convert to CMYK…,” choose OK. 
You should always set your image to the CMYK color space if you plan to print the image 
using the traditional print process. However, if you simply want to make a quick print 
from a desktop printer, you can stay in RGB color mode.
 3. 
Choose File > Save As and rename your file. Under Format choose TIFF (take note of the 
other available formats). Save the file to your lessons folder. Be sure the Embed Color 
Profile option is selected (if you assigned a profile to the image, this option should be 
checked automatically). Click Save.
 4. 
A TIFF Options dialog box will appear. Here, you can choose a form of image 
compression. If the file size of the image is not an issue, stick with a compression setting 
of NONE to maintain the highest-quality image. LZW is another good choice for image 
compression, since it is a lossless form of compression (see the section, Compression, in 
Chapter 11). LZW works best on grayscale images or images with large areas of uniform 
color. However, LZW compression is not universally used by all programs, so if there is 
any doubt, keep it set to NONE.
Note: Depending on the image attributes, the choice of options in the TIFF 
Options box will vary. If, for example, your image contains more than one layer, 
you have a Layer Compression option. If your image has layers, you can choose 
the RLE or ZIP compression options and preserve the Photoshop layers in the TIFF, 
or reduce the file size of the image and discard the layers (flatten) and save a copy. 
Preserving the Photoshop layers in TIFF format will increase the file size.
 5. 
If you choose to flatten the layers of the image—which is going to happen in any case when 
you open the file in another program—be sure you save a version with the layers. You never 
know when you are going to need to reopen the image in Photoshop and make changes.
 6. 
Click OK to close the TIFF Options dialog box. Out of interest, compare the file size of your 
PSD version to the TIFF version. To do this, find the saved files in your lessons folder (or 
wherever you saved them), right-click (Windows) or Ctrl-click (Mac) over each file icon, 
and choose Properties (Windows) or Get Info (Mac).
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

229
|  Chapter 10 |
CONSULT THE PROFESSIONALS
If printing your artwork professionally, either via a digital or commercial press, is a 
“must,” alleviate undue headaches and find yourself a reliable print specialist. A good 
specialist can identify your printing needs and offer appropriate solutions for getting 
the best-quality print job for your specific situation. However, do not underestimate 
the importance of understanding the printing process and its terminology—what was 
just covered in this chapter. Properly setting up your Photoshop file before handing 
it to the printer can save you time and money. Also, have a clear idea of what kind 
of paper the job requires. For instance, do you envision your creation on porous 
newsprint or slick, heavy card stock? Different types of paper produce varying color 
effects and require different specifications.
Note: Your print specialist can provide paper samples and color swatches to aid 
you in your decision.
During the final output stages of your document, consult your printing service 
bureau to find out how best to prepare your file (i.e., color mode, resolution, and 
format). Also, be aware that the complexity of your artwork determines a lot about 
what you need to know to prepare it for print. Transparencies, alpha channels, spot 
colors, gradients, fonts, vector graphics, and duotones, for example, might require 
extra attention to print properly.
SETTING UP THE PRINT JOB
The easy way out of the printing process is to choose File > Print  and be done 
with it. Yeah, right. If you want your print job to look professional, it can get more 
complicated than just choosing Print. (So, if you skipped the rest of this chapter 
and came directly here, I am assuming you already know about the quirks and 
conundrums of printing.) As previously covered, you first need to know where you 
are going to print your work (desktop printer, commercial printer, PDF). Second, you 
need to understand output compatibility, and third, you may need to contact a print 
specialist. With that in mind, you can go to the proper setup command in Photoshop. 
Do not simply go to File and choose Print; first consider the options presented when 
you select File > Print.
PRINT COMMAND
OK, you are ready to see your work on some papyrus material. In Photoshop, choose 
File > Print and see what is available. See Figure 10–11 (on the next page). (Note: If 
you want to do this right now, open swing.psd in the folder chap10_lessons/assets 
to use as an example.)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
230
 1. 
The first thing to notice is the option to scale your image (Scaled Print Size) to a print size 
other than what was originally specified under the image size area (Image > Image Size). 
You might want to do this if your original image is larger than the paper you are printing 
it on, or if you want a smaller, quicker proof for markup purposes. Remember, however, if 
the image is scaled larger the quality will deteriorate.
 2. 
To the right of the image preview, designate Output as your option choice. Refer to 
Figure 10–11 again. For output, you can specify numerous goodies (i.e., a background 
color or border treatment). You can also make specifications necessary for a seamless 
printing endeavor, such as bleed amounts (if you have color extending right to the 
edge of your document), screen and transfer measurements, printer marks for proper 
registration of an image’s color plates (see Figure 10–12), and film output options. For 
kicks, select the Border option and specify a border width. Also, choose Calibration Bars, 
Registration Marks, Corner Crop Marks, Center Crop Marks, and Labels. Note that each 
selection is shown on the image in the preview window.
 3. 
Still in the Print window, switch the Output options selector to Color Management. 
Under the Print option you can choose a Document Profile or a Proof Profile. For each 
selection, set the options in the Options area. In the Options area, you can set Color 
Handling to Printer Manages Colors or Photoshop Manages Colors based on a specific 
Printer Profile.
FIGURE | 10–11 |
Output options in the Print command window.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

231
|  Chapter 10 |
Note: Proof Profile, which we have not discussed, can be indicated for your 
document under View > Proof Setup. Consult the Help files for more on soft and 
hard proofs.
 4. 
If you are not ready to print but want to preserve your settings, choose Done. If you are ready 
to print, select where you would like to print your document from the Printer drop- down in 
the Print Window or under the Print Settings button. See figure 10-13. (on the next page) Save 
as PDF option under the PDF button or choose Adobe PDF under the Printer drop-down area, 
if available. Choose Print to execute the print action. See Figure 10–14 (on th next page).
 5. 
Lastly, choose Print in the lower right corner of the window to execute the action.
Note: If your printer does not support PostScript data, a dialog box will come 
up indicating that some options chosen might not be available with the printer 
indicated. See Figure 10-15. (on page 233).
FIGURE | 10–12 |
A PDF version of the file swing.psd. Registration, cropping, border, and bleed 
specifications were indicated in the Print command output area.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
232
Note: If you have printed a copy of your image to a desktop printer or saved it 
as a PDF document (which you can view using the Acrobat Reader), you will see 
the specifications set on the image, such as registration and cropping marks. See 
Figure 10–12 for an example.
FIGURE | 10–14 |
Under Print Settings 
you can choose how to 
output your document 
via your printer or as 
a PDF document.
FIGURE | 10–13 |
Options on my Macintosh 
for printing to a desktop 
printer or PDF document.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

233
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | 10–15 |
Conflict dialog box that could 
come up if your printer does not 
support PostScript information.
FIGURE | 10–16 |
Page Setup for printers 
specifically installed on my 
Macintosh. To scale to print 
size, use the options under 
the Print command rather than 
the Page Setup box for your 
particular printer.
t
t
As you roam through the various print dialog 
boxes, you might discover that you can set 
scaling options for your image in the print 
specifications dialog box of your particular 
desktop printer. See Figure 10–16. The 
recommendation is to not set the scaling 
options in this specific area, but rather in 
the Print window as reviewed previously.
  DON’T GO THERE!
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
234
SUMMARY
With the wave of a wand, I wish I could make the printing process for your digital imagery totally seam-
less and stress free. But, as you learned, there are many variables to this. It is unlikely your print job will 
come out perfectly the first time, so be prepared to waste a few (or a dozen) sheets of paper trying to 
get everything just right. And, of course, it doesn’t hurt to consult the professionals, get a proof or two 
created of your final work, and meticulously edit before printing the job in full.
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
1. 
Access the Help > Photoshop Help menu and read the following topics related to printing: “Printing” and 
“Color Management > Keeping colors consistent.” A word of caution: This is a ton of information to wade 
through—not necessarily bedtime reading, but rather something to be learned on a “need to know” basis.
  IN REVIEW
1. 
Briefly describe the four printing methods.
2. 
What are process colors?
3. 
Why might you output your image into a PDF?
4. 
What are the three areas that should be considered when preparing an image to go to print?
5. 
Describe color management and why it is important to understand.
6. 
What do you do in the Color Settings dialog box (Edit > Color Settings)?
7. 
Why calibrate your monitor?
8. 
What does halftone printing mean? What are halftone dots?
9. 
Describe what happens when an image is flattened.
10. 
Where is a good place to set alternate scaling options for a printed image?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

235
|  Chapter 10 |
2. 
Find out if your desktop printer supports PostScript and if you have the ability to specify 
options for color separations in the Print dialog box. If so, print separations for a document 
that has been saved in the CMYK Color mode (Image > Mode > CMYK Color).
3. 
Open the sample file swing.pdf in the folder chap10_lessons/assets. Take a look at the 
printer marks that have been specified around the artwork. In the Help files, do a search 
for “setting output options” or “to set output options.” Investigate what each printer 
mark represents.
4. 
Call a printing service (or search online) and inquire about the printing services it offers 
and what file specifications it requires. Be specific with your questions and try out some 
of the terminology you learned in this chapter.
5. 
Explore options for making contact sheets (a feature that conveniently creates thumbnail 
versions of multiple images for proofing purposes) in the Adobe Output Module (AOM). 
AOM is a feature in the Adobe Bridge program. Here are the steps to give it a try:
a. 
In Photoshop, click on the Launch Bridge icon in the Application Bar to open the 
program.
b. 
Open Adobe Bridge CS5 > Preferences from the main menu. In Preferences, under  Startup 
Scripts, check the Adobe Output Module option. See Figure 10–17. Close Preferences.
FIGURE | 10–17 |
Choose the Adobe Output Module in Adobe Bridge’s Preferences.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
236
c. 
At the top part of the Bridge interface click the Output to Web and PDF option. See Figure 10–18. An 
Output panel opens to the right.
d. 
At the top of the Output panel choose the PDF option, and under Template choose the 4*5 Contact 
Sheet. See Figure 10–19.
e. 
On the left side of the Bridge program be sure the Folders panel is open. Scroll for a folder on your 
computer that contains images or photographs. Once the folder is selected, the images should appear in 
the Content panel at the bottom of the Bridge program. See Figure 10–20, #1 and #2 (on the next page).
f. 
Hold down the Shift key on your keyboard and select any number of images in the folder for which you 
would like a contact sheet made. Refer to Figure 10–20 again.
g. 
Scroll to the bottom of the Output panel, choose the View PDF after Save option, and click Save (refer to 
Figure 10–20, #3). The PDF document with thumbnails of the images will be created and opened in your 
Adobe PDF viewer. See Figure 10–21 for an example of a finished contact sheet.
For instructions on making Web Galleries (also a feature in the AOM), see Exploring on Your Own in Chapter 11.
FIGURE | 10–18 |
Choose Output to Web or PDF in the Bridge program.
FIGURE | 10–19 |
Under PDF choose a contact sheet template.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | 10–20 |
1. Browse for some images on 
your computer. 2. Select the 
images in the Content panel. 
3. Set options for the contact 
sheet and choose Save.
FIGURE | 10–21 |
An example contact sheet 
in the PDF format.
y
3
A
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
238
DESIGN
adventures
IN
Winery in Modesto, California, is a good example of how 
composition is not just the bringing together of elements in 
one program, but also the coordination of elements among 
two or more programs. See Figure D–1.
PROFESSIONAL PROJECT EXAMPLE
The 5-liter wine box label shown in Figure D–1 was created 
for Gallo Winery using a combination of Photoshop and 
Illustrator. First, in Photoshop, photographs of glasses of 
wine were incorporated to achieve the most appetizing 
look. The final wine glass was then layered with a basket 
WINE BOX COMPOSITION
A
s you learned in, Chapter 9, assembling artwork 
pieces—photos, illustrations, and text—into 
an aesthetically pleasing whole is the art of 
composition. An experienced art director or 
graphic designer can envision the larger scope of 
attractively arranging elements, while simultaneously 
considering each element’s minute design details. 
Moreover, a good handle on current computer graphics 
software programs and their tool sets is crucial for 
bringing an inspired vision to life. The work of art director 
Dave Garcez and the graphic artists at E. & J. Gallo 
FIGURE | D–1 |
A 5-liter wine box label 
was produced using Adobe 
Photoshop and Illustrator. 
Used with permission of 
E. & J. Gallo Winery.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

239
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | D–2 |
Photographs were taken and layered in Photoshop. 
Used with permission of E. & J. Gallo Winery.
FIGURE | D–3 |
The photographs were then incorporated 
into a complete image. Used with 
permission of E. & J. Gallo Winery.
and some grapes. See Figure D–2 and Figure D–3. The 
logo was created in Illustrator. A hand-drawn sketch 
was scanned and placed as a template into Illustrator. 
The final logo design and photographic images were 
incorporated into Photoshop and then saved and imported 
into Illustrator, where additional typographic elements 
were added and the whole file was prepared for print. See 
Figure D–1. This same project is used as an Adventures in 
Design in Exploring Adobe Illustrator CS5, emphasizing the 
parts of the project (i.e., the logo design) that were done 
in Illustrator. Now, I want to share the techniques used to 
achieve the perfect look for the wine glass image.
The pixels of two of the wine glass photos were selected, 
transformed, and blended to produce the most active and 
realistic looking “swirl” of wine. See Figure D–2 and 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
240
Figure D–3. The glass was then retouched to produce 
a more appetizing glow and give it more roundness. To 
enhance it, the highlights on an empty glass were outlined 
and then saved into an alpha channel. Using a combination 
of the Dodge, Burn, and Airbrush tools, the selections 
(alpha channels) were then used to lighten highlighted 
areas and darken shadowed areas. See Figure D–4.
The grapes were also enhanced. The lower-right corner 
was darkened for more light contrast, and many berries 
were retouched to remove imperfections. They were then 
placed within the basket. See Figure D–5.
Another subtle improvement was done to the image. To 
make the stem of the glass appear in front of the stripe 
element at the bottom of the final design, another photo 
FIGURE | D–4 |
Alpha channels were used to highlight 
and darken selections, creating 
more brightness and roundness to 
the glass: 1. The original wine glass 
photo; 2. Highlight outlines are 
drawn; 3. Alpha channel masks are 
created; 4. Final retouched photo.
of the stem was taken. Then a color print of the grapes 
and basket was distorted and placed behind it. The areas 
around the stem were deleted. See Figure D–6.
Your Turn
Putting into practice your image compositing skills, it’s 
your turn to create an attractive image that could be used 
on a wine box, label, or advertisement. The original photos 
for the Peter Vella wine box label are provided for your 
educational use in the aid examples folder (basket.tif, 
grapes.tif, chard_glass1.tif, and chard_glass2.tif), or you 
can photograph or find your own images.
Self-project Guidelines
1. Find a selection of images you might like to 
use in your image composition. They can be 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

241
|  Chapter 10 |
FIGURE | D–5 |
The grapes were retouched and incorporated with the basket.
FIGURE | D–6 |
An effect is created on the stripe element at the bottom of the design. 
The stripe is reflected through the wine glass stem.
photographs you have taken or borrowed for 
educational purposes, scanned illustrations, or 
the photos provided in the aid_examples folder. 
Some image ideas could include pictures of wine 
bottles or barrels, vineyards, other styles of wine 
glasses, or someone enjoying a glass of wine. 
Try to get the highest quality images possible.
 2. On paper, sketch some ideas of how you see the 
images assembled into a completely new design.
 3. Determine what techniques you know 
in Photoshop that will enable you to 
recreate the sketch you like best.
 4. On a new document with a resolution of at least 
150 pixels, import the photos into Photoshop. 
Put each image on its own named layer.
 5. Work your pixel magic on the images using what 
you have learned in Photoshop. Adjust tonal 
levels and color, select and transform pixels, 
blend layers, and add effects and filters.
|
|
6. Save the file in PSD format and in 
a print-ready TIFF format.
Things to Consider
Here are some things to consider when working on 
your image compositions for this lesson and in your 
professional work:
▶A design is never finished. Leave 
time to do revisions.
▶Save often, and back up your work. I suggest 
saving different versions of your work, as in 
wine_imagev1, wine_imagev2a, wine_imagev2b, 
wine_imagev3, etc. You never know when you 
might want to refer to an earlier version.
▶Get your document organized. In other words, 
use layers and name them intuitively.
▶Print your image from a desktop printer 
(preferably color) to get a good idea of 
the image size and overall look.
▶If you “borrowed” from another’s work, or used 
another’s image as a template in the creation of 
your own composition, resolve any copyright issues.
|
|
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Print Publishing |
242
David Julian
About David Julian
David Julian holds a BFA from Pratt Institute, and is a widely 
published and awarded photographer, illustrator, and mixed-
media artist. His work has been commissioned for clients in 
all genres, and has appeared in over one hundred magazines 
including Macworld, Sierra, Edutopia, Los Angeles Times, New 
York Times, Boston Globe, Baltimore Sun, Psychology Today, 
Alphabet. © David Julian.
GEO, Nikon World, PRINT, Communication Arts, PhotoMedia, 
Zoom, and Archive. He also authors articles for Digital Photo 
Pro, PC Photo, Digital Photographer, and Double Exposure. 
When not working in his studio filled with eclectic collections, 
he travels and teaches creativity workshops across the 
continent. Dave’s patient, intuitive teaching manner helps 
others develop the ability to reach their creative goals. Active 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

243
|  Chapter 10 |
Transformation. © David Julian.
variable retouching strokes and is perfectly integrated into 
the brush behaviors in Photoshop”. 
Transformation
“For Transformation, I began with a rough concept sketch to 
outline my idea. I made notes and a list of elements I needed 
to find in my archives or shoot for my Photoshop composite. 
I then assembled the elements, such as the girl, landscape, 
butterfly, and wings into an ‘elements’ folder on my hard 
drive. I prepared these for importing into the main layered 
as a portfolio consultant, Dave is also on Adobe’s Lightroom3 
beta team and partners with Wacom and OnOne Software. He 
also co-leads a 840-member Photoshop User Group in Seattle. 
His images are represented by Corbis, and his work can be 
viewed at www.davidjulian.com.
About the Work of David Julian
“My main tools are a Macintosh MacPro, twin 23” Apple 
displays, and a Wacom Intuos 4 tablet. The Wacom is the 
most essential tool for my style of work as it allows fluid and 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Print Publishing |
244
Explorer PAGES, continued
image in Photoshop by silhouetting objects from backgrounds 
and doing some basic retouching. Once I created a new file 
at poster size and at my printer’s 360ppi resolution, I began my 
composite image with the key element of the woman. I added 
a different coat and retouched her face and hair using painted 
details and adjustment layers. Then I added the landscape, the 
full-moon sky, and a texture shot of an oil painting.
“I often reduce the element’s opacity and play with layer 
modes to better visualize my options for composition and 
overall ‘feel’ of the evolving art. Once the main elements 
are in place and resized, I add shadow layers or use Layer 
Effects or dimension. Lastly, I fine-tune each element layer 
with masks and adjustment layers to balance color, opacity, 
effects, and mood. After so much effort, I generally move 
onto something else, returning several hours or a day later 
to fine-tune the composite using a refreshed perspective.”
Heaven and Hell
“I created Heaven and Hell as a self-assignment after visiting 
several impressive cathedrals and cemeteries in Portugal. 
I sketched the basic idea and composed onto a canvas in 
Photoshop the four main photographic elements: the skulls, 
the sky with starlings, the cross, and the arched doorway. I left 
them in color, letting each layer overlap transparently until 
Heaven and Hell. © David Julian.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

245
|  Chapter 10 |
Spaces. Years later, I scanned the slide at high resolution and 
recontextualized the image to fit into a series called Dreams 
and Visual Poems. In this series, all images are split-toned 
towards sepia and cool grey to lend a historical yet mystical 
feel. I added a Black and White adjustment layer, adjusting 
the sliders to best pump contrast into the features and to 
separate the sky from the temple. Three Curves adjustment 
layers were added, each carefully masked to balance the 
overall landscape and enhance or soften details.” 
“My original shot contained blurring at the edges due to hand-
wiping mist from my lens, which caused a pleasing effect that 
I then added to in Photoshop. I achieved this by converting a
duplicate image layer using Convert for Smart Filters from 
the Filters menu, and added more blur only to the edges by 
masking the blur filter. The edge was added as the topmost 
layer in multiply layer mode.”
the composition gelled in my mind. I then added a Black and 
White adjustment layer to the topmost layer so that all layers 
would appear colorless.” 
“Much masking and retouching was done with my Wacom pen 
to blend edges and fix distractions, and some brushed-in tone 
and blurring was used as well. Once the composition and tones 
were balanced, I added a Color Balance layer to the top of 
the stack to tone the image toward sepia. Lastly, I added the 
organic photographic edge as a layer (with mode set to multiply) 
from my collection of prints made long ago in the darkroom. The 
result is my darkly interpretative vision of a place between 
Heaven and Hell.”
The Temple of Prambanan
“This is a huge Hindu temple complex in Java, Indonesia. I 
shot this image on color slide film for a series called Sacred 
The Temple of Prambanan. © David Julian.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
| Web Publishing |
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

WEB PUBLISHING
11
247
charting your course
Preparing images for the Web or screen-based publication is an important task in today’s online 
world. Luckily for us, Web development tools come packaged with Adobe Photoshop and alleviate 
many of the headaches that occur when we try to find the right balance between an image that 
looks good but can also be quickly downloaded from the Internet for efficient viewing. For the 
avid Web designer, there is much to explore in Photoshop’s Web tools, and it is not uncommon to 
find instructional books specific to this part of Photoshop. This chapter offers an overview of the 
three main features Web designers use in Photoshop: the Save for Web & Devices command (see the 
section by the same name); the ability to slice images for fast rendering and to create button and 
rollover effects (see the section “Image Slicing”); and the Animation panel (see the section “GIF 
Animation”).
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Optimize images like a pro
 
▶
Get a handle on Web file formats
 
▶
 Examine the interrelationship among image color, format, size, and compression in the Web 
publication process
 
▶
Get hands-on experience with the Save for Web & Devices options
 
▶
Slice a Web page
 
▶
Create an animated GIF using the Animation panel
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
248
ABOUT OPTIMIZATION
In part, Chapter 9 discussed the process of designing a print or Web page layout—the 
integration of many elements (such as text and graphics) into a pleasing visual display. 
I want to reiterate that the layout process usually involves working in more than one 
graphics program. For Web page design and development, this most likely includes 
the use of an image manipulation program to optimize images (i.e., Photoshop) and a 
layout program that assembles Web elements and codes them into a Web page fit for 
a browser to read (i.e., Adobe Dreamweaver or Flash).
When it comes to publishing graphics for the Web, it is all about optimization. 
Optimization, when referring to online artwork, is the process of preparing a 
functionally optimal graphic, which is an artful balancing act between the visual 
quality of an image and its quantitative file size. There are three interrelated areas to 
consider in the Web optimization process: image format, image color, and image size. 
These areas directly relate to image compression, which refers to reducing an image’s 
file size so it looks good on screen and downloads quickly over an Internet connection.
COMPRESSION
An image’s file size can be reduced by compression. If you compress 
a bitmap image too much—to make it smaller in file size—you can 
lose visual quality. For instance, it might lose its antialiased effect, 
which is the smoothing of pixelated edges through a gradation of 
color. It could dither, which occurs when colors that are lost during 
compression are replaced by colors within the reduced color palette. 
See Figure 11–1 and Figure 11–2.
FIGURE | 11–1 |
Close-up antialiasing creates 
a stair-step effect of color 
gradation. When viewed at 
a distance, the edge of the 
object looks smoother.
FIGURE | 11–2 |
Dithering attempts to simulate 
colors that are lost in the 
compression process. On the left 
is a close-up of an image without 
dither. On the right, with dither. 
The differences are subtle, but 
noticeable with certain images 
viewed at full magnification.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

249
|  Chapter 11 |
There are two basic types of compression: lossy and lossless (or “nonlossy”). Lossy 
compression discards data to make a file smaller. Let’s say you are optimizing a line of 
pixels in the JPEG format, which uses lossy compression. Ten of the pixels are white, 
followed by a gray pixel, and then five more white pixels. With lossy compression the 
computer reads the line as 16 white pixels; the gray pixel, being the odd one in the 
sampling area, is converted to white.
Lossless compression does not eliminate detail or information. Instead it looks for 
more efficient ways to define the image, such as through the use of customized color 
tables (see the section “Image Color”). Ultimately, how compression is applied to an 
image varies greatly depending on the image’s format, color, and size.
IMAGE FORMAT
Traditionally, most Web images are saved in the bitmap formats GIF, JPEG, or PNG. 
Bitmap images rely on resolution to determine their file size and quality. Therefore, 
bitmap images are generally larger in file size than vector graphics, and have a slower 
load time when viewed from the Web. Vector-based file formats—including Adobe’s 
SWF and Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) formats—have emerged that allow us to 
save and view graphics as streamlined paths, shapes, text, and effects in the online 
environment. Such graphics are scalable in size and easier to download. However, 
Photoshop does not handle these file types because it is the master of pixels, not 
vectors. Adobe Illustrator does a much better job at creating vector images. It also 
can support export of both the SWF and SVG formats.
Note: Adobe Flash and After Effects also have the ability to export bitmap 
images and animations to the SWF format. In the SWF format, the graphic can be 
posted directly to the Web or opened in Adobe’s Flash. For information on SWF, do 
a search for SWF in the Photoshop Help files.
The file format you choose for an optimized image depends on the color, tonal, and 
graphic characteristics of the original image. In general, continuous-tone bitmap 
images (images with many shades of color, such as photographs) are best compressed 
in the JPEG or PNG-24 formats. Illustrations or type with flat color or sharp edges 
and crisp detail are best as GIF or PNG-8 files. The following list outlines the 
characteristics of each Web-friendly format you can save in Photoshop including GIF, 
JPEG, PNG-8, PNG-24, and WBMP. Further clarification of these characteristics is 
presented in the next two sections.
GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) Format
 
▶Supports an 8-bit color depth. Bit depth determines the amount and range 
of color an image can contain. A 1-bit image supports two colors, black and 
white; an 8-bit image supports up to 256 colors. A customized 256-color 
palette is referred to as indexed color.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
250
 
▶Works best compressing solid areas of color, such as in line art, logos, or 
graphics with type.
 
▶Is supported by the most common Web browsers, such as Internet Explorer, 
Safari, and Firefox.
 
▶Can be animated.
 
▶Traditionally uses a lossless compression method. Lossless compression occurs 
when no data is discarded during the optimization process (see the section 
“Compression”). You can save a GIF file multiple times without discarding data. 
However, because GIF files are 8-bit color, optimizing an original 24-bit image 
as an 8-bit GIF will generally degrade image quality.
Note: Illustrator and Photoshop also allow you to create a lossy version of a GIF 
file. The lossy GIF format includes small compression artifacts—similar to those in 
JPEG files—but yields significantly smaller files.
 
▶Can be interlaced, so images download in multiple passes, or progressively. The 
downloading process of interlaced images is visible to the user, ensuring the user the 
download is in progress. Keep in mind, however, that interlacing increases file size.
 
▶Includes dithering options: the process of mixing colors to approximate those 
not present in the image.
 
▶Supports background transparency and background matting: the ability to 
blend the edges of an image with a Web page background color.
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) Format
 
▶Supports 24-bit color (millions of colors) and preserves the broad range 
and subtle variations in brightness and hue found in photographs and other 
continuous-tone images (such as gradients).
 
▶Is supported by the most common Web browsers.
 
▶Selectively discards data. Because it discards data, JPEG compression is 
referred to as lossy (see the section “Compression”). The compression is set 
based on a range between 0% and 100% or 1 and 12. A higher percentage 
setting results in less data being discarded. The JPEG compression method 
tends to degrade sharp detail in an image, particularly in images containing 
type or vector art. Because of the nature of JPEG compression, you should 
always save JPEG files from the original image, not from a previously saved 
JPEG. A suggestion: before doing any compression on an image, save a copy in 
the PSD format. The PSD version becomes your original, uncompressed version 
that you can come back to if necessary.
 
▶Can be interlaced, so images download in multiple passes.
 
▶Does not support transparency.
 
▶Does not support animation.
PNG-8 (Portable Network Graphics) Format
 
▶Uses 8-bit color. Like the GIF format, PNG-8 efficiently compresses solid 
areas of color while preserving sharp detail, such as that in line art, logos, or 
graphics with type.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

251
|  Chapter 11 |
 
▶Has not traditionally been supported by all browsers, but this is changing. It 
is advisable to test images saved in the PNG format on browser platforms that 
you and your audience might be using to view Web pages.
 
▶Uses a lossless compression method, in which no data is discarded during 
compression. However, because PNG-8 files are 8-bit color, optimizing an 
original 24-bit image as a PNG-8 can degrade image quality. PNG-8 files use 
more advanced compression schemes than GIF, and can be 10% to 30% smaller 
than GIF files of the same image, depending on the image’s color patterns.
 
▶Can be indexed, like the GIF format, to a specific 256-color palette (such as 
Adaptive or Restrictive).
 
▶Includes dithering options: the process of mixing colors to approximate those 
not present in the image.
 
▶Like the GIF format, it supports background transparency and background matting: 
the ability to blend the edges of the image with a Web page background color.
PNG-24 (Portable Network Graphics) Format
 
▶Supports 24-bit color. Like the JPEG format, PNG-24 preserves the broad range 
and subtle variations in brightness and hue found in photographs. Like the 
GIF and PNG-8 formats, PNG-24 preserves sharp detail, such as that in line art, 
logos, or illustrations with type.
 
▶Uses the same lossless compression method as the PNG-8 format, in which no 
data is discarded. For that reason, PNG-24 files are usually larger than JPEG 
files of the same image.
 
▶Like PNG-8, is not necessarily supported by all browsers.
 
▶Supports multilevel transparency, in which you can preserve up to 256 levels of 
transparency to blend the edges of an image smoothly with any background color.
WBMP format
 
▶Supports only 1-bit color, which means images are reduced to contain only 
black and white pixels.
 
▶Standard format for optimizing images for mobile devices in the past (such as older 
cell phones and PDAs), which did not support viewing complex images in color.
IMAGE COLOR
Photographs and artwork to be viewed on-screen, such as on a Web page, must 
be saved in the RGB Color mode. (To review, read the characteristics of the RGB 
Color mode in Chapter 5.) To convert artwork to the RGB Color mode, choose 
Image > Mode > RGB Color. When it comes to the topic of image color, you need 
an understanding of color-reduction algorithms, covered in the following section.
Color-Reduction Algorithms
Photoshop uses color-reduction algorithms to generate a specific color table for an 
optimized image. You will get a better idea of how color tables work in a lesson later 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
252
in this chapter. Color-reduction algorithms only apply to the GIF and PNG-8 formats. 
Because these two formats support the 8-bit format (i.e., an image with 256 colors or 
less), the color tables determine how the computer calculates which 256 colors 
to keep.
Note: If the original image has fewer than 256 colors, you can adjust the maximum 
number of colors that are calculated, further reducing the size of the image.
Each color reduction palette produces slightly different results, so it is a good idea to 
understand how each type works its magic. The descriptions of the color tables that 
follow are taken from the Photoshop Help files. (Photoshop categorizes the color 
tables as dynamic, fixed, or custom.) Reading descriptions, however, will not give you 
the full effect of what these color tables do. This will only be possible when you see, 
later in the chapter, how the tables affect an actual image.
Dynamic options use a color-reduction algorithm to build a palette based on the colors 
in the image and the number of colors specified in the optimization setting. The 
colors in the palette are regenerated every time you change or re-optimize the image.
 
▶Perceptual: Creates a custom color table by giving priority to colors for which 
the human eye has greater sensitivity.
 
▶Selective: Creates a color table similar to the Perceptual color table, but favors 
broad areas of color and the preservation of Web colors. This color table usually 
produces images with the greatest color integrity. Selective is the default option.
 
▶Adaptive: Creates a custom color table by sampling colors from the spectrum 
appearing most commonly in the image. For example, an image with only the 
colors green and blue produces a color table made primarily of greens and blues. 
Most images have a concentration of colors in particular areas of the spectrum.
Fixed options use a set palette of colors. In other words, the available colors are constant, 
but the specific colors in the palette will vary depending on the colors in the image.
 
▶Restrictive (Web): Uses the standard 216-color color table common to both 
Windows and Mac OS 8-bit (256-color) palettes. This option ensures that no 
browser dither is applied to colors when the image is displayed using 8-bit 
color. (This palette is also called the Web-safe palette.) If your image has 
fewer colors than the total number specified in the color palette, unused colors 
are removed. Using the Restrictive palette can create larger than necessary 
files and is recommended only when avoiding browser dither is a high priority.
 
▶Black & White: Builds a color table of only two colors—black and white.
 
▶Grayscale: Creates a custom table of only grayscale pixels.
 
▶Mac OS and Windows: Builds an 8-bit palette, capable of displaying 256 colors, 
using the color table of the system you select. If your image has fewer colors 
than the total number specified in the color palette, unused colors are removed.
The Custom option uses a color palette that is created or modified by the user. If you 
open an existing GIF or PNG-8 file, it will already have a custom color palette. When 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

253
|  Chapter 11 |
you choose the Custom color palette, it preserves the current perceptual, selective, or 
adaptive color table as a fixed palette that does not update with changes to the image.
Note: For future reference, you can lock, add, sort, delete, and shift colors in the 
generated color tables. You can also save and load color tables to apply to images.
IMAGE SIZE
To discuss image size is to reintroduce the concept of resolution. For online display, 
an image’s resolution need only match a standard monitor’s resolution, which is 
72 pixels per inch (ppi) for Mac and 96 ppi for Windows. This is a welcome relief 
considering what you learned in Chapter 10: the resolution of artwork going to print 
varies depending on where it is being printing and on what kind of paper stock.
Resolution is a moot point when working with vector-based graphics. These types of 
images are unique in their application to the Web. They are inherently scalable and 
compact in size. So, keep in mind that much of what we are talking about in regard 
to file size and compression applies to bitmap (or rasterized) images. Until more Web 
designers advance to using the latest online vector graphic formats, such as SWF and 
SVG, much of the graphics you see on the Web will be in bitmap format.
A bitmap image’s size is directly related to its resolution. Image size can be referred to 
in two ways, and both impact optimization: the actual dimensions of an image (e.g., 
5-by-5 inches or 400-by-600 pixels); and the image’s file size (its actual amount in 
digital bits). This is measured in bytes, kilobytes, megabytes, or gigabytes. A byte is 8 
bits, a kilobyte (KB) is 1,024 bytes, a megabyte (MB) is 1,024 kilobytes, and a gigabyte 
(GB) is 1,024 megabytes. How big is too big for a Web image? Well, it depends on 
how many images you have on a single Web page, whether they are bitmap or vector 
based, and whether they are dimensionally large or small.
I prefer to restrict my Web images, especially bulky bitmap ones, to no more than 10 
to 20 KB each in file size. In fact, when I build Web pages it is not uncommon for a 
client to request that we keep the total file size of everything on a Web page under 
30 KB for viewers with slow Internet connections. The ultimate, of course, is to 
actually post your optimized images to the Web and test how long it takes for them to 
download on different Internet connections—a process you can perform in the Save 
for Web & Devices area of the program.
SAVE FOR WEB & DEVICES
Think of the Save for Web & Devices option (File > Save for Web & Devices) as a 
fitness program for your graphics. Depending on your image’s body type (format), 
you can try out various fitness regimens (compression schemes) to produce the best-
looking and leanest image possible in the Optimized window view. A 2-Up or 4-Up 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
254
window view lets you compare and contrast an image’s optimization settings next to 
the original file. See Figure 11–3.
FIGURE | 11–3 |
The Optimized window view 
with the 4-Up window tab 
selected.
FIGURE | 11–4 |
Select a browser to view your image. If you do not have a browser selected, 
choose Other and find the browser of your choice installed in your applications 
folder, such as Safari, Firefox, or Internet Explorer.
In Save for Web & Devices you also can view 
your image using the selected specifications in 
a browser window of your choice (e.g., Safari, 
Firefox, Internet Explorer, whatever is installed 
on your computer). In the Save for Web & 
Devices window, this option is located in the 
lower-left corner of the box, next to the Device 
Central button. See Figure 11–4.
As discussed in the Image Format section, there 
are general guidelines for what artwork is best saved in what format—photos as JPEGs, 
line art as GIFs. However, to determine the right file size and quality, you need to subtly 
adjust the options in the Save for Web & Devices dialog box. A simple adjustment to the 
bit depth of a GIF image, for example, can reduce the file size of an image immensely, 
resulting in a much more efficient Internet download. There are multiple options to 
choose from in the Save for Web & Devices dialog box, but don’t let that overwhelm 
you. When you are ready to learn about these options, review that information in 
the Photoshop Help files. For now, just learn some of the basics and trust your visual 
instincts when you start comparing and contrasting settings in the Save for Web & 
Devices dialog box—something you get the opportunity to do in Lesson 1: Preparing 
an Image for the Web.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

255
|  Chapter 11 |
OPTIMIZATION 
WORKFLOW TECHNIQUES
If you understand how optimization 
works and how to save an image with 
proper optimization settings, you know 
90% of the Web image publication 
process. However, for purposes of 
workflow—finding more efficient ways 
of doing a task—there are a couple of 
features related to optimization that 
might prove beneficial for you sooner 
rather than later. First is the ability to 
save and edit optimization settings (see 
Figure 11–5) and resize the image (pixel 
size) at export (see Figure 11–6).
Second, when you have many images 
that need to be saved with the same 
optimization setting, you can create 
a clever timesaver called a “droplet.” 
A droplet is a small application that 
automatically applies specific settings 
to a batch of images you drag over a droplet icon. Let’s say you just received 50 
high-resolution photos that need to be resized and converted to JPEG format, with 
a 60% compression. Moreover, the project needs to be done soon because the Web 
developer has to get the photos online (today) as part of the company’s new spring 
catalog. With a droplet action, you record the optimization specifications on one of 
the photos and then have Photoshop diligently execute the steps on the rest of the 
images (while you take a long lunch break, of course). To make a droplet with specific 
optimization settings, record your optimization settings as an action. Then, to execute 
the action, choose File > Automate > Create Droplet. See Figure 11–7 (on the next 
page). When you’re ready to execute the droplet action on images, drag a folder of 
images over the saved droplet.
I don’t cover the topic much in this book, but Photoshop has an Actions panel 
(Window > Actions) where you can record a series of individual actions 
(commands)—like the steps for saving an image to a particular size and format—
and then automatically run the action on batches of images. To practice creating 
a droplet in Photoshop, see the section Exploring on Your Own at the end of this 
chapter.
FIGURE | 11–5 |
Save and edit your optimization settings.
FIGURE | 11–6 |
Create a new size for the optimized image at export.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
256
LESSON 1: PREPARING AN IMAGE FOR THE WEB
In this lesson, you’ll optimally save a colorful photograph, originally in the TIFF 
format, of a quilt created by Karen Kamenetzky. You’ll use the settings in Photoshop’s 
Save for Web & Devices dialog box to prepare the image for Web publication.
Setting Up the File
 1. 
In Photoshop, choose File > Open and open chap11L1.tif in the chap11_lessons
folder.
 2. 
Press Shift-Tab to hide unneeded windows.
 3. 
Select View > Actual Pixels to be sure you are viewing the image at 100%.
 4. 
Familiarize yourself with the file’s specifications. Choose Image > Mode and be sure it is 
in RGB Color mode.
 5. 
Choose Image > Image Size and note the document size and resolution. Right now the 
image is saved at 150 ppi. When optimized it will be reduced to 72 ppi—the standard 
resolution for screen-based graphics. Do not make any changes, just click OK.
 6. 
Make a color adjustment to the image. Choose Image > Adjustments > Levels…, click 
on the Auto button and click OK, and then choose Image > Auto Color. Note the subtle 
but significant changes in the brightness and contrast (the vibrancy) of the image.
Setting the Save for Web Options
 1. 
Choose File > Save for Web & Devices, and select the 4-Up option on the tab in the 
upper-left corner of the window. A four-window view of the image becomes available. 
See Figure 11–8 and Figure 11–9.
FIGURE | 11–7 |
The Create Droplet options 
dialog box.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

257
|  Chapter 11 |
 2. 
Click on the top-left window to highlight it. A colored box appears around the image. 
Note that this window shows the original image at a file size of 456 KB. Also, note that 
Preset is set to Original in the information area to the right of the dialog box.
 3. 
Click on the window to the right of the first window. A colored frame will appear around 
the image, and the setting options for the image become available at the top right of 
the dialogue box.
 4. 
The viewing annotations at the bottom of the selected window provide valuable 
information about the optimization settings for that particular window. Those settings 
include format type, size, estimated download time, and Color table specifications.
 5. 
Note that the download time is determined by a specified Internet connection speed. 
By default, this is set to the standard modem speed, 56.6 kilobytes per second (Kbps). 
To change this setting, click on the icon with the triangle and four horizontal lines to the 
right of the listed download speed and duration. See Figure 11–10 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 11–8 |
Choose the 4-Up option to 
compare and contrast the image 
in four different windows.
FIGURE | 11–9 |
The full 4-Up window view.
T
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
258
6. 
Under Preset, leave it [Unnamed]. Then select the 
following options (see Figure 11–11):
 
▶Optimized file format: GIF
 
▶Color-reduction algorithm: Adaptive
 
▶Colors: 256
 
▶Dither algorithm: No Dither
 
▶Transparency: Uncheck
 
▶Interlaced: Uncheck
 
▶Matte: None
 
▶Web Snap: 0%
 
▶Lossy: 0
 7. 
The Color Table for the selected window indicates 
the colors being used in the image, which is 
determined by the color-reduction algorithm 
(Adaptive) and the maximum number of colors 
in the algorithm setting (256). Hover—do not 
click—your cursor over a swatch to reveal the color’s 
attributes, which appear in a long rectangular box 
near the bottom of the window. See Figure 11–12.
8. 
Select the third (bottom-left) window and adjust the 
settings differently, as follows:
 
▶Optimized file format: GIF
 
▶Color-reduction algorithm: Restrictive
 
▶Colors: Auto (the maximum number available)
 
▶Dither algorithm: Diffusion
 
▶Dither: 100%
 
▶Transparency: Uncheck
 
▶Interlaced: Uncheck
 
▶Matte: None
 
▶Web Snap: 0%
 
▶Lossy: 0
FIGURE | 11–10 |
Change the Internet connection speed to see how it affects the 
image’s download time.
FIGURE | 11–11 |
Set the optimization options.
 9. 
In the Color Table for the selected window, the swatches with a diamond in the middle 
indicate Web-safe colors. (For more information on Restrictive [Web] algorithm, see 
the section Color-Reduction Algorithm.) The others are in the general RGB color space. 
Hover—do not click—your cursor over one of the diamond swatches, and the Web-safe 
hexadecimal color number is revealed in the box described in step 7.
 10. 
Select the fourth window and alter its settings as follows:
 
▶Optimized file format: JPEG
 
▶Compression Quality: Maximum
 
▶Quality: 100
 
▶Progressive: Check
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

259
|  Chapter 11 |
 
▶Blur: 0
 
▶Matte: None
 
▶Embed Color Profile: Uncheck
Comparing and Contrasting Settings
 1. 
Take a close look at what each optimization setting does to the image. Magnify the 
windows with the Zoom tool (located to the left of the Save for Web & Devices window) 
or with the Zoom level (at the bottom, left of the window above the Device Central 
button) and really examine the artifacts of each compression scheme. Use the Hand tool 
to move the magnified image around in a window.
 2. 
Double-click on the Zoom tool icon to set the view of each window to the original 
image size. Which version looks best to you?
 3. 
Compare and contrast the viewing annotations at the bottom of each window. What 
are the size differences? Is the one that looks best to you a reasonable size for a quick 
download from the Internet (i.e., under 20 K)?
Getting Picky
 1. 
OK, let’s fine-tune and reduce the file size of the image even more. It definitely needs it. 
It is a beautifully complex image that could be worth the download wait time, but let’s 
make a version a user would be able to view relatively fast, even on a slower connection 
(i.e., 56 Kbps). Select the second window (top-right side).
 2. 
Change the color-reduction algorithm to Selective, and reduce the colors to 128. The 
file size is reduced, but it does not look any better, and the file size is still too large. The 
gradients of color on the rock formations are getting splotchy. This is because gradients 
are composed of several shades of color, so when the color palette is reduced, so are the 
number of colors needed to make the gradient look smooth.
FIGURE | 11–12 |
Hover over a swatch to reveal the color’s numeric attributes.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
260
 3. 
Look at window 4—the JPEG. The gradient here looks good, 
but the file size is too big. How can we fix it?
 4. 
Select window 4 and change the JPEG compression quality 
to Medium. Great! The file size is smaller and the image still 
looks relatively acceptable (compare it to the first window—
the original file). It’s still pretty big, however. Let’s get it 
under 20 KB.
 5. 
In the Image Size area (below the Color Table), reduce the 
resize percentage to 75%. See Figure 11–13.
6. 
Click the planet icon or the Preview button (both located at 
the bottom of the window) to view the optimized image in 
a browser. This is the ultimate test of how good it looks. See 
Figure 11–14 and Figure 11–15. Close the browser window.
Note: You might need to choose Other in the browser 
options menu (click on the double arrow next to the 
planet icon) to find a browser you have installed on your 
computer. I like to check my image in several browser 
types—Internet Explorer, Safari, and Firefox—because 
you never know which browser will be used to view the 
image.
 7. 
Make sure the bottom-right window is highlighted, 
and select Save to save this version of the file. Name it 
webimage.jpg and for format (Save as type), choose 
Images Only. Save the file in your folder chap11_lessons.
 
 
FIGURE | 11–13 |
Scale down your optimized image to decrease its file size.
FIGURE | 11–14 |
From the Select Browser Menu, select the 
browser in which you want to view the 
image.
FIGURE | 11–15 |
Example of details revealed 
when an image is viewed in a 
browser window.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

261
|  Chapter 11 |
Note: If you do not want to save the file right away, choose Done rather than 
Save. This will close the Save for Web window but maintain your optimization 
settings.
 8. 
Save and close the lesson.
IMAGE SLICING
Image slicing is dividing up areas of an image or a complete Web page layout 
into smaller, independent files. If you are familiar with constructing Web pages, 
and working in HTML, you probably have an understanding of the benefits of 
slicing. If you are new to Web page design and development, this might seem like a 
somewhat crazy thing to do to your artwork, but slicing is useful for the following 
reasons:
 
▶Creating accurate HTML table placement
 
▶Creating independent files, each containing its own optimization settings
 
▶Creating smaller, independent files for faster download
 
▶Creating interactive effects, such as button rollovers
LESSON 2: SLICING A WEB PAGE NAVIGATION BAR
In this lesson, you prepare a navigation bar for placement in a Web page. Using 
Photoshop’s Slice tool, you will slice and optimize areas of the layout for optimal Web 
performance.
Setting Up the File
 1. 
Open chap11L2.psd located in the folder chap11_lessons. If a Missing Color Profile 
warning appears, click OK.
 2. 
Choose View > Actual Pixels.
 3. 
Press Shift-Tab to hide unneeded panels, if not already hidden.
 4. 
Choose Window > Layers. Note that there is one layer available, called nav–bar.
 5. 
To turn the guides on, choose View > Show > Guides, if not already checked. Guides 
have been created for you to indicate where the slices will be made. See Figure 11–16.
FIGURE | 11–16 |
The guides help to accurately 
create image slices.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
262
Making Slices
 1. 
To turn the slices on, choose View > Show > Slices, if not already 
checked.
 2. 
Select the Slice tool in the toolbox (located under the Crop tool). See 
Figure 11–17.
  3. 
Position the pointed end of the Slice tool in the upper-left corner of the 
image and click and drag to the right, defining a box around the swirl 
logo and top header section (do not include the yellow bar of “nav” 
buttons at the bottom). See Figure 11–18. Note that a number for the 
slice is indicated in the upper-left corner of the defined box. To hide/
show slices, choose View > Show > Slices.
FIGURE | 11–17 |
Select the Slice tool.
FIGURE | 11–18 |
Define a slice with the 
Slice tool.
FIGURE | 11–19 |
Create six more slices, using the 
guides for accurate placement.
Note: When you make slices, you do not actually “cut up” your artwork. Instead 
you create an overlay of divided areas that determines how the individual files will 
be created when saving the document. Slicing always occurs in a grid-like pattern. 
Even if you do not define a slice in a particular area, Photoshop automatically 
creates one to maintain the structure necessary for exporting into an HTML page.
 4. 
With the Slice tool, slice around each button area in the lower part of the navigation bar. 
There will be six slices across the bottom: a slice defining each of the four buttons and 
one on each edge. Use the guides to get accurate placement. See Figure 11–19.
Note: Don’t worry if you make a mistake. Just use Edit > Undo, or choose Edit > 
Step Backward a few times, if necessary and try your slice again.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

263
|  Chapter 11 |
 5. 
Each individual slice can be modified. From the toolbar, choose the 
Slice Select tool (under the Slice tool, as shown in Figure 11–20), and 
then click on the slice you want to alter. You can resize it with the 
handles in each corner of the selection, move it, or delete it.
 6. 
With the Slice Select tool, select the Contact slice area.
 7. 
There are also options for selecting individual slices. Double-click on 
the Contact slice area. In the Slice Options window, change the name 
for the sliced area to contact_button, make up a link (URL), such as 
contactpage.html, and an Alt Tag contact_button. Leave the rest 
of the options set to the defaults. Then, click OK. See Figure 11–21.
 8. 
Choose File > Save for Web & Devices. Select 
Preview the optimized image in a browser 
option (at the bottom of window) and choose 
a browser to view the sliced image. Place your 
cursor over the word Contact to see that the 
area is now being interpreted as a link (the 
little hand cursor shows up). This occurs when 
you add a link (URL) to the slice in the Slice 
Options panel. Close the browser window and 
the Save for Web & Devices window.
 9. 
Choose File > Save As, and save your file in 
your lessons folder.
Optimizing and Saving the Slices
 1. 
To optimize and save the images, choose File > 
Save for Web & Devices.
 2. 
Choose the 2-Up window option.
 3. 
Select the Slice Select tool located on the left 
side of the window. See Figure 11–22.
 4. 
Select slice number 1 in the lower window. It will highlight in yellow 
or appear with a lightened screen. Adjust the optimization settings of 
this sliced area. We chose JPEG, Medium, Quality: 50 because of the 
many gradations of color in the header and logo graphics.
 5. 
Select the first button area (Home) and adjust the optimization 
settings. We chose GIF, Selective, No Dither, and reduced the Colors to 
16, producing a very efficient graphic.
 6. 
Select each of the other slices and optimize them to your liking. 
Balance the image file size with visual appeal.
 7. 
To view the final, optimized work, turn off the Toggle Slices Visibility in 
the tools area to the left of the window. See Figure 11–23 (on the next 
page).
 8. 
OK, we are almost there. Choose Save in the Save for Web & Devices 
window.
FIGURE | 11–20 |
Choose the Slice Select tool to select and modify 
slices.
FIGURE | 11–21 |
The Slice panel options to modify individual slices.
FIGURE | 11–22 |
Select the Slice Select tool.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
264
 9. 
In the Save Optimized As box, enter the 
following:
 
▶Save As: mynavbar.jpg
 
▶Format (Save as type): Images Only
 
▶Where: Your lessons folder
 
▶Settings: Default Settings
 
▶Slices: All Slices
 10. 
Wait—before you hit Save, I want to show 
you something. Under Settings, choose 
Other. In Output Settings, choose the Saving 
Files option. In the Optimized Files options, 
make sure Put Images in Folder is checked 
and that images is indicated for the folder 
name. Then click OK. See Figure 11–24.
11. 
Hit Save to save the individual files to the 
images folder you specified. The images 
folder will be located in your lessons folder. 
Minimize the Photoshop program and 
find this folder. Open it up and, voila, all of 
your sliced images are there and ready to 
be placed into an HTML Web page. See 
Figure 11–25.
GIF ANIMATION
Photoshop offers features to create simple 
animations for Web publication.
LESSON 3: CREATING A WEB 
ANIMATION
In this lesson, you’ll prepare an animated GIF 
for a vintage aircraft Web page. Using the 
Animation panel, you will move a number of 
elements to give the illusion of motion and 
flight.
Setting Up the File
 1. 
Open chap11L3.psd located in the folder 
chap11_lessons.
 2. 
In the toolbox, double-click on the Hand 
tool to expand the working window.
FIGURE | 11–23 |
Option to toggle the 
Slices Visibility.
FIGURE | 11–25 |
Find your saved images 
on your computer.
FIGURE | 11–24 |
The Saving Files options in Output Settings.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

265
|  Chapter 11 |
 3. 
Double-click on the Zoom tool in the toolbox. Now, you 
have plenty of space to work in. See Figure 11–26.
 4. 
Be sure View > Snap is checked. This option will allow 
you to snap the layers easily to the sides of the canvas.
 5. 
Choose Window > Animation to open the Animation 
panel. By default, the Animation panel opens up at the 
bottom of the screen. Here you will see two frames: the 
first frame shows all of the layers, and the second frame 
shows only the Sky layer. See Figure 11–27.
Animating the Layers
 1. 
Select the Move tool in the toolbox.
 2. 
With the Sky layer highlighted in the Layers panel and 
your Move tool selected, click and drag the sky image in 
the working window slowly to the left. As you position 
the image, you will notice the image moves to the left 
and eventually snaps to the right edge. When it snaps, 
you are done with the move. Holding down Shift will 
keep it aligned top-to-bottom. See Figure 11–28.
Note: You may be thinking, “It looks exactly the 
same . . . what’s going on?” Remember, looks can be 
deceiving. The reason for making them look exactly 
the same has to do with making the animation loop. 
Looping an animation is a great way to catch the 
attention of a viewer and minimize the file’s size. You 
will soon find out what I mean.
 3. 
In the Layers panel, turn on the layer visibility (the 
eyeball) of the Background layer and highlight the layer. 
See Figure 11–29.
FIGURE | 11–26 |
Zoomed out version of the file—now, lots of room to work!
FIGURE | 11–27 |
Animation panel shows two frames.
FIGURE | 11–28 |
Move the sky image to the left until it snaps.
FIGURE | 11–29 |
Make the Background layer visible and select it.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
266
 4. 
Using the Move tool, click and drag the purple mountains to 
the left like the Sky layer previously. It may take multiple click-
and-drags to move the mountains until they snap to the right 
edge. If the mountains (Background layer) suddenly disappear, 
and all you see is blue sky, choose Edit > Undo and move the 
mountains again but not as far to the left. You want to snap 
the bottom-right corner of the mountains to the bottom-right 
corner of the canvas. See Figure 11–30.
 5. 
In the Layers panel, turn on the layer visibility for the Plane layer 
and Foreground layer.
 6. 
Click on the Foreground layer to highlight it.
 7. 
Again using the Move tool, click and drag the brown foreground 
cliffs to the left and snap the bottom-right corner of the layer to 
the bottom-right corner of the canvas. This is a long drag and 
may take multiple click-and-drags to move the cliffs all the way 
to the left. See Figure 11–31.
 8. 
In the Animation panel, you will notice the two frames are 
identical. Now, we are ready to create the animation. See Figure 
11–32. To do this, you will have Photoshop create additional 
frames between the two frames we just created. This is called 
“tweening” in the animation industry. Traditional animations, 
created by such studios as Disney and Warner Brothers, had 
many frames drawn in between key frames (the two frames 
in the Animation panel would be considered “key frames”) to 
create the illusion of motion. These “tween” frames were drawn 
by artists called “in-betweeners.”
 9. 
In the Animation panel, click on the Tweens animation frames 
icon. See Figure 11–33.
 10. 
In the Tween window, Tween With should be set to Previous 
Frame, Frames to Add is 58, Layers is All Layers, and all 
Parameters (Position, Opacity, and Effects) should be checked. 
See Figure 11–34. Click OK.
 11. 
You will notice a lot more frames appear in the Animation panel. 
Those frames are created by our in-betweener—Photoshop. See 
Figure 11–35.
FIGURE | 11–30 |
Snap the Background layer object into position.
FIGURE | 11–31 |
Snap the Foreground layer object into position.
FIGURE | 11–32 |
Snap the Foreground layer object into position.
FIGURE | 11–33 |
Click the Tweens animation frames icon.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

267
|  Chapter 11 |
12. 
Want to see how it looks? In the Animation panel, click the Plays 
animation button. See Figure 11–36. There goes your plane 
flying through a canyon. Pretty nifty! Click the Stops animation 
button (same location as the Plays animation button). To learn 
more about the animation feature of Photoshop, choose Help 
> Photoshop Help > Video and animation.
Saving the Animated GIF
 1. 
Choose File > Save for Web & Devices.
 2. 
Under Preset, leave it [Unnamed]. Then select the following 
options (see Figure 11–37 on the next page):
 
▶Optimized file format: GIF
 
▶Color-reduction algorithm: Selective
 
▶Dither algorithm: No Dither
 
▶Transparency: Uncheck
 
▶Interlaced: Uncheck
FIGURE | 11–34 |
Select options in the Tween 
window.
FIGURE | 11–35 |
Photoshop creates all the in-between frames—alright!
FIGURE | 11–36 |
Click play to view your animation.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
268
 
▶Colors: 16
 
▶Matte: None
 
▶Web Snap: 0%
 
▶Lossy: 0
 3. 
Preview the optimized image in a browser (select this option at the bottom of window), 
and choose a browser to view the animated GIF. See Figure 11–38. Close the browser 
window.
 4. 
Click Save. Name it plane.gif. For Format (Mac) or Save as type (Windows), choose 
Images Only. Save the file in your chap11_lessons folder.
FIGURE | 11–37 |
Save options for the animated 
GIF.
FIGURE | 11–38 |
View the animated GIF in a browser.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

269
|  Chapter 11 |
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
Yeah, I know, you are probably all excited now—at least, I hope so—about using Photoshop. Creating, 
 adjusting, and preparing images for print and Web publication is no longer such a deep, dark secret.
1. 
Describe image optimization. What three interrelated areas must 
be considered in the Web optimization process?
2. 
What is dithering?
3. 
Photographs are best saved in what format? What about graphics 
with solid colors and line art?
4. 
What image formats use color-reduction algorithms and why?
5. 
When would you use the WBMP format?
6. 
How many bytes are in a kilobyte? Why is that important to know?
7. 
Name at least two things you can do in the animation panel.
8. 
Name three useful things about slicing images.
9. 
Where do sliced images go once you save them?
10. 
What is so useful about a droplet?
1. 
For information about Web graphics with Photoshop, spend some time in the Help files (Help > Photoshop 
Help > Web graphics).
2. 
Using what you have learned about the Save for Web & Devices window, decide which optimization 
settings are best for the example artwork, fig1.tif, located in the folder chap11_lessons/samples.
3. 
Automate the optimization process by learning how to make a droplet in Photoshop (File > Automate > 
Create Droplet). For more information about making a droplet, refer to Help > Photoshop Help and search 
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
270
for “Create a droplet from an action.” Use 
the batch of images located in the folder 
chap11_lessons/samples. See Figure 11–39.
4. 
Create a Web photo gallery. I admit, this is 
a really cool thing! A Web gallery is a quick 
way to create a Web page or presentation 
that showcases a series of digital images 
or photos. The features for making web 
galleries are now located in the Adobe 
Bridge program as part of the Adobe 
Output Module (AOM). For more details on 
getting to AOM in Bridge see Chapter 10’s 
Exploring on Your Own section, #5. Once 
in the AOM in Bridge follow these steps:
 
a.  Choose the Web Gallery option in 
the Output panel. Choose a Template 
and Style. See Figure 11–40.
 
b.  On the left side of the Bridge program 
be sure the Folders panel is open. Scroll 
for a folder on your computer that 
contains images or photographs (For 
practice you may use the images located 
in the chap11_lessons/samples 
folder.) Once the folder is selected, the 
images should appear in the Content 
panel at the bottom of the Bridge 
program. See Figure 11–41, #1 and #2.
 
c.  Hold down the Shift key on your 
keyboard and select any number of 
images in the folder for your web gallery. 
Refer to Figure 11–41, #2 again.
 
d.  Scroll to the bottom of the Output panel 
to the Create Gallery section. Choose 
Save to Disk and browse to a location 
where you would like to save your web 
gallery (refer to Figure 11–41, #3). Click 
Save. An Adobe Web Gallery folder will be created in the location you specified. Go to the folder and 
double click on the HTML document inside to view the web gallery in a browser See Figure 11–42 for an 
example of a finished web gallery and also chap11_lessons/samples/Adobe Web Gallery Example.
Note: There are many other options in the Web Gallery panel that you can set before outputing your 
Web gallery, such as site information, color, and appearance. Also, be sure to try out the numerous 
templates available.
FIGURE | 11–40 |
The Output panel in Bridge with the Web Gallery option selected.
FIGURE | 11–39 |
Drag a folder of images to a droplet 
to automatically optimize the 
images.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

271
|  Chapter 11 |
FIGURE | 11–41 |
1. Browse for some 
images on your 
computer. 2. Select the 
images in the Content 
panel. 3. Set options 
for the Web Gallery and 
Save to Disk.
FIGURE | 11–42 |
An example of a Web 
gallery.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Explorer PAGES
| Web Publishing |
272
Glenn Mitsui
“Learn aggressively. Make the technology end of what you 
do go away with your skill in the programs. This will allow 
you to create freely because you know what is possible. This 
is when the real magic happens. Think of the obvious, then 
throw it away. Your ideas have to be better, be two steps 
ahead. That’s when you surprise people; that’s when you 
surprise yourself.”
About Glenn Mitsui
Glenn Mitsui was born and raised in Seattle, WA. He 
attended Seattle Central Community College, studying 
graphic design/illustration. One class short of graduating, 
Glenn took the graveyard shift at Boeing where he learned 
technical illustration on the computer. After earning enough 
money to buy a Datsun 280Z, he left Boeing and opened 
Studio MD in Seattle with friends Jesse Doquilo, Randy Lim, 
and Cindy Chin. Glenn became the studio illustrator, doing 
work for various magazines, newspapers, and corporations. 
Studio MD flourished for 10 years until 1.5 million gallons 
of water flooded the entire business in 1998. Since then, 
Glenn began looking at things differently as a close friend 
comforted him with these words, “This is a baptism, baby, 
time to start over.”
Glenn continued to work as a freelance illustrator. His 
work concentrated on editorial illustrations for clients 
such as the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, the 
Los Angeles Times, Atlantic Monthly, PCWorld, Time, and 
Discovery Magazine. His work has been honored by the 
Society of Illustrators, HOW, Graphis, and Print. In 2002, 
he was inducted into the NAPP Photoshop Hall of Fame. 
In his spare time, Glenn is president and co-founder of a 
program called LINK. Its aim is to bring various artists in 
the community together, connecting them with inner city 
high school students to help expand their art awareness in 
monthly Saturday workshops. For the past 11 years, LINK has 
provided funding to help over 50 students attend college.
Glenn’s work has evolved from editorial illustration to fine 
art. It is used in concert settings, church services, and 
installation pieces. His latest venture, the Organica project, is 
a collaboration with musicians to visually score their music. 
It includes a full-length DVD of moving pictures set to the 
ambient music of Dan Phelps. Visit Glenn’s Web site to learn 
more about his exciting work: http://www.glennmitsui.com/.
Upstream. Compliments of Glenn Mitsui.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

273
|  Chapter 11 |
About the Work of Glenn Mitsui
Glenn shares his process for creating the Family image: “The 
Family image is homage to a good friend’s father who passed 
away. He was an amazing man who enjoyed life to the fullest 
and left behind a legacy of a wonderful family. His stem was 
not strong enough to support his petals, but his roots will 
grow forever.
“This piece was done entirely in Photoshop. The process 
is quite simple, no filters, no real amazing techniques. A 
lot of this piece is grounded in what feels right. The flower 
and roots were drawn with the Pen tool in Photoshop. The 
petals were also drawn using the Pen tool, then filled with a 
gradation. The wavy lines were drawn with a regular pencil 
on paper, then scanned. The textures are layered on top of 
each other until they look right. Cement, paper, linen, papyrus, 
rusted metal, paint, graphite streaks all combined till it feels 
right. I love the different variations you go through to get 
something you like. The trick is knowing when it is done, 
when can you walk away and feel satisfied. Then all you have 
to do is find someone who shares your sense of beauty.”
Gesthemene. Compliments of Glenn Mitsui.
Family. Compliments of Glenn Mitsui.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Web Publishing |
274
Explorer PAGES, continued
Charlene Chua
“I start sketching out my ideas, sometimes with a pencil 
and paper, and other times straight into Photoshop. I use 
a Wacom Cintiq, which is basically a monitor that you can 
draw on, and this allows me to directly convert the ideas in 
my head into a digital format.”
About Charlene Chua
Charlene Chua spent her youth growing up in Singapore, 
where she divided her time between drawing, reading 
comics, and failing her Mandarin classes. She started 
her working life in 1998 as a Web designer, and went on 
to become a senior graphic designer, Web producer, and 
interactive project manager, with companies like Ogilvy 
Interactive and The Gate Worldwide. She decided to 
pursue illustration as a career in 2003, eventually moving to 
full-time illustration in 2006. 
Since then she has worked with clients from North America, 
Europe, Singapore, and Australia on a wide variety of 
illustration projects. Her work has appeared in the Society of 
Illustrators of Los Angeles’ Illustration West 43 and 45, 
American Illustration Tribute, and Ballistic Publishing’s 
Exotique 4, as well as several other art books. She illustrated 
the children’s picture book Julie Black Belt for Immedium 
Publishing, and the short stories “Eidolon” and “Worn” for 
Image comic’s Liquid City anthology.
Courtesy of Charlene Chua.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

275
|  Chapter 11 |
Other times the idea is more complicated and abstract, 
requiring an interesting visual solution for conveying less 
tangible subjects, like emotions.
I start sketching out my ideas, sometimes with a pencil and
 paper, and other times straight into Photoshop. I use a 
Wacom Cintiq, which is basically a monitor that you can 
draw on, and this allows me to directly convert the ideas in 
my head into a digital format. Right now, I find I like coming 
up with ideas and compositions in rough thumbnails that I 
doodle on paper, and then creating a more polished sketch 
in Photoshop.
Once I have a working sketch, I import this into Illustrator and 
start creating the final colored artwork. Before discovering 
Illustrator (and prior to that, Freehand), I had been trying to 
teach myself how to work with the airbrush. I played around 
with that in my teens and loved it, but was also constantly 
frustrated by how difficult it was to control the tool. Freehand 
and Illustrator offered me a solution that let me achieve 
what I wanted to do with the airbrush, and more. As time 
went by I got more used to working with these two programs 
rather than Photoshop. I do use Photoshop a lot, though, for 
sketching and for applying final effects and textures to my 
artwork. 
I work mostly with the Pen tool in Illustrator. I use it to draw 
shapes based on the sketch, and to create additional shapes 
to add shadows and highlights to a piece. I am a big fan of 
using clipping masks; again, this is similar to something I used 
to do with the airbrush that I enjoyed but found extremely 
tedious. I tend to work with quite a few layers set to Multiply 
to build up soft shadows, and several in Screen or Soft Light 
for highlights (although this may not be necessary with the 
newer gradient features in CS5).
In 2007 she moved to Toronto, Canada, with her husband and 
two cats. She now spends her time illustrating, working on 
comics, watching video games, and telling people her last 
name is ‘choo-wah’, not choo, chui, choi, chew... 
Learn more about Charlene at: http://www.charlenechua.com
About the Work of Charlene Chua
Every piece I do begins with an idea. My ideas are usually 
not very conceptual, but I do usually have to think about what 
I am going to do and start from there. Sometimes the idea is 
very simple and straightforward – a picture of a couple of kids
 eating ice cream, a landscape with trees, mountains, and forests. 
Courtesy of Charlene Chua.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
| A New Dimension |
(for Photoshop CS5 
Extended version users)
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A NEW DIMENSION
12
277
charting your course
Photoshop has always been known as a 2D image manipulation program, but that has changed. 
Photoshop CS5 Extended can support transformation, material editing, and texture mapping on 
simple three-dimensional (3D) objects available within the program or imported from 3D authoring 
programs. The world of 3D modeling and animation can be a full-time study; in this chapter you’ll 
explore some basic concepts and discover what Photoshop CS5 Extended has to offer.
goals
In this chapter you will:
 
▶
Transform objects in three dimensions
 
▶
Practice moving in camera view
 
▶
Place materials and textures onto an object
 
▶
Explore the 3D scene properties panel
 
▶
Convert a 2D image into a 3D model
 
▶
Import a 3D model
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
278
X, Y, AND Z
In traditional 3D (three-dimensional) modeling and animation authoring programs, 
such as DAZ Bryce, Autodesk’s Maya and 3ds Max, Softimage, or NewTek Lightwave, 
you model and animate objects in a virtual space made up of three axes: X, Y, and 
Z. When working in the 3D default view in Photoshop, the ground plan (horizontal 
orientation) is made up of the X (red) and the Y (green) axes and 
the vertical orientation (up and down) is the Z-axis (blue). The 
three axes can be represented by placing your hand palm up and 
extending the middle finger straight up. See Figure 12–1.
Photoshop Extended simulates working in three dimensions 
with tools and commands that transform (scale, rotate, move), 
apply materials and textures, change the lighting or render 
modes (from solid to wireframe, for example) to pre-constructed 
3D models. Photoshop places 3D models on a separate “3D 
Layer,” a discrete entity in the Layers panel that behaves like any 
other layer. It can have effects and blending modes applied to it, 
be masked, and so on. See Figure 12–2. 
There are numerous primitive 3D shapes available in Photoshop 
that you can add to your 2D scenes, such as cone, cylinder, 
sphere, donut, soda can, etc. However, you can also open and 
work with 3D files (.u3d, 3ds, .obj, .kmz [Google Earth], and .dae 
[Collada] file formats) created in programs like Adobe Acrobat 
3D version 8, or Autodesk’s 3ds Max or Maya. However, to edit a 
3D model itself (alter its polygonal structure, for example), you 
must use a traditional 3D authoring program.
o
t
t
e
w
m
L
o
b
FIGURE | 12–1 |
The default positioning of the three axes in 
Photoshop are Z (blue) on the vertical plane and 
X (red) and Y (green) on the horizontal plane.
FIGURE | 12–2 |
Photoshop places a 3D object on its 
own layer in the Layers panel.
LESSON 1: TRANSFORMING IN X, Y, AND Z
In this lesson, you’ll practice moving, scaling, and rotating a 3D 
object and then practice orbiting around the object in camera 
view.
Creating and Moving a 3D Object
 1. 
In Photoshop choose File > New, call it my_cube and under 
Preset select the Default Photoshop Size. Click OK.
 2. 
Choose the 3D Workspace option. See Figure 12–3.
 3. 
From the menu bar choose 3D > New Shape from Layer > Cube. 
Note that there are plenty of other simple 3D Objects to choose 
from (Donut, Hat, Soda Can), but those are for you to play with 
later. See Figure 12–4. 
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

279
|  Chapter 12 |
Note: If you get a “To speed-up the 3D import ...” warning, 
choose Continue (see Figure 12-5). However, in the future if 
you need to adjust 3D Preferences, such as rendering options, 
RAM and file loading usage, and 3D Overlay colors, choose 
Photoshop > Preferences > 3D (Mac) or Edit > Preferences > 3D 
(Windows). See Figure 12-6.
 4. 
In the toolbox, select the 3D Object Rotate tool. See Figure 12–7.
 5. 
An interactive indicator representing the three axes appears at the 
top left of your workspace (if the 3D axis indicator is not visible, 
choose View > Show > 3D Axis). You will play with this 3D axis 
indicator to perform transformations on the object. Click on the 
gray bar at top of the axis indicator and drag it over the center of 
the cube shape. See Figure 12–8 (on the next page).
FIGURE | 12–3 |
Select the Advanced 3D Workspace.
FIGURE | 12–4 |
The 3D options from the menu bar.
FIGURE | 12–5 |
An example of a 3D Preferences warning.
FIGURE | 12–6 |
The 3D Preferences window.
FIGURE | 12–7 |
Select the 3D Rotate tool from the toolbox.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
280
 8. 
Click on the cone of the x-axis indicator (placing your mouse over 
it changes it from red to yellow) and drag right and left. You are 
moving the object along the x-axis of virtual space. See Figure 12–12.
 9. 
Click the Home button again to start over. Refer to Figure 12–11 
again.
 10. 
Click on the cone of the y-axis indicator (placing your mouse over 
it changes it from green to yellow) and drag left and right. You are 
moving the object along the y-axis of virtual space. See Figure 12–13.
11. 
  Click the Home button again.
Note: It’s not necessary to move the 3D axis indicator 
over the object to have it work effectively; this is 
simply to better illustrate how moving, scaling, and 
rotating the object (which originates from its center 
in this instance) will be affected on the x, y, and z axes. 
While you are practicing, be sure the cube is set at the 
“Default” position so it matches the steps and visuals 
in this lesson. See Figure 12–9.
 6. 
Let’s first play with moving the object. On the indicator 
the blue arrow represents the “z” axis, the green arrow the 
“y” axis, and the red arrow the “x” axis. Click on the cone-
like shape at the top of the z axis indicator (placing your 
mouse over it changes it from blue to yellow) and drag 
up and down. See Figure 12–10. With this method, you 
are moving the object in virtual space along the “z” axis.
 7. 
Click the Home button to return the object to its initial 
position. See Figure 12–11.
FIGURE | 12–8 |
Position the 3D axis indicator over the cube.
FIGURE | 12–10 |
Move the object along the z-axis.
FIGURE | 12–11 |
Click the Home button to return the object to its initial position.
FIGURE | 12–9 |
Be sure the cube is set to the default position.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

281
|  Chapter 12 |
Scale the Object
 1. 
To scale an object uniformly, move your mouse over the 
cube in the middle of the axes indicator until it turns 
yellow, click on it, and drag up and down. See Figure 12–14.
 2. 
Click the Home button.
 3. 
Click on the blue cube on the z-axis and drag up and 
down to scale along the z plane. See Figure 12–15.
 4. 
Click the Home button.
FIGURE | 12–12 |
Move the object along the x-axis.
FIGURE | 12–13 |
Move the object along the y-axis.
FIGURE | 12–14 |
Click and drag up or down on the center of the 
axis indicator to scale the object uniformly.
FIGURE | 12–15 |
Scale along the z-axis.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
282
 5. 
Click on the red cube on the x-axis and drag right and 
left to scale along the x plane. See Figure 12–16.
 6. 
Click the Home button.
 7. 
Click on the green cube on the y-axis and drag left 
and right to scale along the y plane. See Figure 12–17.
 8. 
Reset to Home again.
Rotate the Object
 1. 
Now, practice rotating the object. Click on the 
elongated blue rectangular shape between the cube 
and cone shape on the z-axis (placing your mouse 
over it changes it to a yellow circle that wraps around 
the center of the axis indicator). Drag the mouse in a 
circular motion and note that the degree of rotation is 
tracked by a dark blue highlight. See Figure 12–18.
Note: While the rotation is being initiated from 
the z-axis, its path is circling around the x-axis. This 
is noted numerically in the x orientation field on 
the options bar. See Figure 12–19.
 2. 
Click the Home button to return to the cube’s original 
position.
 3. 
Next, click on the elongated red rectangular shape 
between the cube and cone shape on the x-axis 
(placing your mouse over it changes it to a yellow 
circle that wraps around the center of the axis 
FIGURE | 12–16 |
Scale along the x-axis. 
FIGURE | 12–17 |
Scale along the y-axis.
FIGURE | 12–18 |
Rotation of the object.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

283
|  Chapter 12 |
indicator). Drag the mouse in a circular motion 
and note that the rotation is tracked by a dark red 
highlight. See Figure 12–20. Also, note the numeric 
rotation in the y-orientation field on the options bar.
 4. 
Reset back to Home.
5. 
Next, click on the elongated green rectangular 
shape between the cube and cone shape on the 
y-axis (placing your mouse over it changes it to a 
yellow circle that wraps around the center of the axis 
indicator.). Drag the mouse in a circular motion and 
note that the rotation is tracked by a green highlight. 
See Figure 12–21. Also, note the numeric rotation in 
the z-orientation field on the options bar.
 6. 
Click the Home button again. Now that you’ve 
explored moving, scaling, and rotating the object 
in each dimension, you can practice multiple 
transformations with more confidence.
Note: You have been practicing transformations 
on a 3D object using the axis indicator. You can 
also transform by clicking a specific 3D tool in 
the toolbox or options bar. See Figure 12–22 and 
Figure 12–23 (both on the next page). Move the 
axis indicator away from the scene by clicking on 
its gray bar, and try each 3D tool to familiarize 
yourself with this method of transforming. Options 
include:
 
▶3D Object Rotate – constrains the rotation of 
an object around the X, Y, or Z-axis
 
▶3D Object Roll – rolls an object two-
dimensionally in the front-facing view
 
▶3D Object Pan – moves an object right/left 
and/or up/down
 
▶3D Object Slide – moves an object with 
perspective right/left and/or away/toward
 
▶3D Object Scale – scales an object uniformly
Also explore what happens when you change the 
position of the object, which alters its default view 
as you apply transformations, such as Left, Right, 
Top, Bottom, Back, and Front views of the object. 
Refer to Figure 12–9.
FIGURE | 12–20 |
Rotation of the object around the y-axis.
FIGURE | 12–21 |
Rotation of the object around the z-axis.
FIGURE | 12–19 |
Rotation initiated from the z-axis orients around the x-axis, 
as shown in the numeric orientation field for the x-axis.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
284
Moving in Camera View
In the first part of this lesson, you practiced transforming the actual object; in this 
section you will practice moving around the object as if you were viewing it through a 
video camera.
 1. 
Let’s explore the camera view with a different object. Close and don’t save the my_cube 
file you were working on previously. In Photoshop choose File > New, call it my_hat, 
and under Preset select the Default Photoshop Size. Choose OK.
 2. 
Check that the 3D Workspace option is selected. Refer to Figure 12–3.
 3. 
From the menu bar, choose 3D > New Shape from Layer > Hat. Leave the axis indicator 
away from the scene; we will play with each camera view by selecting the tools from the 
toolbox or options bar, rather than using the indicator. See Figure 12–24.
 4. 
In the toolbox, select the 3D Rotate Camera tool. See Figure 12–25 and note the little 
video camera visual in the upper-right corner of the tools icon. Place your cursor over 
the object and click and drag up/down and right/left; imagine you are an acrobatic 
camera operator orbiting around the object in all directions.
FIGURE | 12–22 |
Select a 3D tool, such as the 3D 
Object Scale tool, from the 
toolbox.
FIGURE | 12–24 |
A 3D hat object – leave the axis 
indicator away from the scene.
FIGURE | 12–23 |
You can also select a 3D tool, such as the 3D Object Scale tool, from the options bar.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

285
|  Chapter 12 |
 5. 
Click on the Home button.
 6. 
Try the other Camera movement tools by selecting each one from the 
toolbox or the options bar. Remember to click the Home button between 
each movement to set the camera back to its default position. See Figure 
12–26.
 
 
Options include:
 
▶3D Rotate Camera to easily view all sides of the object, the tool 
adds a spinning action to the camera’s motion
 
▶3D Roll Camera rolls/tilts the camera two-dimensionally in the 
front-facing view
 
▶3D Pan Camera– moves the camera right/left and/or up/down
 
▶3D Walk Camera – simulates a viewer walking right/left and/or away/toward 
the object
 
▶3D Zoom Camera– simulates a viewer walking away/toward the object
 7. 
Close the my_hat file. There is no need to save it.
FIGURE | 12–25 |
Select the 3D Rotate Camera tool – note the 
video camera icon next to the tool’s icon.
FIGURE | 12–26 |
Select other camera view 
options from the toolbox or 
options bar.
FIGURE | 12–27 |
In the 3D Panel choose 
the Filter By: Whole 
scene option.
LESSON 2: MAPPING A 
TEXTURE AND ADJUSTING 
MATERIAL SETTINGS
In this lesson, you’ll map a logo to a 3D wine 
bottle model and adjust its material settings.
 1. 
In Photoshop choose File > New, call it my_
bottle, and under Preset select the Default 
Photoshop Size. Choose OK.
 2. 
Choose the 3D or Reset > 3D Workspace 
option. Refer to Figure 12–3.
 3. 
From the menu bar choose 3D > New Shape 
from Layer > Wine Bottle.
 4. 
Select the Filter By: Whole scene option in 
the 3D Panel. See Figure 12–27.
 5. 
Select the 3D Camera Zoom tool. See 
Figure 12–28 (on the next page). Over the 
wine bottle, click and drag down with the 
tool to zoom in closer to the object.
t
s
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
286
 6. 
Let’s map a label around the wine bottle—a 2D image of the 
wine label you explored in Adventures in Design: Wine Box 
Composition. From  the Scene List in the 3D panel choose 
the Label_Material layer; the panel changes to the Material 
options mode. See Figure 12–29.
Note: The way we perceive the material or texture of an 
actual object is related to how light hits its surface. In the 
virtual world it’s the same. However, in the virtual world 
we can control this effect in Photoshop’s 3D (Materials) 
panel, where we can adjust surface characteristics such as 
Ambience, Refraction, Diffusion, Bump textures, Glossiness, 
Opacity, and Reflectivity as we see fit. In this short chapter 
on 3D, we will not cover the specifics of each characteristic, 
but feel free to play with the options. Note, however, that 
many of the options will not be visible directly in Photoshop; 
they must be rendered into a final image. See Rendering 
options in the Exploring on Your Own section at the end of 
this chapter.
 7. 
Under the Diffuse options choose Load Texture. See Figure 12–30. 
Open the wine_label.jpg found in the chap12_lessons/
lesson2 folder.
FIGURE | 12–28 |
Select the 3D Zoom Camera tool.
FIGURE | 12–29 |
Choose the Label_Material layer.
FIGURE | 12–30 |
Select the Load Texture option.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

287
|  Chapter 12 |
Note: In the Diffuse options submenu (and the other surface characteristic sub-
menus) there is an option to create a New Texture. New Texture creates a blank 
document in Photoshop in which you can draw and paint your own texture 
directly in the program and map it onto the object. To load the New Texture, 
choose the Open Texture option (also in the submenu). In this lesson, however, 
we opened a texture that is a premade image in the JPEG format using the Load 
Texture option. Refer to Figure 12–30 again.
FIGURE | 12–31 |
The wine bottle with 
the label mapped 
onto it.
FIGURE | 12–32 |
Select the Glass_
Material layer.
F
S
M
 8. 
Use the 3D Object Rotate tool to orbit the object and see 
how the label has wrapped around the object. See Figure 
12–31.
 9. 
Now, choose the Glass_Material layer in the 3D panel. 
See Figure 12–32.
 10. 
Adjust the Opacity setting to 80%. (As an alternative to 
typing the percentage manually into the Opacity field, 
you can use the “scrub” feature to adjust the setting by 
clicking directly on or below the word “Opacity” and 
dragging left or right. See Figure 12–33.)
 11. 
If you would like a different color glass—other than the 
default green—click on the Diffuse color box and choose 
a new color. See Figure 12–34 (on the next page).
 12. 
Choose File > Place and open table_chairs.jpg in the 
chap12_lessons/lesson2 folder. Press Enter or Return 
on the keyboard to confirm the placed object.
FIGURE | 12–33 |
Set the Opacity by clicking on or below the word “Opacity,” 
and scrubbing the arrow left or right.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
288
 13. 
In the Layers panel, drag the table_chairs layer below the Background layer, which 
contains the wine bottle object.
 14. 
Select the Background layer and position the wine bottle on the table using the 3D 
transformation tools (scale, pan, and rotate). See Figure 12–35. It’s not a perfect match to 
the table photo, but you get the idea.
15. 
Let’s adjust the lighting a little. Choose the Filter By: Lights option in the 3D panel. See 
Figure 12–36 (on the next page).
 16. 
Under Infinite lights in the layers, choose the Infinite Light 1 layer.
 17. 
Set the intensity setting to 1.55, then choose the Light Rotate tool. See Figure 12–37. 
Click and drag the tool on the scene to adjust the light so that it appears to be coming 
from the same direction as the light in the rest of the room.
 18. 
Save your scene.
FIGURE | 12–34 |
Choose a Diffuse (main) color 
for the objects glass material.
FIGURE | 12–35 |
An example of the 3D bottle 
positioned within a 2D photo.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

289
|  Chapter 12 |
TURNING 2D IMAGES INTO 3D 
OBJECTS
In Photoshop, you can convert images or photographs into dimensional objects 
with the 3D Postcard, Mesh from Grayscale, Volume from Layers, and Repoussé 
commands.
3D Postcard creates a perspective effect on the image or converts an image or 
photograph into a repeated grid for tiling and texturing.
Mesh from Grayscale converts a grayscale image into a 3D mesh. The various levels 
of gray, black, and white in the image determine the depth of the 3D conversion. It 
works great for terrain-like effects. This is a simplified version of depth mapping or 
bump mapping.
Volume from Layers converts selected layers into a 3D volume. This feature is still 
quite buggy and requires a high-end video card and a recommended 256 MB of 
video RAM.
Repoussé, as specified in the Photoshop help files, is a term that describes a 
metalworking technique in which object faces are shaped and patterned by 
hammering on the opposite side. In Photoshop, the Repoussé command converts 2D 
objects into 3D meshes, which you can precisely extrude, inflate, and reposition in 
3D space.
FIGURE | 12–36 |
Select the Filter By: Lights option in the 3D panel.
FIGURE | 12–37 |
Rotate the light.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
290
LESSON 3: EXPLORING THE 3D 
POSTCARD FEATURE
In this lesson, you learn how the 3D Postcard feature 
can alter the perspective plane of a 2D image that is then 
mapped into another 2D scene.
Transforming a 2D image
 1. 
Choose File > Open and open the lisbon_framed.tif
found in the chap12_lessons/lesson3 folder.
 2. 
From the menu bar, choose 3D > New 3D Postcard from 
Layer.
 3. 
Select the 3D Object Rotate tool from the toolbar. See 
Figure 12–38.
 4. 
Click and drag on the image to rotate it into various 
perspective views. See Figure 12–39. Try the other 3D 
transformation tools (pan, scale, etc.) by selecting them 
in the options bar, the toolbox, or using the axis indicator. 
That’s the essence of what the postcard feature can do, but 
let’s see how it works in a scene.
 5. 
Close the lisbon_framed.tif—don’t save it.
Using the Postcard Feature in a Scene
 1. 
Choose File > Open and open chap12L3.psd found in the 
chap12_lessons/lesson3 folder. This scene should look 
very familiar; it’s the first lesson you did in this book (you’ve 
come a long way since then!). One difference, however, is 
the Lisbon photo you played with in the previous section 
of this lesson is positioned over the bed. It appears out of 
place, because the perspective and lighting on the photo 
don’t quite match the rest of the room. Let’s fix this.
FIGURE | 12–38 |
Select the 3D Object Rotate tool to rotate the postcard.
FIGURE | 12–39 |
The 3D postcard in a perspective view.
 2. 
Choose the Reset 3D workspace.
 3. 
Highlight the framed_photo layer in the Layers panel.
 4. 
From the menu bar, choose 3D > New 3D Postcard from Layer.
 5. 
Use the 3D Object Rotate tool, 3D Object Pan tool, and 3D Object Scale tool to adjust the 
photo so that it is aligned in the same perspective as the rest of the scene. See before 
and after in Figure 12–40.
 6. 
In the Layers panel, set the blending mode for the Lisbon photo to Soft Light. See Figure 
12–41. This blends the photo better into the scene; however, zoom in close and notice 
there is a white border artifact around the photo. Let’s correct this.
 7. 
Be sure the framed_photo layer is selected. In the 3D panel, choose the Filter By: 
Materials option. See Figure 12–42.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

291
|  Chapter 12 |
FIGURE | 12–40 |
Use the 3D object tools to align the photo in the scene as shown in the “after” example.
FIGURE | 12–41 |
Set the layer blending mode for the photo to Soft Light.
FIGURE | 12–42 |
Select the Filter By: Materials option.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
292
8. 
Click on the Diffuse color box to open the Color Picker. Move the cursor (which is actually 
the Eyedropper tool) over the dark frame of the photo and click to select the dark brown 
color. Select OK. See Figure 12–43 and Figure 12–44.
 9. 
Choose View > Fit on Screen to admire the finished image—well done!
 10. 
 Save, if you’d like.
FIGURE | 12–43 |
Click the Diffuse box to open the Color Picker.
FIGURE | 12–44 |
Take a sample of the color in the image with the Eyedropper tool.
LESSON 4: EXPLORE NEW MESH FROM GRAYSCALE 
(DEPTH MAPPING)
Photoshop uses a technique called depth or height mapping—often found in 3D 
authoring programs to create terrains and landscapes—to translate a 2D image 
into a three-dimensional object. A depth map is a map (image) that includes depth 
information for every pixel. In Photoshop, this depth information is created by the 
variations of gray in a grayscale image (kind of like how it determines color levels in 
an image using a histogram, as learned in Chapter 6). In this lesson, you explore depth 
mapping using Photoshop’s New Mesh from Grayscale command.
 1. 
Open the file depth_map_normal.psd in the chap12_lesson/lesson4 folder. This 
was a color image that I converted to grayscale for use in this lesson: Image > Mode > 
Grayscale.
 2. 
Choose 3D > New Mesh from Grayscale > Plane. See Figure 12–45.
 3. 
Select the 3D Object Rotate tool in the toolbox. Rotate the object to view its new 
three-dimensional state—amazing! See Figure 12–46.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

293
|  Chapter 12 |
FIGURE | 12–45 |
Create a new mesh from 
a grayscale image.
FIGURE | 12–47 |
Note that each object has 
different levels of grayscale.
FIGURE | 12–48 |
Rotate each object to see 
the various levels of depth 
that were created based 
on the variations of gray 
color in the object.
 4. 
Let’s do some compare and contrast on three of the same images with 
varied levels of color. Open the file depth_map_light.psd.
 5. 
Apply the 3D > New Mesh from Grayscale > Plane command.
 6. 
Open the file depth_map_dark.psd and again apply the New Mesh 
from Grayscale > Plane command.
 7. 
From the Application bar, select 3-up under the Arrange Documents 
options, and note the variation of surface texture resulting from the 
color differences in each image. See Figure 12–47.
 8. 
Now, select each file and use the 3D Object Rotate tool to rotate each 
object so you can see the depth differences in each object. See Figure 
12–48.
 9. 
Close the files or play with them further. This ends the lesson.
FIGURE | 12–46 |
The image transformed into a 3D mesh.
t
t
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
294
GUIDED PROJECT: IMPORTING A 3D OBJECT
In this project, you import a 3D object, add materials and texture maps to it, and 
place it within a 2D scene. You can import preconstructed 3D objects in the following 
formats: .u3d, 3ds, .obj, .kmz, and Collada. Via the Web, many 3D objects can 
be found for royalty-free usage at little or no cost; for example, visit http://www.
the3dstudio.com/. Keep in mind that 3D files can be very large; they can take some 
time to download and require significant amounts of RAM to render efficiently in 
Photoshop.
 1. 
Choose File > New, call it 3D_import and under Preset select the Default Photoshop 
Size. Choose OK.
 2. 
Reset the 3D Workspace in the Application Bar.
 3. 
Choose from the menu bar 3D > New Layer from 3D File and open the model in 
chap12_lessons/project/mini_obj.obj. It’s quite large (23 MB without any textures 
applied), so it might take some time to open.
Note: This Mini Cooper model is compliments of Gilles Tran’s web site: Oyonal - 3D 
Art and Graphics Experiments (http://www.oyonale.com/modeles.php?page=58 ).
 4. 
Use the 3D Rotate Camera tool to orbit around the model to check out its detail.
 5. 
In the 3D (Scene) panel, select the Body layer and change its diffuse color.
 6. 
Select the Glass layer and change its opacity to 10%. Feel free to change the window 
color by adjusting the diffuse color.
 7. 
Select the Headlight layer, change the diffuse color to a bright yellow and set the 
opacity to about 50%.
 8. 
Save the file in your lessons folder.
 9. 
Rotate the car so you can see the front of it and zoom in close with the 3D Zoom 
Camera tool. See Figure 12–49.
 10. 
Select the Plate layer and under the Diffuse submenu choose Load Texture. Open 
the lplate.jpg found in the chap12_lessons/project/texture_images folder. The 
European-style license plate should map to the plate model on the front of the car.
 11. 
Select the Emblem layer under the Diffuse submenu choose Load Texture. Add the 
mini_emblem.jpg found in the project/texture_images folder.
 12. 
At this point select any other layers in the 3D Panel and adjust colors as you see fit.
 13. 
Choose File > Place and add a country road image (or any other image you like) to the 
scene. The country road image, used with permission from http://www.freefoto.com/, 
can be found in chap12_lessons/project/country_road.jpg. Scale the image to fit 
the scene size, then double-click on the image to apply it to the document.
 14. 
Move the country_road layer below the mini_obj layer.
 15. 
Orient and scale the Mini Cooper to fit in the scene. Adjust its lighting if necessary. See 
Figure 12–50.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

295
|  Chapter 12 |
FIGURE | 12–49 |
Use the 3D Zoom tool to zoom in 
closer to the object.Mini Cooper 
model is courtesy of Gilles Tran.
FIGURE | 12–50 |
An example of a 2D photo 
placed behind the 3D object.
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| A New Dimension |
296
  IN REVIEW
SUMMARY
The 3D tools in Photoshop CS5 Extended are basic yet useful, and this chapter only brushed the surface of 
the features currently available. I suspect they will become more extensive and robust in future editions of 
Photoshop. For now, the features highlighted here provide artists a way to import and add 3D objects to their 
2D artwork—an option never before available without access to an extensive 3D authoring program.
Now that we are at the end of this book, it is up to you to continue exploring the magic of Photoshop. As you 
undertake this graphic design adventure, keep in mind the words of the great magician Harry Houdini: “Don’t 
lose confidence in an effect because it has been presented many times before. An old trick in ‘good hands’ is 
always new. Just see to it that yours are ‘good hands.’”
1. 
Explain the concept of x, y, and z.
2. 
A 3D model can be transformed in Photoshop. Define transform.
3. 
What does the 3D Object Pan tool do? What does the 3D Pan Camera tool do?
4. 
What’s the difference between the 3D Object Scale tool and the 3D Zoom Camera tool?
5. 
What does the New Mesh from Grayscale command do?
6. 
List at least three surface characteristics that can be altered on a 3D object in Photoshop.
7. 
What does the Load Texture command do?
8. 
Name at least three software programs where you can model and animate 3D objects.
9. 
Where can textures be created to map onto 3D objects?
10. 
What’s rendering (see Exploring on Your Own at the end of this chapter)?
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

297
|  Chapter 12 |
  EXPLORING ON YOUR OWN
1. 
Rendering is the process of computing, pixel by pixel, one or more 2D images from 3D scene data, from 
the viewpoint of a simulated camera (from: http://www.mentalimages.com). Play with the rendering 
options in the 3D Panel. Create a new file. Choose 3D > New Shape From Layer, and select any of the 
premade 3D objects. In the 3D (Scene) Panel, explore the rendering options. See Figure 12–51.
FIGURE | 12–51 |
Explore the rendering options 
for a 3D object.
Note: If your video card does not meet the minimum requirement for hardware-accelerated 3D 
rendering, a warning message will display.
2. 
Study texture mapping and read this informative article: ‘Teaching Texture Mapping Visually’, by Rosalee Wolfe: 
http://www.siggraph.org/education/materials/HyperGraph/mapping/r_wolfe/r_wolfe_mapping_1.htm.
3. 
View a video on mapping 2D images onto 3D models in Photoshop at http://www.adobe.com/
designcenter/video_workshop/?id=vid0020.
4. 
Make your own textures with texture-making software, or in Photoshop. Or, find free textures online to 
map onto your objects.
 
▶Texture Maker for Windows: http://www.texturemaker.com/download.php
 
▶StarfishX for Mac and Windows: http://homepage.mac.com/mscott/starfishx/starfishx.html
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
299
A
adding, selection area, 65
Adobe Bridge program, 18–19
Adobe Creative Suite, 18
Adobe Fireworks, 45
Adobe Flash, 45, 249
Adobe Illustrator, 249
Adobe Output Module, 235, 270
Adobe photoshop. See Photoshop
Adobe RGB, 221, 224
After Effects, 249
alignment commands, 200
alpha channels, 178, 180, 181
anchor points, 155, 156
Anderson, Darrel, 54–56
Animation, 264–268
Application bar, 18–19
art creation, nonrepresentational, 
164–165
Artforms, 164
Assign Profile, color setting, 224
Auto-Align Layers, 200
axes indicator, 279–284
axes in Photoshop, 278–283
B
background color, 96
Background layer, 8
Bevel options, 49, 50
bit depth, 40–41, 100–102
bitmap formats, 249–251
bitmap images, 40–44
black-and-white images, 41
blending modes, 202–203
Blur tool, 121
BMP file formats, 45
border effects, 8–9
Brush Preset picker, 149
Brush tools, 146–150
Burke, Kelvin, 172–173
Burn tool, 169–171
Busch, David D., 194
C
Canvas Size, 8, 119
Carroll, Jim, 212–215
Channel Mixer, 101
Channels panel, 101
Chua, Charlene, 274–275
clipping masks, 182
Clone Source panel, 128, 129
Clone Stamp tool, 121, 127
Close, Chuck, 91
CMYK color model, 93–94
CMYK ink colors, 219
color
adjusting, 100–102
applying, 95–100
fixes, photograph, 7
management, 221–225
modes, 95
optical mixing, 90–91
optimization, 251–253
profile, 221–225
spectral illusion, 91–92
tolerance, 60
Color Libraries, 96–98
color models
choosing, 92–94
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300
| Index |
CMYK, 93–94
Grayscale, 92
HSB, 93
Lab, 94
lesson, 102–110
RGB, 92–93
Color panel, 96
Color Picker, 10, 96–98
color-reduction algorithms, 
251–253
Color Replacement tool, 137
Color Settings dialog box, 222, 224
color wheel, 93, 95, 105, 113
comp, 195
complementary colors, 90, 95, 102, 
108, 110
compositing, defined, 194
composition, 238–241
defined, 194
design process, 194–202
example project, 206–208
vs. compositing, 194
compression, 248–249
contact sheet, 235–237
content
assembling, 197–198
format of, 196
gathering, 195–196
organizing, 198–202
context menus, 24
contrast adjustment, 46
copyright issues, 196
CorelDRAW, 45
Count Tool, 200
cropping, photograph, 5–7
Crop selection, 120
Crop tool, 6, 119–120
custom brush, 151–152
Custom options, 253
custom shapes, 162–163
D
depth mapping, 292–293
design process, 194–202
desktop printing, 218
Diffuse options, 286, 287
digital printing, 218–219
Digital Retouching and Compositing:
Photographers’ Guide, 194
Direct Selection tool, 154, 155
Distort tool, 68
docks, 21–23
document area, 17
Dodge tool, 122, 130, 169–171
droplet, 255
duplicates, creating, 51
Dwyer, Michael, 142–143
Dynamic options, 252
E
effects, 205–206
Elliptical Marquee tool, 61, 176
Emboss options, 50
EPS formats, 45
Eraser tool, 149
exporting, 46, 153, 220, 262
Eyedropper tool, 10, 96, 200
F
Fichner-Rathus, Lois, 90, 194
files
compression, 248–249
importing, 197–198
size, 44
file formats
bitmap, 249–251
BMP, 45
EPS, 45
GIF, 45, 249–250
images, 249–251
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

301
|  Index |
JPEG, 45, 250
PICT, 45
PNG, 45
PNG-8, 250–251
PNG-24, 251
PSD, 26, 160, 227, 250
SVG, 45, 249
SWF, 45, 249
TIFF, 45
vector, 249
WBMP, 251
for web optimization, 249–251
Fill pixels, 161
filtering, image area, 70
filters, 205
fine-tuning, 202
Fixed options, 252
Fixed Ratio styles option bar, 62
Fixed Size styles option bar, 62
Flow settings, 150
Foreground color, 96
Freeform Pen tool, 153–154
Free Transform command, 48, 67, 
74–76, 83, 85
Full Screen Mode, 35
with Menu Bar, 35
G
gamut, 91
Garcez, Dave, 238
GB. See gigabyte (GB)
GIF animation, 264–268
GIF file formats, 45
GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) 
format, 249–250
gigabyte (GB), 253
GIMP, 45
Gradient Editor, 98–100
Gradient tool, 96, 98–100
Grayscale color model, 92
Grid function, 201
guides, 201
H
Hagen, Joel, 57
Hand tool, 10, 32, 33
Healing Brush tool, 121
History panel, 7, 126, 149, 187
Horizontal Type Mask tools, 183
Horizontal Type tool, 9–10
HSB color model, 93
I
image area selection. See selection, 
image area
image formats. See file formats images
images
bit depth, 40–41
bitmapped, 40–44
black-and-white, 41
correction
canvas, 119
cropping, 119–120
dimensions, 118–119
effect, 121
enhancement, 120
import, 118
lesson, 122–133
mode, 118–119
resize, 118–120
resolution, 118–119
retouch, 121
save, 122
exporting, 46
importing, 46
optimizing for Web, 256–261
resolution, 41–44
vector graphics, 44
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Index |
302
image slicing, 261–264
image transformation. See transformation, 
image
import, 197–198
importing
images, 46, 118
photograph, 5–7
J
Joint Photographic Experts Group. 
See JPEG formats
JPEG formats, 10, 11–12, 45, 250
Julian, David, 242–245
K
KB. See kilobyte (KB)
kilobyte (KB), 253
Knoll, John, 12
Knoll, Thomas, 12
L
Lab, 94
Lasso tools, 63–64
Lasso, 64
Magnetic Lasso, 64, 65
Polygonal Lasso, 64, 65
layer masks, 181–182
Layers panel, 198–199
Layer Style dialog box, 8, 204
layer styles, 204
Levels panel, 7
Lighting Effects filter, 205
Liquify feature, 206
Load Selections box, 52
Load Texture option, 287
lossless compression, 249, 
250, 251
lossy compression, 249, 250
M
Magic Wand tool, 48
Magnetic Lasso, 64
magnification tools, 30–33
Marching ants, 9
Marquee tools, 61
masks
clipping, 182
horizontal, 183
introduction to, 176–180
layer, 181–182
lesson, 186–188
quick, 184–185
types of, 180–185
vector, 181–182
vertical, 183
material settings, adjustment to, 
285–288
Maximize Compatibility Photoshop
Format options, 9
MB. See megabyte (MB)
mechanical printing, 219
megabyte (MB), 253
Menu bar, 17–18
Mesh from Grayscale, 289
Mitsui, Glenn, 272–273
mock-up, 218
monitor calibration, 225–226
Moring, Jeffrey, 210–211
Move tool, 10, 47, 68
moving in camera view, 284–285
N
navigational features, 30–35
Navigational panel, 34
New Document options box, 16
New Texture option, 287
Noise gradients, 100
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

303
|  Index |
nonrepresentational art creation, 164–165
Normal style option bar, 61
O
one-bit image, 41
Open Texture option, 287
optical mixing, 90–91
optimization
color, 251–253
compression, 248–249
image format, 249–251
image size, 253
lesson, 10–12
Save for Web & Devices option, 253–254
settings, 255
workflow techniques, 255–256
Options bar, 6, 21
organizational features, 198–202
output compatibility
color, 221–226
format, 227–228
monitor calibration, 225–226
resolution, 226–227
P
Paint Bucket tool, 96
Painting
Brush tool, 146–150
custom brush, 151–152
Pencil tool, 146–150
palettes. See panels
panels, 21
paper, 195
Patches tool, 121
paths, 153–155
Path Selection tool, 156
Paths panel, 153–155
pattern
blending, 49–51
duplicating, 51
Pattern Stamp tool, 121
PDF. See Portable Document File (PDF)
Pencil Preset picker, 148, 149
Pencil tool, 146–150
Pen tools, 156–157
Freeform, 153–154
Perspective tool, 68
photo gallery, 270
photograph. See also images
adding effects to, 121
border effects, 8–9
color fixes, 7
cropping, 5–7
enhancing, 120
importing, 5–7, 118
makeovers of, 4–12
optimizing for Web, 10–12
resizing, 118–120, 123–124
retouching, 121, 126–131
shadow effects, 8–9
title effect, 9–10
Photomerge command, 138–141
photoshop
in brief, 12
magic tour, 4
Photoshop Extended, 278
photoshop interface, 5
application bar, 18–19
context menus, 24
customizing, 26–28
docks, 21–23
document area, 17
marking up, 24–26
menu bar, 17–18
navigational features, 30–35
options bar, 6, 21
panels, 21
status bar, 23
tools panel, 20
Photoshop’s native format (PSD), 26, 
160, 227, 250
PICT formats, 45
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Index |
304
pixels
altering, 49–51
bit depth, 40–41
blending, 49–51
deleting, 46–49
duplicating, 49–51
hiding, 52
introduction to, 146
lesson, 46–52
lightening and darkening, 46
painting and drawing with, 
146–152
pixels per inch (ppi), 41–43, 218, 
227, 253
for printing, 208
resolution and, 41–44
revealing, 52
selecting, 60, 62
transforming, 46–49
PNG file formats, 45
PNG-8 (Portable Network Graphics) 
format, 250–251
PNG-24 (Portable Network Graphics) 
format, 251
pointillism, 90
Polygonal Lasso tool, 64
Portable Document File (PDF), 
219–220
Preble, Duane, 164
Preble, Sarah, 164
preferences
deleting, 28–29
setting, 26–28
Preferences dialog box, 5
print commands, 229–233
printing
commercial, 219
desktop, 218
digital, 218–219
PDF format, 219–220
print jobs, setting up, 229
print specialists, 229
Proof Profile, 231
PSD. See Photoshop’s native format (PSD)
Q
Quick Mask, 66
Quick Mask Mode, 184–185
quick masks, 184–185
Quick Selection tool, 63
R
rasterizing, 155
Rectangle tool, 24
Rectangular Marquee tool, 61, 78, 
186, 187
Red Eye tool, 137
reference point, 68, 84–85
Refine Edge option, 65, 66
refining, selection area, 65
rendering, 297
Repoussé, 289
resizing, images, 118–120
resolution, 41–44
adjusting, 118
images, 118–119
output compatibility and, 226–227
pixels per inch (ppi), 41–43, 218, 
227, 253
for printing, 208
retouching, images, 121
RGB color mode, 123, 205, 251
RGB color model, 92–93
RGB gamut, 91
RGB images, 102
Roeoesli, Natascha, 114–115
Rotate tool, 68
Rotate View tool, 168
rulers, 200–201
Rulers units, 5
Ruler Tool, 200
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

305
|  Index |
S
Save for Web & Devices, 10–11, 133, 
253–254
setting, 256–259
Scale tool, 68
Scattering effect adjustments, 150
screen modes, 35
Select Blending options, 49
selection, image area
add effects to, 70
adding, 65
copying, 69
deleting, 70
deselecing, 67
duplicating, 69
feathering, 60
filtering, 70
highlighting, 61
lessons, 71–81
object on layers, 65–66
pasting, 69
refining, 65
select menu, 61
subtracting, 65
transforming, 67–68
selection, pixels, 60, 62
selection tools
Lasso tools, 63–64
Magic Wand, 62–63
Marquee tools, 61
overview, 60
Quick Mask, 66
Quick Selection, 63
select menu, 61
settings
customizing, 26–28
deleting, 28–29
Seurat, Georges, 90
shadow effects, 8–9
Shape layers style, 162
shapes
drawing, 161–163
style selection, 163
tools, 161–163
Sharpen tool, 121, 126
shazam, 41
Skew tool, 68
Slice tool, 262–263
smart filters, 205
Smudge tool, 46, 121, 130
Snap, 201–202
spectral illusion, 91–92
Spot Healing Brush tool, 121, 136
stage. See Photoshop interface
status bar, 23
Stroke options box, 9
style, 204
subtracting selection area, 65
Summerhays, Joe, 190–191
SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics), 45, 249
Swatches panel, 98
SWF, 249
formats, 45
T
text
color changes, 9
font changes, 9
formatting, 159
texture mapping, 297
lesson, 285–288
3D files, 278
3D modeling and animation authoring 
programs, 278
3D Object Pan, 283
3D Object Rotate tool, 283
3D objects
creating and moving, 278–281
importing, 294
material settings, adjustment, 285–288
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

| Index |
306
moving in camera view, 284–285
rotating, 282–283
scaling, 281–282
texture mapping, 285–288
2D images into, 289–294
3D Object Scale, 283
3D Object Slide, 283
3D Pan Camera tool, 285
3D Postcard, 289
lesson, 290–292
3D rendering, 297
3D Rotate Camera tool, 285
3D tools, 283–285
3D Walk Camera tool, 285
3D Zoom Camera tool, 285
thumbnail sketches, 195
TIFF format, 45, 227–228
title effect, photograph, 9–10
tolerance, color, 60, 62, 63
tonal range adjustments, 121
toolbox, 20, 21
tools
hidden, 20
panel, 20
shape options, 24
tips, 24
transformation, image, 67
transform tools, 68
Trash Can icon, 51
2d images into 3d objects, turning, 
289–293
Type tool, 158–159
Tyrone, 32
U
Understanding Art, 90
undoing actions, 7, 130
user interface. See Photoshop interface
V
vector-based file formats, 249
vector graphics, 44
compatibility, 160
paths, 153–155
pen tool, 156–158
vector masks, 158
vector masks, 158
Vertical Type Mask tools, 183
Volume from Layers, 289
W
Warnock, Tim, 86–87, 194
Warp tool, 68
WBMP format, 251
Web animation, 264–268
Web browsers, 12, 250, 251, 254, 260
Web Color model, 93
Web galleries, 270–271
Web optimization
color, 251–253
compression, 248–249
image format, 249–251
image size, 253
lesson, 10–12
Save for Web & Devices option, 
253–254
settings, 255
workflow techniques, 255–256
workspaces, 18–19, 36–37
X
X, Y, and Z, 278–289
Z
Zoom tool, 31–32, 259
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

