The Definitive Guide to 
Selling Abroad Profitably
 ―
Second Edition
 ―
Laurel J. Delaney
EXPORTING

 EXPORTING 
 THE DEFINITIVE GUIDE TO SELLING 
ABROAD PROFITABLY   
 SECOND EDITION  
 
 
Laurel J. Delaney

Exporting: Th e Defi nitive Guide to Selling Abroad Profi tably, Second Edition
Laurel J. Delaney 
 
 
 
Chicago, Illinois 
 
 
 
USA 
 
 
 
 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-2192-1 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-2193-8
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016953347
Copyright © 2016 by Laurel J. Delaney 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illus-
trations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or 
by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no inten-
tion of infringement of the trademark.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even 
if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or 
not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of 
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsi-
bility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express 
or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr
Acquisitions Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Developmental Editor: Matt Moodie
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Pramila Balen, Laura Berendson, Aaron Black, Louise 
Corrigan, Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Celestin Suresh John, Nikhil Karkal, 
James Markham, Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Natalie Pao, Gwenan Spearing
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando Kim
Copy Editor: Lauren Marten Parker
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global
Cover Designer: eStudio Calamar S.L.
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-4505, e-mail 
  orders-ny@springer-sbm.com , or visit   www.springeronline.com . Apress Media, LLC is a 
California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media Finance 
Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail   rights@apress.com , or visit   www.apress.com . 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promo-
tional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, 
reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at   www.apress.com/bulk-sales .
 Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is avail-
able to readers at   www.apress.com . For detailed information about how to locate your book’s 
source code, go to   www.apress.com/source-code/ . 
Printed on acid-free paper

 Apress Business:  The Unbiased Source of Business 
Information 
 Apress business books provide essential information and practical advice, 
each written for practitioners by recognized experts. Busy managers and 
 professionals in all areas of the business world—and at all levels of technical 
sophistication—look to our books for the actionable ideas and tools they 
need to solve problems, update and enhance their professional skills, make 
their work lives easier, and capitalize on opportunity. 
 Whatever the topic on the business spectrum—entrepreneurship, finance, 
sales, marketing, management, regulation, information technology, among 
 others—Apress has been praised for providing the objective information and 
unbiased advice you need to excel in your daily work life. Our authors have no 
axes to grind; they understand they have one job only—to deliver up-to-date, 
accurate information simply, concisely, and with deep insight that addresses 
the real needs of our readers. 
 It is increasingly hard to find information—whether in the news media, on the 
Internet, and now all too often in books—that is even-handed and has your 
best interests at heart. We therefore hope that you enjoy this book, which has 
been carefully crafted to meet our standards of quality and unbiased coverage. 
 We are always interested in your feedback or ideas for new titles. Perhaps 
you’d even like to write a book yourself. Whatever the case, reach out to 
us at   editorial@apress.com   and an editor will respond swiftly. Incidentally, at 
the back of this book, you will find a list of useful related titles. Please visit 
us at    www.apress.com  to sign up for newsletters and discounts on future 
purchases.
 The Apress Business Team  

 To the center and sunshine of my life, Bob. 
To my other loves, Stan, Margaret, Terry, Keith, 
the Marovich family, aunts and uncles, cousins, nieces 
and nephews, and precious friends. To all the other 
remarkable people in my life, whether named or 
unnamed in this book, all of whom I respect and 
appreciate. To all entrepreneurs and small business 
owners who are building enduring export enterprises 
that contribute to making our world a better place. 
 In loving memory of Lynn Kavanagh. A sister like no other. 

Contents
Author Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
About the Author. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xv
Part 1: 
Building Your Foundations for Exporting  . . . . . . .1
Chapter 1: 
Are You Ready to Export? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 2: 
Writing an Export Business Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Chapter 3: 
 Prepping For Exports  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Chapter 4: 
The Human Side of an Export Enterprise. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Part 1I: 
 Creating and Using Online Marketing 
Platforms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Chapter 5: 
Online Fundamentals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Chapter 6: 
 Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence . . . . . . 87
Chapter 7: 
 Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Chapter 8: 
The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Chapter 9: 
The Mobile World at Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Chapter 10: Marketing Your Business Worldwide  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Part III: 
Mapping Out Your Export Journey. . . . . . . . . . .187
Chapter 11: Choosing a Product to Export  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
Chapter 12: Exploring Your Territory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 205
Chapter 13:  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for the Export 
Marketplace  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 227
Chapter 14: Preparing Your Service for Export . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Chapter 15: Web Design with the World in Mind  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
Part IV: 
 Developing Sales and Distribution 
Capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .279

viii
Chapter 16: Finding Cross-Border Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 281
Chapter 17: Methods of Exporting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
Part V: 
Managing the Transaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .333
Chapter 18: Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options . . . . . . . . . . 335
Chapter 19: Pricing and Preparing Quotations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
Chapter 20: Getting Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 375
Chapter 21: Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 407
Chapter 22: Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures. . 419
Part VI: 
Keep Building Your Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .439
Chapter 23: In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 441
Chapter 24: Cross-Cultural Learning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 451
Part VII: 
The Export Journey. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .463
Chapter 25: Global Ethics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 465
Chapter 26: International Business Travel and Security Tips  . . . . . . . . 477
Chapter 27: Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth . . . . 497
Chapter 28: New Frontiers in Emerging Markets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 513
Chapter 29: The Top Ten Export Business Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 531
Part VIII: 
Export Mastery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .541
Chapter 30: Export Success. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 543
Chapter 31: Essential Keys to Export Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 559
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 563
Contents

 Author Note 
 Dear Readers, Friends, and Export Enthusiasts, 
 Welcome to the revised and expanded edition of  Exporting: The Definitive Guide 
to Selling Abroad Profitably. 
 Exporting is the most dynamic force in producing a healthier business, and 
a more exciting one. It holds the promise of growth based on the individual 
business owner’s initiation, making possibilities virtually unlimited. To become 
truly competitive, one must create the conditions for superior results and 
have a strong global presence in our interconnected world. 
 Whether you are already an exporter or just setting sail on an export adven-
ture, the wealth of information, ideas, insights, and practical advice in this book 
will enable you to become successful in the export marketplace. 
 What’s new and augmented in this edition?
• 
 Data and citation updates.  
• 
 Updates on actual and prospective trade agreements 
(especially TPP and TTIP developments).  
• 
 New CFR and EAR rules, and export controls.  
• 
 A sample job description for an export manager.  
• 
 New contributions and updates on specialist interviewees 
in Chapter   30 .  
• 
 Substantive enhancements adapted from articles that I 
have written in the past several years.  
• 
 Updated and augmented hyperlinks with new sites that 
have appeared since the book’s initial publication.  
• 
 New export success tips in Chapter   31 . 
 As you delve in, you will see that each chapter represents what could be a 
standalone book. With that in mind, use each chapter as a springboard to 
further research on your own to grow your business. 

 
x
 Keep growing, exporting, evolving, and thriving. Share what you’ve learned. 
Make the world a better place within your company and your industry, and 
for your employees and family. 
 You may be small today, but through exports, you can grow faster, grow 
stronger, and soar globally to be large tomorrow. Achieving export greatness 
requires you envision your overseas market through the lens of alternative 
future possibilities. 
 I hope this book inspires you to reach outside your comfort zone and take 
on the exciting world of exporting. Strive to be creative. Be fearless. And 
have fun. 
 The world awaits. 
 Happy exporting, 
 Laurel Delaney 
 P.S. To keep up to date on export news, trends, and resources, visit Exporting 
Guide (   www.exportingguide.com  ) and join our LinkedIn Exporting Guide 
Group MOOD (   www.linkedin.com/groups/6518842  ). 
Author Note

  About the Author 
 Laurel  J.   Delaney   is founder and president 
of Chicago-based GlobeTrade.com, a manage-
ment consulting company that helps entre-
preneurs and small businesses go global. The 
United States Small Business Administration has 
recognized Ms. Delaney as a world-renowned 
global small business expert by naming her the 
Illinois Exporter of the Year. She is the author of 
 Start and Run a Profitable Exporting Business and 
Exporting Essentials as well as numerous articles 
that have appeared in international and scholarly 
publications such as  The Wall Street Journal and 
 The Conference Board . She is the creator of The 
Global Small Business Blog (   www.globalsmall-
businessblog.com   ), which is ranked No. 1 in 
the world for entrepreneurs and small businesses 
interested in going global; President of Women 
Entrepreneurs GROW Global (   www.WomenEntrepreneursGROWGlobal.org  ); 
director of the Global Small Business Forum (   www.globalsmallbusinessfo-
rum.com   ); and publisher of the Exporting Guide (   www.exportingguide.com  ). 
She serves as the About.com Import & Export expert (  http://importex-
port.about.com/  ), is a charter member and a board member by appointment 
of the World Entrepreneurship Forum, and is a member of the International 
Council for Small Business. She also serves as the Chicago Chapter Chair for 
the Women Presidents’ Organization. Ms. Delaney’s passion for going global 
goes back to 1985, when she first started her business. Since then, she has 
devoted more than 60,000 hours of work in the area—from consulting to 
writing to teaching. 
 Ms. Delaney holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Advertising from Columbia 
College Chicago and a Master’s in Business Administration from Lake Forest 
Graduate School of Management. 
 
 

 Acknowledgments 
 Any book project involves more people than just the author, because writing 
and publishing a book is not a solitary effort. My list of people to acknowl-
edge starts with the very accomplished Apress team: Robert Hutchinson, 
Acquisition Editor; Rita Fernando Kim, Coordinating Editor wizard; and the 
mighty Matthew Moodie, Senior Development Editor and copyedit king. 
Without Robert’s encouragement and direction, there would be no  Exporting 
book 2 nd edition, and without the exceptional talents of Rita and Matt, it would 
not be nearly as great. 
 To Roy Paulson, Drew Greenblatt, Philip Pittsford, and Alison Larson for your 
insightful contributions. To Douglas Clark, Melissa Gillespie, Moji Eagan, and 
Becky Schilling for your special assistance. 
 I owe a special debt of gratitude to Brandon Reed, Special Advisor to Strategic 
Council, The Good to Great Project LLC, Office of Jim Collins for his patience 
in working with me to have Jim Collins endorse my book; and to Jim Collins, 
author of  Good to Great and co-author of  Beyond Entrepreneurship , for reading 
my book and endorsing it. You are both an inspiration to me. 
 To my family and dear friends for having to put up again with my disappearing 
act to update this book in my spare time in 2016. I look forward to seeing you 
at lunches and special occasions again. To Syd and Mellie, my precious cats, for 
their constant rollovers on their backs to give a flash of their bellies, which 
brought a smile to my face. To Bob Marovich, my husband, for his patience, 
support, and unconditional love throughout our life journey. 
 Finally, to you, dear reader: I am grateful for your desire to export. It is people 
like you who make the world of business far more exciting and a better place 
to hang out. 
 Rest assured that if you are not mentioned by name here and should be, 
the next time I connect with you online (  https://www.linkedin.com/
groups/6518842  ) or see you in person, I will thank you.  

  Introduction 
 Globalization is a reality that isn’t going away. That means we’re all in 
this together, and we’re going to have to fight for what we want and need  .  
 —Michael Froman, United States Trade Representative, 
Executive Office of the President (2015)  i 
 Welcome to the second edition of this book. There are more than seven bil-
lion potential customers in the world, and 3.4 billion of them are online.  ii How 
many of those customers is your company reaching? In a world that is now 
hyperconnected by the Internet, being a successful businessperson means no 
longer confining your business by borders—whether those of the city, state, 
or country. Exporting—or sending goods and services out of a country—
increases a company’s sales and profits, enhances its prestige, creates jobs, and 
offers a valuable way to level seasonal fluctuations. Exporting is also a power-
ful force that contributes to economic growth, development, and prosperity 
in our world. 
 The explosion of US entrepreneurs and small businesses—more than twenty-
eight million combined  iii —engaging in the world economy in the last few years 
is largely attributable to the Internet. This transition has taken place as busi-
nesses have sought new ways to grow and tap into the more than 95 percent 
of the world’s consumers and 80 percent of the world’s purchasing power 
that lie outside the United States.  iv Surprisingly, though, less than 1 percent of 
these businesses and individuals operate in the US export marketplace, even 
though the number of exporters has grown faster than the number of nonex-
porters in terms of both goods sold and employment. Converting nonexport-
ers to exporters is what this book is all about. 
 
■ Tip  Start planning to sell abroad. The businesses of exporters grow faster, they employ more 
people, and their employees earn more than the businesses of nonexporters. 

xvi
 What This Book Can Do for You 
 Exporting: The Definitive Guide to Selling Abroad Profitably equips you with the 
knowledge you need to export and helps you create the enthusiasm to suc-
ceed, leading to greater revenues and profitability for your business.  Exporting 
puts you in the driver’s seat, so you can sell more everywhere, get on the 
world stage, and grow. Other benefits to exporting include:
• 
 Improving your return on investments  
• 
 Creating jobs  
• 
 Overcoming low growth in your home market  
• 
 Outmaneuvering competitors  
• 
 Providing a competitive advantage  
• 
 Becoming more productive  
• 
 Spurring innovation  
• 
 Developing a diversification strategy  
• 
 Surviving a domestic recession  
• 
 Spreading R&D costs across larger markets  
• 
 Generating economies of scale in production  
• 
 Exploring previously untapped markets  
• 
 Making productive use of excess domestic capacity  
• 
 Extending the product life cycle  
• 
 Insulating your seasonal domestic sales by allowing you to 
find new foreign markets  
• 
 Broadening your personal intellectual horizons  
• 
 Enriching your country  
• 
 Traveling to new countries  
Introduction

xvii
 
  The Current State of Exporting 
 Export-driven entrepreneurs and small businesses play a significant role in the 
overall economic growth and prosperity of the United States and the world 
at large. They have the potential to improve productivity, achieve greater effi-
ciencies, enhance world-class competitiveness, and create jobs. This is pos-
sible because:
• 
 Exporting lends itself to small business. More than 301,923 US 
companies exported goods in 2014 (latest available data). 
Small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)—those with 
fewer than five hundred employees—accounted for 98 
percent of all identified exporters in 2014.  v 
• 
 Exports generate revenue. The known export revenue of 
small- and medium-sized enterprises in the United States 
rose to $479,376 billion in 2014 (latest available data), 
up 2.7 percent from 2013. SMEs were responsible for 34 
percent of goods exports in 2014.  vi 
• 
 Exports are growing. US exports of goods and services 
reached $2.35 trillion in 2014, hitting a record high for 
the fifth straight year.  vii Service exports alone were at a 
record level of $710.3 billion.  viii Goods export to the 20 
economies that have trade agreements with the United 
States reached a record $765.1 billion—an increase of 
4.3 percent from 2013.  ix 
• 
 Exporting helps you find new customers and develop new 
markets. The International Monetary Fund (   www.imf.org   ) 
forecasts that nearly 87 percent of the world economic 
growth during the next five years will take place outside of 
the United States.  
• 
 Exporting supports jobs. American jobs supported by total 
exports were 11.3 million in 2014 and contributed one-
third of the United States’ annual growth between 2009 
and 2013.  x 
Introduction

xviii
• 
 Exporting using the Internet offers a new sales channel. 
Thanks to the Web, entrepreneurs and small business 
owners have a potent new way of doing business—one 
that leverages e-commerce, social media, and networking 
to find new business, no matter from where it comes. 
The Internet has become the ultimate platform by which 
businesses can innovate through personalization and 
export around the world.  
• 
 Exporting is not a choice; it is an imperative. An export-or-
die mentality is required by those individuals and business 
owners who don’t want to be beaten by their competi-
tors—both local and global—in the world marketplace. 
More so, those who don’t export will become obsolete 
in a world where global connectivity is increasingly preva-
lent and easy.  
 The Future of Exporting 
 Exporting intends to help US companies become more competitive interna-
tionally through exporting and to bring thousands of new businesses into the 
world marketplace. As already mentioned, small- and medium-sized compa-
nies account for almost 98 percent of US exporters, but they represent only 
about 34 percent of the total export value of US goods. With 80 percent of 
global demand now outside of the United States, it is expected there will be 
$40 to $50 billion worth of export opportunity for the United States within 
five years. At the Export-Import Bank in 2015, for example, nearly 90 per-
cent of transactions—more than 2,330—directly supported American small 
businesses.  xi Under new legislation, in 2016, small businesses must account for 
25 percent of Ex-Im Bank’s financing dollars, up from a current mandate of 20 
percent.  xii Exporting is not just an option; it’s an absolute must for building and 
sustaining a successful future. 
 What will your business look like in a decade? Our world is in constant 
motion and growth. Whether researching, buying, or selling, can you imagine 
operating  anything these days without crossing borders and riding the next 
wave of profitable growth? Don’t be scared if your answer is “Yes.” By the time 
you finish this book, you will be exporting successfully and be able to adapt so 
that you can succeed in untapped markets. Until then, don’t let fear immobilize 
you. Keep reading. 
 
■ Remember  Exporting isn’t rocket science. You can do it. And your bottom line will soon show 
the results of your efforts. 
Introduction

xix
 Who This Book Is For 
 Exporting is for entrepreneurs and small business owners who are new to the 
practice and are ready to take their business to the next level of growth. It is 
for entrepreneurs and small business owners who currently export but are 
looking for new market insights and have a desire to expand into other coun-
tries. It is also for people who never expect to export, yet do, and become 
accidental exporters—individuals who export out of surprise rather than a 
business imperative. 
 Exporting will help you:
• 
 Develop a clear strategy on how to export  
• 
 Find the right people for your enterprise  
• 
 Export your product or service efficiently and profitably  
• 
 Find customers, enter new markets, get paid, and ship  
• 
 Discover your best territory through statistics and mar-
ket research  
• 
 Develop pricing and prepare documentation  
• 
 Take advantage of trade agreements  
• 
 Leverage the Internet—especially through tablets and 
mobile phones—to boost your online exports  
• 
 Learn from others who have exported successfully  
 How to Use This Book 
 Exporting has been created and structured to make it as easy as possible to 
export. The book’s eight sections work together to achieve that goal by pro-
viding the following descriptions of the process: 
 Part I: Building Your Foundations for Exporting looks at whether you 
are ready to export; shows you how to write an export business plan that 
takes into consideration the positive impact of free trade agreements; explains 
how to prepare for exporting by describing the corporate, legal, and finan-
cial considerations; and describes how to manage the human side of your 
enterprise. 
 Part II: Creating and Using Online Platforms covers online funda-
mentals; shows how to create a social-networking and media presence; and 
demonstrates how to use e-commerce platforms (eBay, Alibaba, and Etsy) to 
export and sell globally. 
Introduction

xx
 Part III: Mapping Out Your Export Journey examines how to find a 
product and manufacturer for export, to draft an export-supplier agreement, 
to research an export market, to prepare a product or service for export, and 
to translate web and marketing material for a global audience. 
 Part IV: Developing Sales and Distribution Capabilities offers creative 
ways to find cross-border customers and describes several different methods 
of exporting. 
 Part V: Managing the Transaction explores transport options, pricing 
considerations, payment methods, cargo details, and documentation. 
 Part VI: Keep Building Your Business suggests ways to provide excep-
tional export service and analyze cross-border alliances and partnerships. 
 Part VII: The Export Journey delves into the importance of cross-cultural 
learning; suggests the rules of the export world for ethical conduct; offers a 
checklist of international-business travel tips; shows the impact of the opera-
tion of woman business owners in our new brave world; outlines the implica-
tions of big emerging markets for growing a small business; and lastly, describes 
the top ten emerging export business markets. 
 Part VIII: Export Mastery provides real-world experiences as told by 
successful export-business owners; offers sixteen essential keys to export 
success; and finally, introduces you to a MOOD—a massive open online dia-
logue—in the form of a LinkedIn Exporting Guide Group (MOOD). It will 
help keep you focused on exporting success. 
 Each chapter is written as a stand-alone topic with the intent that most peo-
ple, especially busy executives, do not have time to read a book from cover to 
cover in one sitting. You can select a section that speaks immediately to your 
needs, delve into it, and find what you are looking for. Explore it at your conve-
nience and come back to it as a reference source. A few sections in the book 
do warrant a reading before you get to the other chapters, such as Chapter   1 , 
covering whether you are ready to export, but reading it is not a prerequisite 
for success in exporting. Learning and growing by way of exports should take 
place on your own terms.  Exporting is merely a facilitator that will enable you 
to perform better in the world marketplace. 
 First things first: You need to be  ready to take on the world, because the future 
of exporting lies in your hands (and, as you will read in this book, in your 
pocket). As you turn the page to Chapter   1 , you are opening the gateway to 
selling globally.  Let’s export! 
Introduction

xxi
 Notes 
  i.   “Remarks by Ambassador Michael Froman to the 
National Foreign Trade Council Upon Receiving the 
World Trade Award,” Office of the United States trade 
Representative, October 15, 2015,   https://ustr.
gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/
speechestranscripts/2015/october/remarks-
ambassador-michael  .  
  ii.   “Internet Users in the World by Regions,” Internet World 
Stats, June 2016,   http://www.internetworldstats.com/
stats.htm  .  
 iii.   “Advocacy Welcomes Its Seventh Chief Council,” The Small 
Business Advocate, January 2016,   https://www.sba.gov/
sites/default/files/Jan_2016_newsletter.pdf  .  
 iv.   “The State of World Trade 2014: The Outlook for 
American Jobs, Economic Growth, and Global Leadership,” 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, May 16, 2014,   https://
www.uschamber.com/speech/state-world-trade-
2014-outlook-american-jobs-economic-growth-
and-global-leadership  .  
  v.   U.S. Census Bureau News,   http://www.census.gov/
foreign-trade/Press-Release/edb/2014/
2014prelimprofile.pdf  .  
 vi.   Ibid. 
 vii.   Commerce.gov, U.S. Exports Hit Record High for the 
Fifth Straight Year, Department of Commerce;   https://
www.commerce.gov/news/blog/2015/02/us-
exports-hit-record-high-fifth-straight-year  . 
 viii.   Ibid. 
 ix.   Ibid. 
 x.   Ibid. 
 xi.   The Facts About EXIM Bank, Exim.gov;   http://www.
exim.gov/about/facts-about-ex-im-bank  . 
 xii.   Export-Import Bank Chairman Fred Hochberg happy U.S. 
exporters can use agency to finance sales overseas, The 
Business Journals;   http://www.bizjournals.com/biz-
journals/washingtonbureau/2015/12/fred-hoch-
berg-eager-to-let-world-know-export.html  . 
Introduction

P A R T
 Building Your 
Foundations for 
Exporting 
 
I

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_1
 C H A P T E R 
 Are You Ready 
to Export? 
 Exports have played a critical role in America’s economic comeback, and 
they continued to do so in 2014. 
 —U.S. Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker (2014)  
 Anyone who wants to  export , can. The world awaits. The essential element 
needed to be successful exporting is readiness. The rest is mechanics and 
know-how. Whether you’re a first-time exporter or entering a new market, 
selling goods and services across borders is easy and just a mouse click away. 
I’m here to show you how. But before I get to that, let me take you back to a 
little more than twenty-five years ago. 
 It was 1985. Even back then, I challenged conventional assumptions about 
how to compete and started to view markets outside the United States as 
the future of the business I had started: Global TradeSource, Ltd. I even put 
“global,” “trade,” and “source” in the company name, thereby shifting the buy-
er’s possibilities from being local to those of the world and drawing upon the 
distinctive strengths of alternative, growing overseas markets as those that 
would offer the company’s products and  services  . 
 That kind of vision, along with a more recent facilitator called the  Internet , has 
broken down every imaginable barrier to growth and prosperity and has trans-
formed not just how we conduct business but the world at large. The moment 
you create a Web site, blog, or Facebook account, your point of contact with 
consumers becomes global. The Internet is the great global leveler and gives 
1

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
4
everyone a chance to make spectacular strides in exporting—by finding, 
acquiring, and servicing customers the world over faster than ever—which in 
turn drives profits and growth for businesses. The blueprint for prosperity in 
exports is right at your fingertips. Never has there been such attention to the 
Internet, interconnectedness, and exporting than now. 
 
■ Note  The Internet has broken down all barriers to world commerce—democratizing trade 
by guaranteeing that exporting’s benefits are shared more widely by more of America’s small 
exporters. It is your most potent weapon in the battle to capture more international sales. 
 The use of technology, especially  social networks  such as Facebook, LinkedIn, 
Snapchat, and Twitter, along with the advent of more affordable smart phones, 
watches, and tablets, makes finding and exporting opportunities in the world 
marketplace a breeze for small business owners and executives. And as a 
result of these incredible advancements in technology, these same empow-
ered individuals can create opportunities on the web—not just browse for 
themselves—and even launch whole new enterprises in a heartbeat based on 
unmet needs and  interests   expressed by consumers. 
 Because social networks enable us to extend our worldwide connections rap-
idly, increasing our ability to identify opportunities on a more open, transpar-
ent basis, none of us operates in a vacuum as a solo entrepreneur any longer. 
 What does this have to do with exporting and your readiness to do so? Plenty. 
It  defines  how an export business is born and can grow, if nurtured correctly, 
into something absolutely amazing. 
 Next, let’s take a look at three examples of real-world situations that could 
arise that will shape how you view the potential of exporting and how it gets 
done. After that, we’ll move on to what it takes to succeed in exporting. Last, 
we’ll make a distinction between exporting services and products, which will 
allow you to decide what you are going into the international market with. 
 You’ll note that at this point I do not talk about the financial considerations 
of exporting. They are obviously an important aspect that you must consider 
before you export in order to be properly capitalized. However, I am inten-
tionally leaving the discussion out of this section because it will be covered 
later, beginning with Chapter   3 . 
 How an Export Product Business Is Born 
 Imagine someone named Abel Anderson who is working in the automo-
tive industry while running a food-export business. In the evenings and on 
weekends, he goes to food fairs. Although he works full time in the automotive 
industry, his real passion is food. He’s always seeking novel food items to try.   

Exporting
5
 At one local trade show that Abel attends in Chicago, he falls in love with 
a specialty item that tastes like cheesecake, caramel, chocolate, and butter 
crumbs all rolled into one scrumptious cookie the size of a hockey puck. 
He chats with the person at the booth named Samantha and asks her if she 
exports the product. She tells him she does not. Abel expresses interest in 
working with her baking company in his spare time as an independent con-
tractor to export its products to a select few countries. Lo and behold, she 
agrees. 
 After spending a few days with Samantha making sure the ingredients in the 
cookie can hold up in overseas transit and pass regulatory laws, Abel draws 
up a contract. He then contacts the International Trade Administration via 
the Internet to conduct a partner search for agents located in Dubai, Saudi 
Arabia, and Oman—areas of the world where he thinks there is significant 
demand and enough wealth to purchase gourmet food products. Within three 
months and with the help of ITA, he lines up importing distributors in two 
countries—all just by using e-mail and Skype. He sends a test shipment of 
cookies to each location and discovers in the process that everyone who 
samples the cookies loves them. He receives his first order from the Dubai 
agent for ten thousand packages of cookies. 
 Abel is now in the export product business. It won’t be long before he gives 
up his full-time job in the automotive industry. 
 His story is an example of how the journey to exporting or launching an 
export business begins. Abel started first with his own good idea of exporting 
a product, and then, with the help of technology that most of us use every day, 
he was able to turn his idea into a new business venture. Here, then, we have a 
new paradigm for world competitiveness built on information and technology. 
So while nothing beats a good face-to-face encounter to help deepen your 
knowledge of a country and the customer, making the most of technology 
should also be a priority. 
 In the future, the economic transformation of countries will require busi-
nesses to rely less on selling to locals and more on selling abroad. This gets 
back to how exporting boosts economic productivity and also suggests its 
capacity to solve the problems caused by a growing world population, rapid 
urbanization, and even climate change. 
 Everything we do today is potentially relevant to consumers anywhere 
in the world, provided they understand what we are doing. Consider, for 
example, running a public relations firm. Think it has international legs? 
Let’s find out. 
 
■ Tip  Any product or service you sell no doubt has potential customers abroad. And guess what? 
You will need them all in order to stay relevant and thrive as the twenty-first century progresses. 

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
6
 How an Export Service Business Is Born 
 Envision offering your  local marketing service  , which is booming in North 
America, to someone in the United Kingdom. Let’s imagine that someone 
named Katie Schroeder does just that. She runs a successful Chicago-based 
public relations company called Take It Viral, or TIV, representing some of 
the most popular big-name consumer brands in the United States. TIV has 
received numerous accolades for its creative social media campaigns using 
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Google+. 
 As a result of media fanfare, a business owner in the United Kingdom—we’ll 
call him Joe—has tracked Katie’s work and e-mails her with a request for her 
company to conduct a social-media PR campaign in the United Kingdom. Joe 
makes luxury ties and wants to broaden his brand recognition in the United 
Kingdom and expand his business into the United States. Although Katie has 
reservations about delivering that type of specific service outside her normal 
selling channels, she contemplates how to go about it. All she really needs is a 
plan, technology, a couple of additional support people, and a few good local 
UK connections to make it happen. 
 So Katie decides to take the project. Her first step is to develop a road map. 
Her next step is to execute it. She deploys her existing employees to launch 
the program, and as the UK business grows, Katie outsources work through 
the online freelance employment databases Guru.com, Elance.com, and 
Odesk.com, specifically seeking people in the UK market who are capable of 
managing social media campaigns. 
 At the same time, Katie consults her international accountant on how best 
to handle the tax impact on her business for the newly generated overseas 
revenue stream and payments made to independent contractors located in 
the United Kingdom. Further, she explores all payments options—for both 
money received from clients and money paid to workers—with her trusted 
international banker. Last, she goes over the potential pitfalls on the legal front 
with her international attorney. 
 Through the advice of her banker, Katie sets up a PayPal account to pay off-site 
workers and receives her first UK client payment via a wire transfer to her 
bank account. Voila! She has gone global and achieved her first service export! 
She is already considering opportunities in France, Ireland, and Germany. Her 
new goal is to become less dependent on the ebb and flow of the North 
American market, build up a profitable alternative revenue stream (e.g., in the 
United Kingdom), and expand into additional international markets so that the 
world will eventually become her revenue stream. 
 
■ Note  Exporting requires a team of experts—accountants, lawyers, and others—who 
understand the markets you are selling into. Get them involved early to help you avoid missteps. 

Exporting
7
 How a Business Expands into New Foreign 
Markets 
 Ever dream about branching out into new overseas  markets  ? Meet someone we 
will call Alfild Nelsen. Alfild is currently running a successful specialty chemical-
cleaning-product business with revenues of more than $10 million. Thanks to 
NAFTA, she currently exports to Canada and Mexico, but to further offset the 
anticipation of slowing local growth, she wants to branch out into other interna-
tional markets. While thinking about that, she ventures off to Australia with her 
husband for a vacation. She visits a huge do-it-yourself store in Melbourne and 
spots a wide array of high-end cleaning products not unlike the ones she makes 
in her own business. She buys a couple of the products and thinks about how 
she could find a qualified representative for her own line of cleaning supplies to 
be sold in the same store. Nothing beats healthy competition! 
 When she returns home to the United States, Alfild places the cleaning products 
she bought underneath her kitchen sink and forgets about the idea of exporting 
to Australia. Besides, she’s too busy with her efforts that go into expanding her 
business into the Mexican and Canadian markets! Several months go by and when 
she has some spare time, she suddenly revisits the idea of exporting her specialty 
chemical cleaning products to Australia. She pulls out her laptop, remembers a 
service a colleague uses for exporting to New Zealand called Gold Key Service, 
and finds the Web site. She e-mails the organization and within thirty days has 
a customized market research report, an appointment with a prospective trade 
partner in the chemical cleaning industry, and a trip scheduled to meet face-
to-face with the partner in Australia. Alfild has made the first step in branching 
out into new international markets. These examples show that you can escape 
constraints on growth at home by way of exports and entering new markets. 
The potential is as vast as your imagination. Whether you are an export newbie 
like Abel or Katie or an experienced exporter like Alfild, at some point you must 
decide whether to export a product or a service, or both. As I just highlighted, 
most people begin with a single idea that they are comfortable with, know like 
the back of their hand, and have rich experience with and therefore feel that they 
have a competitive advantage in the global marketplace. Understanding the dif-
ference between exporting a product or a service is critical to making the right 
choice for your business and your personal fulfillment.  
 The Difference Between Product and Service 
Exports 
 Exporting a product involves transporting something you can see, hold, eas-
ily assign a monetary value to, and physically move from point A to point 
B. Exporting a service, such as one that is business oriented, professional, 
technical, financial, or based on franchising or insurance, requires a somewhat 

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
8
different approach. Here’s a quick rundown of the differences between a 
product and a service as they affect the  export process  : 
 Product 
 Service 
 Tangible 
 Intangible 
 Visible 
 Invisible 
 Measurable 
 Immeasurable 
 High perceived value 
 Low perceived value 
 High freight costs 
 Negligible freight costs 
 Negligible human interaction 
 High human interaction 
 Low maintenance 
 High maintenance 
 High standardization 
 Negligible standardization 
 You cannot see or touch a service—and you often cannot assess its true value 
until after you have used it and discovered all the resulting benefits. 
 Services are in many ways a tougher sell than a product, either at home or 
abroad, yet once sold, they move faster thanks to technology. Each of the 
listed differences creates a marketing challenge for the service exporter, 
perhaps the most crucial being the need to convince a distant customer 
to buy your service sight unseen and without any real idea of how they 
will benefit. This is why a service business depends first and foremost on 
people. Of course, when you export a product, you are also relying on a 
whole string of people to do their jobs—banks to help you get paid, freight 
forwarders to move your goods, local distributors to get your product 
on store shelves—but exporting a service demands a special emphasis on 
human interaction, both at home and abroad. (I will discuss the human side 
of enterprise management in Chapter   4 .) 
 U.S. exports of services are booming, topping $710 billion in 2014, according 
to the U.S. Department of Commerce.  i The most competitive advantage of 
service exports, especially during any recession, is that they perform better 
than goods exports. Service exports typically don’t face tariffs, as goods sold 
overseas often do, but some barriers still persist.  
 People Power Drives Your Service Exports 
 Selling a service requires even more people power than product sales to be 
successful. When you export a product, you offer it, clinch your sale, follow 
through, and troubleshoot as needed. Then, once the product is in your cus-
tomers’ hands, they oversee sales in their geographic territory and contact 

Exporting
9
you to order more products when they sell out. There is little need for com-
munication between buyer and seller once the product is in the distribution 
pipeline and moving—being bought, sold, and enjoyed. 
 By contrast, a service export requires direct interaction with your customer, 
not just initially but for the duration of the service contract. For some ser-
vices, of course, the quality of the interaction with your customer is exactly 
what they’re paying for. This is why people with superior communication skills, 
diplomacy, and—this can’t be emphasized enough—acute cultural awareness 
are the greatest assets for delivering a quality service export. 
 An example of a service export is an architectural firm that designs buildings 
in the United States and reaches out overseas to perform its work, or it can 
involve providing royalties and licensing fees, including the money people pay 
to use American software. 
 I will go into greater detail on service exports in Chapter   14 , but for now I ref-
erence the distinction between a product and service export because the dif-
ferences have implications for the marketing and management of the export. 
It is important to decide at the outset what you wish to accomplish: exporting 
a product, service, or both. Although the process is transferable from goods 
to services, each type of export requires its own distinct strategic approach.  
 What It Takes to Export 
 So where do you start? As with any new business venture, you need to first 
take stock of both yourself and your business to see if you have the personal-
ity, mindset, and business that can benefit from exporting. Let’s begin with an 
assessment of  you and then we’ll cover the business. 
 Assessment of You: The  Global Mindset  
 What unique qualities and characteristics does it take to become a success-
ful exporter? To crack open a new overseas market? To become a top-notch 
international executive at a global conglomerate? The answer is that it takes 
the same qualities to do any of these things. Successful exporters, interna-
tional expansion artists, and global executives may vary in their temperament, 
personality, and experience, but in the ways that really count, they are more 
alike than different. What counts is their ability to venture out in the world 
and adapt as they go. I call it a global mindset. 
 
■ Note   Successful exporters have, or develop, a global mindset—the ability and courage to 
operate their business in an unknown environment. 

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
10
 I somewhat liken exporting to riding a roller coaster at an amusement park. 
You eagerly jump into the coaster car, fasten your seatbelt, and get ready for 
the exhilarating ride of your life. Exporting offers a similar experience. It’s an 
adventure that challenges every way you run a business. So the first question I 
ask individuals who express interest in exporting is: Do you have the mindset 
and guts to ride it out? After we clarify what that means—dealing with the 
highs and lows of attempting to do business in far-off places that are hard to 
access quickly and impossible to understand culturally—we discuss what is 
really involved in preparing to export. It’s called doing your homework. 
 Homework can be done on your temperament and abilities, on how to 
export, on researching the market, on financial considerations, and on deter-
mining whether your product or service is in demand anywhere in the world. 
The more preparation you undertake, the greater your chance of reducing 
mistakes. But before you can advance from Point A, thinking about an export 
idea, to Point B, launching the export idea, you must first take stock of yourself 
and decide if you are ready and willing to develop the dynamic outlook that 
will enable you to export. It starts with a determined global mindset: a mix of 
intellectual and behavioral qualities that enable individuals to understand and 
operate a business in environments unlike their own.  
 Examining the State of You: The Global Mindset 
 A global mindset starts with  self-awareness  , reflects an authentic openness 
to and engagement with the world, and employs a heightened awareness of 
the sensitivity of cross-cultural differences. Toss in that adventuresome spirit I 
mentioned early on, adaptability, a solid educational background, core business 
competencies, and life experiences that preferably involve international travel, 
and you have a recipe for the ideal global thought leader. Capitalizing on these 
attributes is a powerful factor in developing a global mindset and achieving 
success in the export world. 
 Here’s my short list of twelve characteristics that I find work in the export 
marketplace. They are based on my own hands-on experiences and the obser-
vations of others who have achieved success crossing boundaries in the busi-
ness world:
  1.  The ability to venture out in the world and adapt quickly  
  2.  Being comfortable and confident in your own skin, along 
with having a heightened sensitivity to others  
  3.  Carrying a high level of intelligence, including cultural and 
emotional  
  4.  Enjoying living in different parts of the world and relishing 
learning a foreign language  

Exporting
11
  5.   Knowing how to bring out the best in people no matter 
where they are from  
  6.   Getting things done with people who come from diverse 
backgrounds in any part of the world  
  7.   Being curious, having a love of learning, and immersing 
oneself in foreign cultures  
  8.   Being objective and open to people and the environment  
  9.  Having enough flexibility to focus on serving and helping 
others 
 10.  Possessing the ability to take something complex and 
simplify it  
 11.   Confronting obstacles with optimism and a willingness to 
continue learning new ways of doing things  
 12.   Being resilient—or having the ability to bounce back from 
even the most challenging of circumstances  
 You may not have all of these characteristics, and I am sure there are some I 
have overlooked, but if you have most of them, you will be comfortable oper-
ating anywhere in the world and well on your way to success in exporting.  
 Assessing Your Business: The Local Business Model 
 You have a successful local  business  ; now what? You’ve saturated your domes-
tic market and there’s no room to grow geographically unless you look out-
side your own borders. 
 Export.gov offers a questionnaire that highlights the “state of a business” 
(  https://new.export.gov/export-readiness-assessment/entity-type  ). 
 The following are the questions you should answer:
 1.   Does your company have a product or service that has 
been successfully sold in the domestic market? 
 Yes        No 
 2.  Does your company have or is your company preparing 
an international marketing plan with defined goals and 
strategies? 
 Yes        No 
 3.  Does your company have sufficient production capacity 
that can be committed to the export market? 
 Yes        No 

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
12
 4.   Does your company have the financial resources to 
actively support the marketing of your products in the 
targeted overseas markets? 
 Yes        No  
 5.  Is your company’s management committed to develop-
ing export markets and willing and able to dedicate staff, 
time, and resources to the process? 
 Yes        No  
 6.  Is your company committed to providing the same level 
of service to export markets that is given to your domes-
tic customers? 
 Yes        No  
 7.  Does your company have adequate knowledge in modi-
fying product packaging and ingredients to meet foreign 
import regulations and cultural preferences? 
 Yes        No  
 8.  Does your company have adequate knowledge in ship-
ping its product overseas, such as the ability to identify 
and select international freight forwarders and freight 
costing? 
 Yes        No  
 9.  Does your company have adequate knowledge of export 
payment mechanisms, such as developing and negotiating 
letters of credit? 
 Yes        No  
 Once you complete the questionnaire, you will immediately receive an online 
score, which will help you assess your export readiness as well as identify 
areas that your business needs to strengthen in order to improve its export 
activities. Don’t be daunted by the fact that you may not be able to provide 
an affirmative answer to all the questions. After all, that is why I am writing 
this book—to help you easily export in the digital age. If you don’t pass the 
assessment, it doesn’t mean you can’t export; it only means you have more 
homework to do in preparation for the end goal: export success. 
 One last related question that begs to be answered: Can you use your home 
base—your domestic operation—as a template for exporting? The answer 
is: it depends. That’s a tall order. You naturally want exporting to become a 
profitable extension of your domestic operation, but there are no guarantees. 

Exporting
13
I encourage you not to count on it. A lot will depend on your firm’s orienta-
tion. For example, you might believe that because your goods and services sell 
well in the United States, they will sell anywhere in the world, but success will 
depend on your marketing approach to modifying those goods and services, 
if needed, to fit your selected export market. Each market is different and 
should be treated as such by adapting to a local country’s culture. 
 
■ Tip  Focus on similarities in exporting across markets whenever possible to standardize your 
business model worldwide and to achieve economies of scale in production. We’ll cover a theory 
related to this in Chapter   11  . 
 Assessing an Export Start-Up: The “Born 
Global” Firm 
 There is a new class of entrepreneurs who have changed the export paradigm 
and show that it is possible to do business and succeed in world markets with-
out having an established domestic base. The concept is referred to as “born 
global.” Born-global digital  companies  are run by individuals of a generation 
that only knows of communicating and transacting business via the Internet. 
Virtually from inception, their digital companies compete on a global scale 
against large, established players in the world arena, breeding the next frontier 
in international trade. They are global by technology, not by strategy, and the 
individuals who start and run these firms tend to bypass rules and regulations 
to get things done. 
 Contrary to conventional methods, born-global individuals don’t build export 
businesses through gradual expansion into foreign markets. Rather, they leap 
into the foreign market and figure things out as they go. For example, a born-
global entrepreneur will review the earlier assessment questionnaire, com-
plete it on a lark, and even if their answers are all “No,” will still proceed in 
exporting. What they are banking on is their own tech know-how and the 
suitability of their product or service for the international market coupled 
with their own chutzpah to get them over speed bumps. 
 I can relate to that disruptive, adventuresome spirit. But I caution you: Rather 
than making progress at every step of the way during the process of export-
ing, you will encounter a lot of scary tunnels, twists, and sharp turns involved 
in figuring it out. That is because the leaders of born-global digital companies 
have no prior knowledge or experience in exporting—only in leveraging tech-
nology. This runs counter to the notion of using your domestic operation, one 
that has a history of proven success, as a template for exporting. In other words, 
and as mentioned earlier, don’t assume what works at home will work abroad. 

Chapter 1 | Are You Ready to Export?
14
Big mistake. There will always be adjustments that have to be made to the 
changing conditions of the company, the environment, and the marketplace, 
rather than a deliberate strategy. 
 If you are a start-up or are of the born-global generation, there is nothing 
stopping you from plunging into exporting. So skip the assessments and just 
 go for it. Sometimes the only way to learn is by doing. If that is the case, use 
your passion as fuel to create new market opportunities and use this book as 
a guide to help you master the export process.  
 Summary 
 Remember how the chapter opened? I asked boldly: Are you ready to export? 
Then I provided three different exporting scenarios to help you understand 
how export initiatives are born. Next, I defined the difference between a 
product and a service export. Last, I offered a simple process to assess your-
self as well as your existing business or start-up as to whether you have what 
it takes to export. 
 Now it’s up to you. You can choose to deal with a stagnant climate and growth 
constraints at home or experience the thrill of exporting to fast-growing 
overseas markets. It’s your decision. If you have the courage and mindset to 
export, and you are ready, turn the page. I want you wholeheartedly on this 
adventure with me!  
 Note 
  i.   U.S. Chamber of Commerce, The Benefits of International 
Trade,   https://www.uschamber.com/international/
international-policy/benefits-international-
trade-0  , accessed July 7, 2016.  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_2
 C H A P T E R 
  Writing an Export 
Business Plan 
 A Guide During the Life of Your Export Business  
 “The plan is useless. But planning is essential.”  Former President Dwight 
Eisenhower said that. Planning is a process, setting concrete milestones 
and tracking progress, with frequent review and revisions. But you can't do 
planning without starting with a plan. 
 —Tim Berry, founder, Bplans.com  
 Congratulations! You have determined you are export ready. You have what it 
takes to export and have decided on the type of export you wish to launch: 
a product, a service, or both. Now it’s time to map out what you intend to 
accomplish during the life of your export business. It’s time to think about 
your export prosperity in a new and dynamic way. This starts with the global 
mindset we covered earlier and moves to crafting what’s ahead for your busi-
ness on the international front. The process, which many dread because it 
requires a deep dive into strategic thinking, becomes an operational plan for 
controlling the export business and serves as a guide for growth and export 
success. The export business plan will become a part of your overall business 
plan—you’ll see how and  why  later on. 
2

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
16
 
■ Note  The Internet plays a huge part in the exporting world, and that is reflected in this book. 
There are lots of online tools and resources referenced throughout the book, so it will be handy to 
have a computer or tablet nearby. 
 Purpose of an Export Business Plan 
 There are four main  purposes for  the export business plan that you will write. 
The first is that it will serve as a guide during the initial stages of your export 
growth. The second is that it will give you a chance to describe your product 
or service offering, detail a realistic sales-and-marketing strategy (i.e., how you 
will reach your customers), provide a range of viable return-on-investment 
figures, and explain what variables will affect those numbers positively or nega-
tively. The third purpose is that if you plan to seek out loans, whether export 
related or not, a business plan that includes an international expansion com-
ponent is required by potential partners, lenders, and investors in order to 
understand your business strategy. And last, if you are looking for direction, 
creating a great export business plan will get you there quicker. 
 Putting a plan in place doesn’t mean you look at it once and file it in a cabinet. 
It’s a powerful, living document reflecting your ideas, team, and efforts. It’s 
meant to be edited, referred to, and shared constantly throughout the growth 
of the business. A plan can be as simple as ideas jotted down on the back 
of a napkin or as thorough as a twenty-five-page report. Whether short or 
long, the plan should focus on what is important to you, what energizes and 
motivates you, and what gives you a sense of purpose and meaning—doing 
something bigger and beyond yourself. Start with the basics:
 1.  What do you like to do?  
 2.   What are you planning to do?  
 Then ask yourself whether the two answers you came up with are in alignment. 
For example, my answers might be:
 1.   What do I like to do? I love to eat Italian food.  
 2.   What am I planning to do? I plan to export hammers 
because I have a good supply source.  
 OK, you get it. I’m out of alignment on my vision for what I love to do versus 
what I intend to do to make that vision a reality. Let’s try again:
 1.  What do I like to do? I love to eat pizza.  
 2.   What am I planning to do? I plan to export frozen pizzas.  

Exporting
17
 There you have it! My passion for something I love to do is in line with what 
I plan to do for a business—the ideal scenario for starting a business. That 
means my love of the product will sustain me during the sharp turns and 
bumps on the road to achieving exporting success. Experiment until you find 
your passion. Sometimes it can take several attempts before you realize what 
turns you on—whether it’s selling pizzas or hammers, or making money! 
 Being purposeful is not something that just happens. You must be proactive 
and intentional. Did I personally start my business with an export business 
plan? Yes, for myself and the benefit of my team. Did we follow it? Not exactly. 
Our primary focus was to secure an initial overseas customer who would 
translate into an export sale and then push the transaction through to make 
a profit. We then reviewed the plan to see how we fared relative to what we 
were trying to accomplish, and we compared results to the realities of the 
market. We then decided to forge ahead on similar deals in other countries. 
 In getting a business or an initiative like an export transaction off the ground, 
customers matter the most, but you need to go further. A great plan outlines 
and supports the assumptions you have going into the business and serves as 
a guide for where you’re headed.  
 Pitfalls of  Not Having an Export Business Plan 
 Not interested in developing a plan? That’s an option and it is your choice. 
You must be short on time and eager to get to market. Bypassing strategic 
thinking for short-term gain can be risky (think along the lines of driving a car 
to a new, distant destination without a map or GPS). Yet it can be tempting 
because it is a quick way to test whether a product or service will sell in the 
export marketplace. 
 In my experience working with hundreds of start-ups and business owners, 
those who fail to  develop a plan make several mistakes along the way. Here are 
some of the common pitfalls. Believe me, these aren’t all of them.
 1.  They move too soon and fast, having a knee-jerk reac-
tion as opposed to executing on a well-thought-out and 
-crafted strategy.  
 2.   They fail to take a pulse on where their business stands 
currently.  
 3.   They divert attention to the overseas market to the 
detriment of their local business.  
 4.  They employ too little staff to take on the overseas 
market.  

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
18
 5.   They proceed to export in a complex market (e.g., where 
there is a lot of red tape or the natives speak a different 
language) or open up negotiations with the wrong party 
(e.g., someone who is untrustworthy or a bad fit).  
 6.  They are too quick to execute on a sale and fail to secure 
a guaranteed payment.  
 7.  They act in a too fast and aggressive manner in providing 
online banking information to get paid or to pay a supplier, 
only to find later on that they have been cyberattacked.  
 8.  They don’t state clearly on their Web site, blog, or 
Facebook page whether they accept international sales 
orders. If they don’t, they should say so. If they do, then 
they should state specifically which countries they serve 
and follow through when inquiries roll in.  
 9.  They put all their eggs in one basket and don’t diversify 
enough to offset the ebbs and flows of the marketplace. 
They put too much emphasis on one product and one 
market that aren’t working.  
 10.   They never fully understand that they might have vulner-
abilities that could impede their ability to get things done.  
 These so-called export sins are just the tip of the iceberg of what can poten-
tially go wrong if you don’t plan accordingly. If you are still dead set on moving 
ahead without a plan, do so at your own risk. I urge you, however, to at some 
point consider formalizing a plan so that you can fully capitalize on your idea 
and leverage it for luring potential partners, lenders, and investors.  
 Pointers for Developing an Export 
Business Plan 
 You should always measure your plan’s progress against the market reality, 
which can be highly unpredictable. You can’t go wrong with that approach. For 
example, you might sell designer diapers via your e-commerce site, empha-
sizing distribution to English-speaking countries such as Australia and New 
Zealand, only to find out quickly that the bulk of your inquiries are in French, 
the native language of the majority of your  prospective   customers. 
 Whatever plan you select, have backup Plans B, C, and D in place. For example, 
let’s say you select Ireland to export catfish to and find out two months later 
that the Irish don’t like catfish. Plan B might be to sell your catfish to another 
market, say the United Kingdom, or to sell another fish that the Irish like. 

Exporting
19
Be smart and apply the global mindset we talked about in Chapter   1 , which is 
to stay flexible and adaptable. Just because you revert to Plan B or C doesn’t 
mean you failed and that exporting won’t work. Rather, it means the market 
reality is such that your original plan won’t work, and thank goodness you 
were smart enough to develop contingency plans. 
 Last, free trade agreements improve foreign market access for exporters, 
promote economic growth, and create jobs. Study active free trade agree-
ments (FTAs) in advance of selecting an export market and preparing your 
export business plan to see how they will benefit your organization. Factor 
that information into your decision-making process accordingly. For example, 
NAFTA is the FTA among Canada, the United States, and Mexico serving to 
remove most barriers to trade and investment in that region. The United 
States and 11 other Pacific region countries recently completed the Trans-
Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade deal involving countries making up almost 
40 percent of the world’s gross domestic product. 
 
UNDERSTAND MARKET CONDITIONS
 Once you have a good idea of what you want to export and where, you can fill out 
your picture of market conditions by answering questions like these (this is a list I put 
together for a client): 
 
 1.  Who will buy your product and why? 
 
 2.  What is the size of the market? 
 
 3.  Is there a FTA in place between your country and the 
prospective market?  
 
 4.  Who is your competition? 
 
 5.  How new is the product to the market you have selected? 
 
 6.  Are there growth opportunities in the market? 
 
 7.  What do the country's demographic profile, economy, and 
mass culture look like right now? 
 
 8.  Are there demographic, economic, or cultural trends that will 
shape the market in the future?  
 
 9.  Does the government help or hinder the sale of imported 
goods? For example, are there any barriers to entry or to 
sales within the market?  
 
 10.  Will the country's climate or geography present logistical 
problems for sales of your product of choice—for example, 
selling chocolates to hot and humid Bali?  

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
20
 
 11.  Does the product have to be adapted to that market by way 
of a physical reconstruction, a new package, or a change in 
servicing practices? 
 
 12.  Does the product have the same use conditions in the 
international market as in the home market?  
 
 13.  Does the product require personal after-sales service and, if 
so, can you provide it in the prospective market?  
 
 14.  Are you comfortable traveling to the market on an as-needed 
basis? 
 Use your own business sense and add to the list. Once you actually start research 
(refer to Chapter   12 ), more questions will arise. This is all part of the process of 
turning your vague ambitions into a concrete export business plan based on market 
realities, so the smarter your questions and more upfront your answers, the better 
your chances of success. 
 Three Types of Export Business Plans 
 Now you’re ready to get organized and create your own plan. To keep the 
process manageable, let’s look at three different types of sample template 
plans, each with distinct advantages for business people with different needs. 
Pick the one that works best for you, keeping in mind that you can shorten the 
analysis while keeping the major  components  of the plan intact.
• 
 The back-of-the-napkin export business plan (suitable for 
born-global entrepreneurs)  
• 
 The traditional-export business plan  
• 
 The Laurel export business plan  
 The  Back-of-the-Napkin Export Business Plan  
 The  back-of-the-napkin  export business plan is for folks who are big on ideas 
and pressed for time and want to get to market fast. While it’s typically short 
and sweet, it serves a better purpose than having no export business plan at 
all. A back-of-the-napkin export business plan can be as simple as explaining 
what the business does, what you want to do next export-wise, and how you 
are going to get there (who is going to be on board). It might look like this:
 1.  “We make the absolute best purple widgets on the 
planet.”  
 2.   “We will export purple widgets.”  

Exporting
21
 3.  “We will export purple widgets to France.”  
 4.  “We will consider making other type widgets, say in red, 
if a customer in France is large enough to justify the 
change.” 
 5.  “Suzy, Ted, Mike, and I will work on this initiative.”  
 6.  “We will export, at a minimum, twenty thousand purple 
widgets within the first year.”  
 7.  “We will not reduce efforts from our domestic business 
to apply them to the export business.”  
 8.  “We will figure out how much money we need and when 
we need it.”  
 9.  “We will finance the exports of purple widgets with 
profits from our domestic business.”  
 10.   “We will find our own customers directly via our Web 
site, blog, and Facebook.”  
 11.   “We will consult with our banker to provide payment 
options on all export sales.”  
 12.   “We will have fun in the export journey to success!”  
 Add a Web site link to show what the business does and provide an execu-
tive summary that includes the founder’s bio and the key team members, and 
you’re done.  
 The Traditional Export Business  Plan 
 It’s important to have a business plan, but you don’t have to reinvent the wheel 
to create one. One place to visit and bookmark online is the Small Business 
Administration’s “Export Business Planner” (  http://www.sba.gov/export-
businessplanner  ). It is a free, customizable tool for small-business owners 
who are exploring exporting. When you are using the planner, you can refer 
to Getting Started: Creating an Export Business Plan. It outlines the following 
(in Chapter   12 , we guide you on market research, so don’t overly challenge 
yourself if you can’t answer all the questions at the initial planning stage):
 1.  Profiling Your Current Business
 a.   Identify current successes.  
 b.  Determine competitive advantages.  
 c.   Evaluate companywide commitment.  

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
22
 2.   Conducting an Industry Analysis
 a.   Find export data available on your industry.  
 b.  Research how competitive your industry is in the 
global markets.  
 c.   Assess your industry’s international growth potential.  
 d.  Research government market studies.  
 3.  Identifying Products with Export Potential
 a.   Select the most exportable products/services that 
your company will offer internationally.  
 b.  Evaluate the product/services(s) that your company 
will offer internationally.  
 4.  Marketability: Matching Your Product/Service with a 
Global Trend or Need
 a.   Classify your product.  
 b.  Find countries with the best-suited markets for your 
product.  
 c.   Determine which foreign markets will be the easiest 
to penetrate.  
 d.  Define and narrow down those export markets you 
intend to pursue.  
 e.   Talk to your US customers or other companies who 
are doing business internationally.  
 f. 
 Research export efforts of US competitors.  
 5.  Determining Market Expansion Benefits/Trade-Offs
 a.   Assess the benefits to exporting.  
 b.  Determine the trade-offs to exporting.  
 6.  Identifying Markets to Pursue
 a.   Select the top three most penetrable markets (see 
the sidebar at the end of this list).  
 7.  Conducting an Export Marketing and Sales Analysis
 a.   Come up with an overall marketing strategy.  
 b.  Figure out sales strategies.  
 c.   Write a detailed product or service description.  

Exporting
23
 d.  Map out the product life cycle.  
 e.   Make a list of copyrights, patents, and trade secrets.  
 f. 
  Determine research and development activities.  
 8.  Determining Expansion Needs
 a.   Access available export financing resources.  
 b.  Determine which financing method is best suited to 
your exporting needs (refer to Chapter   20 for more 
details).  
 9.  Short- and Long-Term Goals
 a.   Define short-term goals.  
 b.  Define long-term goals.  
 c.   Develop an action plan with timelines to reach your 
short-term goals. 
 In summary, the most difficult aspect in developing an export business plan is 
determining the demand for a product or service offering in a foreign country. 
It’s one thing to know a product can be sold in a market—after all, that’s why 
you selected a particular market—but it is a totally different ball game when 
it comes to forecasting how much you can sell and over what time frame. 
Assume that the demand for a product develops in direct proportion to the 
economic development in each country. This might be a useful way to think 
about it, especially when data might be unknown. What is crucial is that you 
have thought through the key drivers of the export venture’s success or fail-
ure—from what level of sales at which the business begin to make a profit to 
the impact of using various methods of distribution channels. 
 
■ Note   An overseas market is as mercurial as it is unpredictable. Who would have guessed that 
a community marketplace for people to list, discover, and book unique accommodations around 
the world would sell?  
 
WHERE DO YOU WANT TO GO?
 Keep your analysis of markets that you want to pursue to one page and break it into 
four manageable parts (use a, b, c, and d below). The purpose of this exercise is to 
establish a broad scope for your research-market analysis but not so broad that you 
overwhelm yourself. Try to begin with the end in mind: where do you want to go and 
how will you know that you have arrived?

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
24
 A. 
 Select the top three most penetrable overseas markets that 
appear to have the best potential for your product or service 
offering. You can conduct market research online; meet in person 
with an international trade expert (see the SBA’s “US Export 
Assistance 
Centers”: 
  http://www.sba.gov/content/
us-export-assistance-centers  ); or test your product or 
service by exhibiting at a local trade show. Trade shows give you 
access to potential customers from all over the world without 
you having to analyze a thing. For example, if you sell hardware 
tools and exhibit at a hardware show and find that you get a lot of 
interest from attendees from a particular foreign market, such as 
Australia, you would know there must be a market there, because 
why else would these attendees be asking for information? From 
there, you can address those inquiries, learn as you grow, and 
conduct further research. 
 B. 
 Analyze the market factors and conditions in each of the selected 
countries. Delve into each country further by reviewing cultural 
attributes, geographical characteristics, political stability, 
demographic characteristics, market size, and growth rates. The 
goal here is to conduct a sound assessment of a foreign market. 
What might the barriers be? What makes it a good market to 
enter? How will the local culture influence the sales of your 
product or service offering? Such in-depth market research 
information is necessary to make sound marketing decisions, 
and it must be done with each new market entry. 
  C. 
  Determine the pros/cons to conducting business in each market. 
Look at potential language barriers, legal restrictions, logistical 
challenges, and payment problems that might get in the way 
of doing business in a particular market. Include all relevant 
variables in your assessment. Do an analysis of your company’s 
own strengths and weaknesses in a selected market. Will your 
product or service offering be at the low-, middle-, or high-
end pricing level? Is there a similar product or service offering 
currently available in the selected market? If so, who is making 
it? Where are they based? Can you compete? Why would you? 
How would you? The more pros you have for entering a new 
market, the better your chance for success. If you can draw on 
the perspective of a native (better yet, an actual prospective 
customer) of the country where you are keenly interested in doing 
business, do so. Nothing beats an on-the-ground assessment. 
 D. 
 Select one market to get started! Now you are ready to interpret 
your findings in light of the stated objective: where do you want 
to go and how will you know that you have arrived? (This gets 

Exporting
25
back to the back-of-the-napkin plan.) At this juncture, you should 
have enough data and experience (from going to trade shows, for 
example) to decide which market is best for you to begin in. Hold 
off on the other two countries and don’t start doing business with 
them until after you have a proven success with the first overseas 
market. If the first selected market doesn't work right away, say 
after six months or a year, move on to market No. 2, and so on. 
Don't muddy the waters. You don't want to do too many things at 
once, because it’s not cost effective and you will end up not doing 
any of them right. 
 The Laurel Export Business Plan 
 The following plan—I’ll call it the  Laurel export business plan (LEBP)  —has 
worked well for many of my clients. You can focus on each section heading 
and then build out accordingly based on the questions I pose and com-
ments I make. What many clients experience as they develop an export 
plan is the eureka moment: “I can do this!” The trick is to craft a plan that 
suits you and can absorb economic shifts and shocks along the way, yet 
still allow for you to achieve successful results. And it can’t hurt for you 
to use both the traditional business export and Laurel export plans to 
develop yours. 
 
■ Tip  It is important to identify where the cash will come from to support your export operation 
and, at the same time, access available export financing options. Conduct a complete audit of your 
cash situation so you are not surprised later on to learn you need more money than anticipated to 
reach a new overseas market. Face weak links and potential problems before you are knee deep 
in a fantastic opportunity. 
 1.  Introduction : Compose an explanation of why you should 
export and what your company wants to gain from 
exporting. Your answers will serve as your guiding light 
and foundation for your entire export business plan.  
 2.   Executive Summary : Specify your long-term financial and 
nonfinancial vision for developing an export business. 
Think three, five, and ten years out. This part shows clar-
ity of purpose, direction, and intent. It is an understanding 
of the company’s identity and a short, concise picture of 
the company in the future. Think of it as an entire busi-
ness plan in miniature. 

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
26
 3.  Strategic Leadership : State your leadership ability clearly. 
Do you have what it takes to drive results for your 
export operation? (Refer to Chapter   1  for a refresher on 
the global mindset.) The business owner must have the 
ability to set direction, make decisions, and provide long-
term planning.  
 4.  Company Description : Explain what do you do and why are 
you good at it.  
 5.  Target Export Market : Identify your customers in 
_______________ (pick a target export market). Think 
about what would motivate them to pay for your product 
or service and if they will be able to afford to pay for your 
product or service. Drill down to a more precise view of 
your target audience.  
 
■ Caution   Are you crystal clear on who your customers are and why they use your product or 
service? If not, go back and do a major rethink!  
 6.  The   Competitive Analysis (Market and Customer) : Distinguish 
how your product or service is unique, and explain briefly 
why people in a selected export market would buy it. Do 
you know the strengths, weaknesses, strategies, opportu-
nities, threats, and financial status of your top five com-
petitors? Spell them out.  
 7.  Marketing and Sales Plan : Detail and clarify how you will 
effectively and efficiently reach the people with whom you 
want to connect through your business (direct, indirect, 
intermediary sales, trade shows, e-commerce, mobile, 
etc.). Ensure existing local customers are not neglected! 
Are your products and services suitable for an export 
market, or will major modifications be required? This part 
should be strategic in that it outlines specific action steps 
to achieve future sales goals.  
 
■ Tip  Utilizing market and customer intelligence determines a company’s ability to perceive and 
adapt to changes in the global marketplace. The more homework you do, the better the chance you 
have to achieve desired results. 

Exporting
27
 8.   Operations Plan : Figure out how you will support the busi-
ness strategies through internal operations, systems, and 
organizational structures. Describe key factors to use 
in your business in finding solutions and in meeting the 
wants and needs of customers, suppliers, employees, and 
other key influencers. If exporting a product, how will 
it get made? Do you have the capacity to produce and 
deliver?  
 9.  Information Technology Plan : State how you will leverage 
technology to take advantage of the export marketplace. 
Will your export business be heavily dependent on tech-
nology? List your business’s strengths and weaknesses 
in the information technology area. IT will support your 
company’s business processes and decision making and, at 
the same time, give it an extreme competitive advantage 
in the global marketplace. Plan the parts of your business 
you will use technology for (order taking, mailing lists, 
social media, finances, e-commerce sales) and how you 
will use it.  
 10.   Logistics Plan : Outline how you will get your product or 
service to the chosen export market.  
 11.   Management Structure : Identify the people and experts 
in your business who will implement your plan and 
exceed your goals. Compile a management team section 
that describes who is on your team and what expertise 
each person brings to the table. This section should also 
include an analysis of strengths and weaknesses in the 
team and what might be missing. 
 12.   Future Development : Tailor your business plan by defining 
future milestones that are in line with your desired goals. 
Describe your vision for your business, including your 
exit strategy.  
 13.   Financials (Export Budget) : Analyze your available resources 
(human, material, and financial) to determine how you 
will support export initiatives. Get together three types 
of financial statements: a cash-flow statement, an income 
statement (also referred to as a profit/loss statement), 
and a balance sheet. Set budget targets and develop pric-
ing strategies. Confront your company’s finances squarely. 
You want your export business to be sustainable over the 
long term.  

Chapter 2 | Writing an Export Business Plan
28
 14.   Strategy Implementation : How will you follow up, review, 
and measure results? Have you set a timeline? Home in 
on a detailed action plan for execution.  
 15.  Risk and Reward Analysis : Provide an assessment of every-
thing that can go wrong and right, and a discussion of how 
your export dream team (EDT—discussed in Chapter   3 ) 
can respond.  
 
■ Tip  Have your EDT review your plan so that they can seek external sources of advice, test it, 
and hold you accountable and responsible for implementing it. 
 As your export business grows, you will become more aware of external fac-
tors that influence your business plan, which will allow you to develop ways to 
manage and adapt to them. These external factors might include: import regu-
lations, exchange rates, availability of finance, new or unexpected competition, 
and disruptive technology and logistics, to name just a few. As mentioned 
earlier, anticipating change and adapting to it requires strategic leadership as 
well as Backup Plans B, C, and D.  
 Summary: Leaving You with Fun and Export 
Adventure on Your Mind 
 You should  express and experience  the passion you have for exporting in the 
crafting of your export business plan. If that enthusiasm is not there, recon-
sider what you are attempting to do. It might not be the right time. Individuals 
e-mail me on a weekly basis saying, “Here’s what I want to do in the export 
market…” Then they ask me: “Will it work?” My response: “I don’t know. It 
depends on you.” (Reread Chapter   1  !) This brings us back to the goal of this 
chapter: creating an export business plan that meets your needs, allows room 
for improvement, and serves the life of your business. 
 Now that you know what is involved, craft your own export business plan and 
use it as an indispensable tool for building your export business—and don’t 
forget to maximize profits! Look at it regularly, revise it when necessary, and 
pay attention to the reality of the market. It will sharpen what you are doing 
and why you are doing it, and help you define and achieve professional and 
personal goals.  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_3
 C H A P T E R 
  Prepping For 
Exports 
 Corporate, Legal, Financial, Logistical, and 
Technological Considerations  
 It’s stuff that is transmitted digitally, and also smaller firms packing up 
goods and selling them abroad. If there’s going to be growth over the next 
decade, it’s going to be in that. 
 — Gary Hufbauer, senior trade expert at the Peterson Institute for 
International Economics (2016) 1 
 Now that you’ve set up your business plan, it’s time to delve a little deeper 
into assembling your export company. The next step is tackling the essential 
details of a sound legal, fiscal, logistical, and tech operation. You’ll be faced with 
obstacles ranging from expanding your enterprise, protecting your company, 
and choosing a product name and other intellectual property to opening a 
bank account in your home country, sourcing financing, dealing with special 
tax situations and setting up online platforms. Not all of these issues will come 
into play immediately, but you will do well to familiarize yourself with the 
framework in which you will be operating right from the start. 
3
 1 “Recovery From Trade Swoon May Be Slow,” The Wall Street Journal, last modified 
January 24, 2016,    www.wsj.com/articles/recovery-from-trade-swoon-may-be-slow-
1453229703   

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
30
 Although the expansion of any business tests us on numerous fronts—from 
hiring the right people to covering fixed expenses and revenue genera-
tion—expanding internationally through exports performed primarily via the 
Internet challenges us in a whole new way that could potentially interrupt the 
viability of a business. When reengineering your business from local to export-
ready, you must take into consideration bullet-proofing processes, additional 
laws governing intellectual property, hiring and firing, contracts, and marketing 
and financial management, as well as settling international disputes and steer-
ing Internet-related activities. 
 Prepping for export success boils down to careful planning (refer back to 
Chapter   2  on crafting a business plan), being proactive in seizing opportunities, 
and holding transparent discussions with trusted advisors on where you are 
headed to ensure every move you make is done with confidence and leads to 
greater growth and prosperity for your business. 
 
■ Note  I am not an attorney, banker, logistics expert, accountant, or technology whiz. The 
information in this chapter is based on experience and extensive research and should not be 
construed as an official plan on how something is done. Before proceeding with an action plan, 
consult with a specialist, just as I  would . 
 Line Up Your Export Dream Team 
 One of the first things you should do before officially setting up your export 
business, or if you are an established enterprise and haven’t done so already, 
is to find yourself a good lawyer, a knowledgeable accountant, a savvy banker, 
a logistics expert, and a tech whiz, each of whom should specialize in interna-
tional transactions. They are your  export dream team (EDT).  You may feel that 
you can’t afford to pay for these professional services, but in truth, you can’t 
afford to do without them. 
 The Fab Five: Lawyer,  Accountant, Banker, Logistics 
Expert, Technology Master 
 A qualified  lawyer  , well versed in international trade and the Internet, will pro-
tect you from those who would take advantage of your inexperience in the 
global marketplace, or from unknowingly perpetrating violations yourself! Any 
one of the big national law firms, such as Baker & McKenzie; Skadden, Arps, 
Slate, Meagher & Flom; Foley & Lardner; and Latham & Watkins, will be able to 
advise you on intellectual property issues, the Internet, mergers, acquisitions, 

Exporting
31
and reorganization. The larger the law firm, the greater the overhead and the 
higher the hourly rates you will be expected to pay. Be aware of this starting 
out, and if you can’t afford it, go elsewhere to make your investment more 
cost effective. 
 
■ Tip  To find a good lawyer, ask around and research, research, research! You’d be surprised 
at how asking a simple question to your accountant, banker, or successful small business peer 
group—“Who do you use for legal representation?”—can help you home in on following up and 
getting a solution. Strike a balance of likeability, specialized experience, and affordability that 
meets your needs. You can also find additional assistance from FindLaw.com and Lawyers.com, 
and by consulting with a bar association, such as the American Bar Association. 
 A good  accountant  specializing in international taxation will help maximize 
your cash flow, limit your eventual worldwide tax exposure, and protect you 
from double or triple taxation scenarios. The big accounting firms such as EY 
and Deloitte have offices in nearly every country in the world and can offer 
you a broad variety of global services, but they’ll cost you. A work-around is to 
find a smaller accounting firm that specializes in international accounting and 
taxation matters for small businesses. 
 A well-versed banker can help you finance an export sale, guide you in struc-
turing competitive payment terms (including online options), or even advise 
you on risk factors before you transact business in a new overseas market. 
The large banks such as J.P. Morgan Chase, Bank of America, BMO Harris Bank, 
PNC, Citi, and MB Financial have unmistakable identities and usually have small 
business banking divisions, branch offices worldwide,  and international banking 
divisions. 
 
■ Tip  Even though the thought of using the  big bank guys might intimidate you, once you are 
a customer—and that could be on the basis of depositing $250 to open an account—you are 
entitled to free consultations with the international banking experts to help you better manage your 
export business. 
 A seasoned logistics expert (refer to Chapter   18   on transport options) will 
help you minimize the risk, complexity, and cost of transporting products world-
wide. Big logistic firms such as UPS, DHL, and FedEx transport products world-
wide, prepare specialized export documentation, build shortcuts in standard 
export shipping processes, monitor shipments, and offer guidance on regulatory 
issues involving compliance and trade. Freight forwarders often serve the same 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
32
purpose, but they do so on a more niche basis (by industry or geographic 
location). They too organize shipments to get goods from one point to a final 
destination. Any of these types of organizations are effective and serve as an 
architect for transport. Before you send your product off on a boat, get comfort-
able with one point person to help you navigate the choppy waters and ask her 
about her resources and whether she has people on the ground in the country 
where you desire to conduct business. And, as always, have a backup logistic 
provider in case something goes awry in a country where business is booming. 
 A technology master will positively impact your business’s future, create value 
where you didn’t know it exists (investing in e-commerce, for example), chal-
lenge your assumptions about why things are the way they are, and identify 
where you should disrupt in your industry to gain a new foothold or global 
customer base. Let’s face it. Technology is the most important agent of change 
in the modern world right now, allowing us to make a profound upward shift 
in global markets. We use technology to shape our world, yet we think little 
about the choices we are making for our business. Few expected, for example, 
Apple to upend the music industry with its iPod and iTunes. A technology 
master is a forward thinker and reimagines what’s possible through Internet 
technology. He or she creates new digital offerings and transforms existing 
ones to deliver profitable new exporting revenue streams. The investment 
in a technology master—one with imagination—is a necessary addition to 
the export dream team and can set you on a path towards a stronger global 
competitive advantage.  
 Start Small  
 For your legal, accounting, banking, and technology needs, I suggest you start 
out with a smaller firm that can attend to you on a more personal and eco-
nomical basis. Many founders of small boutique law firms, for example, acquire 
their experience working for a number of years at a big international law firm 
prior to starting their own business. To keep overhead costs and client fees 
low for small business owners, they focus on the highly specialized practice 
areas that are in high demand, such as Internet law, global trademarks, and 
international franchising. The benefit of contracting a smaller firm to satisfy 
your needs is threefold: prior big corporate experience at a fraction of the 
cost, affordable rate structure, and specific expertise. 
 When a question is too tough for your small firm to handle, let them outsource 
it to a larger firm with a more developed international presence. That way, you 
can stick to your budget and your small firm will stay in charge of your legal or 
accounting operations. But when you reach the point where you’re outsourc-
ing more than in-sourcing, it’s time to make the jump to one of the big guns! 
The large international firms employ individuals of many nationalities who are 
well versed in the laws, professional ethics, and regulations of the countries 

Exporting
33
in which they operate and well positioned to serve your interests. Expect to 
require more extensive and sophisticated information about the countries you 
export to as your business grows, particularly if you do a lot of business in any 
one of them. 
 Your lawyer, accountant, banker, logistics expert, and tech master are vital to 
the success of your export strategy. They should be considered the charter 
members of your EDT. As you will see, they often work in concert to keep 
your new enterprise in the most advantageous legal, financial, logistical and 
tech position possible. 
 
■ Tip  I strongly encourage you to set up an export advisory board (EAB) at your company to help 
you tackle tough challenges, cut costs, expand rapidly, get key introductions that lead to significant 
business down the road, and solve problems before they fester. Unlike a board of directors, an EAB 
does not have authority over your business. It is purely there to offer advice that you can take or 
leave. If you don’t know how to establish an EAB, conduct an Internet search with the keywords 
“How to create an advisory board.” Then, follow the suggestions pertaining to exporting. The 
advisory board will serve in addition to your EDT because it will not charge you for consultations 
nor does it have any vested interest in your business other than to help you grow. Your attorney 
on the EDT should draw up a simple contract. What’s in it for people that will encourage them 
to join your EAB? Perhaps a small annual fee (stipend), gift card, occasional dinner, or excellent 
connections to high-level people with common interests will motivate them to jump on board!  
 Corporate Considerations 
 At this juncture, I am assuming you have already chosen a form of organiza-
tion. If so, skip ahead to the next section. If not, there are five basic forms 
of organization in which you can set up your export enterprise: the sole 
proprietorship, the partnership, the C corporation, subchapter S corporation, 
and  Limited Liability Company (LLC)  . Each form has specific  advantages and 
liabilities  . To decide which form will serve you best, ask yourself the following 
questions:
 1.   How big do I aspire for the company to become?  
 2.   Am I willing to risk my personal assets for the business?  
 3.   Am I willing to grow my business alone?  
 4.  Am I in this for the long haul?  
 5.  Are tax savings important to me?  
 6.  Will I sell my business someday?  

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
34
 Once you know your priorities and your preferred operating style, you’ll 
be well placed to discuss your options with your attorney and accountant 
to determine which organizational form will best support your business 
objectives. If you plan to develop a Web site or blog (refer to Chapter   5  ), 
select a domain name that is preferably the same as your business name. As 
the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) says, the steps to starting an 
online business are the same as starting any business. However, doing busi-
ness online, as we will find out in Chapter   8 , comes with additional legal and 
financial considerations, particularly in the areas of privacy, security, copy-
right, and taxation. 
 Here’s a quick course on the five forms of organizational structures and their 
advantages and drawbacks. 
 
■ Tip  Sole proprietorships, S corporations, limited liability companies (LLCs), and partnerships 
are also known as pass-through businesses because the profits of these firms are passed directly 
through the business to the owners and are taxed on the owners’ individual income tax returns.  i 
 The  Sole Proprietorship  
 If you plan on keeping things small, prefer not to share ownership with anyone 
else, and will be dealing in relatively simple, safe products or services, then 
a sole proprietorship might be the way to go. Sole proprietorships are the 
most common form of business. This type of organization is usually taxed on 
income, property, and payroll. A typical sole proprietorship might be a neigh-
borhood flower shop, hotdog stand, or shoe repair shop. 
 Since it is the sole proprietor’s job to run the business, he is taxed for that job 
by way of his personal income. Since the sole proprietorship is smaller in size 
than a corporation, you can expect taxes to be lower. A sole proprietorship 
can easily be kept confidential and dissolved whenever desired, provided all of 
its financial obligations have been satisfied. 
 The downside of this unincorporated business entity is the unlimited liabil-
ity you incur. Since your sole proprietorship is not legally recognized as an 
independent entity apart from your personal assets, it can be used to satisfy 
creditors if you run into serious financial difficulties in the course of your 
business operations. This is perhaps the best reason for limiting the size of 
your company, too. A sole proprietorship can hire any number of employees, 
but if an employee were to get hurt on the job and later sue you, there is the 
possibility that you would lose a significant part of your personal assets. Think 
through what kind of commitment you’re willing to make before you choose 
this form of organization. 

Exporting
35
 If you choose a sole proprietorship, the best way to protect yourself is to obtain 
adequate insurance coverage for the unexpected, such as auto or property and 
liability coverage. Consult with an insurance expert for additional guidance. 
 A sole proprietorship is usually established simply by filling out a standard 
business form purchased from an office supply store. Include the name of the 
business (you can generally skip this step if you are operating the business 
under your own name), have it notarized, and send the form with a check 
(cashier’s or certified) or money order to your county clerk’s office. Call the 
office or your local chamber of commerce to verify that this procedure agrees 
with its requirements and to find out the amount of the fee. While it’s not 
mandatory to trademark your business name, my colleague Barbara Weltman, 
a tax and business attorney and author of such books as  J.K. Lasser’s Small 
Business Taxes 2016, says it is prudent to gain legal protection so that no one 
else can use it. This process holds true for other corporate structures as well.  ii 
 
■ Tip  Independent contractors, better known as consultants, self-employed, and freelancers, 
are individuals who provide services to others outside of an employment situation, and receive 
payment only for the work being done. The providing of these services becomes a business. Be 
sure to consult with your accountant and attorney to determine what type of contract you need 
in place for independent contractor status since your agreement will serve as a legal document 
between you and your client and will also dictate whether you can claim any business deductions. 
 The Partnership 
 If you prefer to share liability, responsibility, and profits with another person, 
then a partnership is for you. As with a sole proprietorship, you will be taxed 
on an individual basis for your share of the partnership, but you will need to 
expend legal fees to have your articles of partnership (see below) drawn up. 
Many people prefer the security a partnership can offer, but keep in mind that 
a partnership is very much like a marriage: Everything that happens to one of 
you, good or bad, impacts both of you. Also, if your business partner walks out 
on you, it’s as bad as or worse than being dumped by your spouse, especially 
if the terms of dissolution have not been negotiated at the outset of your 
relationship—your whole livelihood could be wiped out! 
 A  partnership  is established much like a sole proprietorship—by filling out a 
form establishing your business name, notarizing it, and sending it in with the 
appropriate fee to the county clerk or your Secretary of State—but you will 
also need to draw up a written contract known as the articles of partnership. 
This contract states the salaries of the partners, how profits and losses are to 
be distributed, and what happens if one of the partners wants out. 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
36
 The most common type of partnership is the limited partnership, in which one 
or more partners gives up participation in management decisions in exchange 
for limited liability and at least one partner has unlimited liability. Less com-
mon is the general or regular partnership, in which all the partners have unlim-
ited liability. In a general partnership, the personal assets of the partners can 
be seized when the firm defaults on its obligations. A typical partnership might 
be a real estate venture, law firm, or consultancy practice. 
 The advantages of a partnership are obvious: a larger financial base, perhaps 
a better credit standing (based on one or all of the partners’ wealth), more 
brainpower, and more labor to go around. The disadvantages are that, par-
ticularly in a general partnership, you are subject to unlimited liability—not 
just your own, as in a sole proprietorship, but quite possibly your partner’s 
as well if she cannot fulfill financial obligations. You also may be faced with the 
involuntary dissolution of the partnership if your partner dies or becomes 
disabled or insolvent, and difficulty in transferring or selling your interest. Your 
recourse in any of these eventualities will be determined by what your con-
tract states. These disadvantages may cause you to prefer to limit the size and 
scope of your business operation. Discuss this option thoroughly with your 
accountant and attorney so you are sure you’re not incurring more risks than 
advantages. 
 The  C Corporation  
 If you want to separate your business affairs from your personal life, limit your 
liability, and be able to get out of the business easily if need be and you aspire 
to grow a huge business, then you’ll want to set yourself up as a corporation. 
Examples of typical corporations include Apple, Intuit, Facebook, and Google. 
You will be taxed on a corporate basis (according to the corporation’s net 
profit)  and on a personal income basis (according to your salary and other 
compensation). Corporate and personal income are taxed at different rates 
and treated differently. This is a complex topic and lies outside the scope of 
this discussion. 
 It generally costs more to set up a corporation than a sole proprietorship or 
partnership because of the more involved procedure of incorporation and 
issuance of shares of stock. You can establish your own entity fairly quickly 
online by purchasing a how-to kit (go to LegalZoom.com, where incorpo-
rations start as low as $149 plus the state filing fee, or Nolo.com). I don’t 
recommend this route. It is better to let your attorney handle it. If you do, 
ask first how much it is going to cost you to incorporate. Boutique law firms 
sometimes offer small businesses a flat rate for incorporating a firm, usually 
anywhere between $700 and $1,000 plus state filing fees and other related 
expenses, but you need to be careful about how that rate can rise based on 
where you are located, special documentation, and shareholder work. 

Exporting
37
 The major parties in a corporation are the stockholders, the board of direc-
tors, and the officers. In the beginning, one person can hold all of these offices 
and then pass them along as the business expands. You can lay the foundation 
yourself and then build as big a company as you want upon it. That’s the beauty 
of incorporating. 
 Some of the most interesting advantages of the corporation, though, arise 
from the fact that it’s both a human and impersonal entity. If you set it up by 
yourself, you’re all there is to it—but you can walk away from it and, legally, it’s 
still a continuing enterprise. It is a self-contained entity governed by its own 
laws. It can sue or be sued and it can receive customer complaints or chari-
table donations. Best of all, no matter what happens with the business, your 
personal assets will be protected insofar as you will not lose more than your 
investment in the business thus far—provided, of course, that you did not 
incorporate to cover up your own misconduct (such as intentionally selling a 
harmful product)! 
 The corporation is a powerful form of business and is usually set up with the 
intention to operate on a much grander scale, to diversify, and to maximize 
profits. You can raise capital for your corporation by selling shares of stock or 
by pledging the stock as collateral to a person or entity that is willing to loan 
you money. However, the biggest drawback to a corporation is its greater tax 
liability. It is generally taxed higher than sole proprietorships and partnerships, 
which, as mentioned earlier, are taxed only on the owners’ personal income. 
In addition, a corporation must pay assorted franchise and state taxes. Plus, 
there’s a whole array of corporate documents that must be kept: articles 
of incorporation, bylaws, minutes of shareholders’ meetings, and records of 
issuance of stock certificates, for example. Furthermore, your shareholders 
are the ultimate owners of your company, and that ownership gives them the 
right to receive dividends, review corporate books and records, and hold or 
sell their stock. The larger you become, the more likely you are to consider 
the best way to maximize everyone’s investment.  
 The Subchapter S Corporation 
 The  subchapter S corporation  is like a regular corporation in all but a few 
respects. In addition to a regular corporation’s advantages of limited liability 
and protection of personal assets, this type of corporation enables you to 
avoid the double taxation normally associated with the distribution of cor-
porate earnings to the firm’s shareholders. This is possible because corporate 
income is taxed as the direct income of the shareholders whether it is distrib-
uted to them or not. It costs about the same to set up as a regular corpora-
tion. A typical subchapter S corporation might be a small private-label food 
company or export consulting business. 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
38
 A subchapter S corporation has a limited number of shareholders, which 
may be individuals, estates, or trusts, but not other corporations. The obvious 
disadvantage here is that the limitation on the number of shareholders accord-
ingly limits your ability to raise capital. If that poses a problem, a corporation 
may qualify as a C corporation, which does not have any limit on the number 
of shareholders, foreign or domestic. There are also special circumstances in 
which a subchapter S corporation is taxed more stringently than a regular 
corporation. 
 Limited Liability  Company 
 An LLC is a blended type of legal structure that provides the limited liability 
features of a corporation and the tax efficiencies and operational flexibility of 
a partnership. It is often more flexible than a corporation, and it is well suited 
for companies with a single owner. 
 The owners of an LLC are referred to as members. Depending on the state, 
the members can consist of a single individual (one owner) or two or more 
individuals, corporations, or other LLCs. There are no restrictions on hiring 
employees but you must make sure you are compliant with key federal and 
state regulations. 
 To the federal government, an LLC is not considered a separate tax entity, 
so the business itself is not taxed as a separate business entity. Instead, all 
federal income taxes are “passed through” to the LLC’s members and are paid 
through their personal income tax. While the federal government does not 
tax the income of an LLC, some states do, so check with your state’s income 
tax agency. 
 There are some rules and regulations for choosing the name of a business for 
an LLC. Be sure to inquire with your secretary of state and consult with your 
attorney to ensure you comply. It is also prudent at the outset to develop an 
operating agreement outlining all details pertaining to the members’ roles, 
rights, responsibilities, allocation of profits and losses, percentage of interests, 
special provisions, and so forth. 
 The advantages of an LLC are limited liability, fewer formalities, fewer record-
keeping responsibilities, and fewer restrictions on profit sharing. Members are 
allowed to contribute different levels of financial and intellectual capital. 
 The disadvantage of an LLC is limited life, meaning if a member leaves the 
company, the business dissolves and the members must fulfill all remaining 
legal and business obligations to close the business. However, there is a work-
around: to prolong the life of the business you can elect to include a provision 
in the operating agreement, as mentioned earlier, that indicates what happens 
if someone leaves the business. In some instances, it may be more difficult to 
raise financial capital for an LLC, so be sure to inquire with your attorney 
should you be interested in eventually doing an IPO, for instance. 

Exporting
39
 An LLC can elect to be taxed as a sole proprietor, partnership, S corporation, 
or C corporation, providing greater flexibility. Further, there is always the 
possibility of requesting S-corp status for your LLC. You don’t have to hire a 
lawyer to set up an LLC, but it’s a good idea to have one to advise you on the 
pros and cons of the legal structure and to read over documentation, includ-
ing your operating agreement, to make sure your interests are protected over 
the short and long term. 
 Check with your experts to see which type of entity will give you the most 
advantages. 
 
■ Tip  To access legal document forms and additional assistance without paying top dollar, visit 
LegalZoom.com (which allows you to speak to an attorney) and Nolo.com (which allows you to find 
an attorney in your area). The sites can be used alone or together with your attorney. 
 Legal Considerations 
 Protecting a trademark in the United States—whether it’s your own company 
name, a product, or your supplier’s product name—is a very complicated 
procedure best handled by a very competent attorney. 
 Protect Your  Intellectual Property  
 When you are considering adopting a trademark, you or your attorney must 
perform a search to see if anyone is using that mark on a similar product or 
service. If you discover that someone has beaten you to it, you then have to 
find out when the other party began using the mark and if it is currently in use. 
If it is not, you have to determine if you can have the rights to it. You may find 
out that another firm is using the same mark but on a totally different product 
or service. For example, you might have trademarked the name Violetta for 
your line of purple bird feeders, only to find out that another firm has trade-
marked Violetta for their line of candles. In either case, you’ll need legal advice 
as to your right to use the mark. 
 Most trademark and patent registrations are made through the commissioner 
of patents and trademarks in Washington, DC. After you have taken the nec-
essary steps to protect your design or mark on the domestic front, you will 
have to start the process all over again in the country in which you are about 
to do business. Particularly if you are registering marks in multiple countries, it 
will be crucial to have an attorney who specializes in international intellectual 
property management. Always discuss fees in advance because this process 
can be very costly. 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
40
 Patents and copyrights need the same attention. You never want to see any-
one, anywhere in the world, take what you have created and put their name 
on it. 
 Legal Protection in the  Online Environment  
 International domain name protection requires specific skills, experience, and 
legal governance, so it is best to find a lawyer who is familiar with  Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)  . With the help of 
your tech expert, you should manage domain names as carefully as any other 
intellectual property within the  firm . 
 Domain Name Protection: Part of Your IP Protection 
 You can secure a domain  name  on your own in minutes (try 
NetworkSolutions.com or GoDaddy.com), but the international use and 
scope of it may not apply worldwide. Furthermore, registering a domain 
name does not necessarily create rights to a trademark. For example, let’s 
say I register laurelpizzas.com as a domain name in the United States. After 
securing the domain name, I cannot assume that I also own it as a trade-
mark and that the same domain is available in China (laurelpizzas.com.cn). 
That is where an international lawyer becomes invaluable for protection, 
maintenance, and enforcement of the domain name as it relates to your 
international business brand. 
 Well before deploying an attorney, a good exercise to go through when you 
start up or launch a new product or service via an established enterprise is 
to ask yourself two questions: How important is the domain name or mark 
to me? Is it a part of my core business? You’ll be surprised at how those two 
questions force you to home in on what really matters to you on legal protec-
tion (think along the lines of Twitter, Facebook, and Apple—they all started 
out small). If something is central to your organization’s growth, you’d better 
protect it, patrol it, and keep it updated and scalable. 
 A lot of online legal-environment protection will come into play based on where 
you are headed with your business and how the Internet factors into your over-
all business strategy (all the more reason to deep dive into Chapter   2 ). Budget 
accordingly and allocate resources to get the appropriate legal protection you 
need. To avoid the “I never saw it coming” experience, discuss with your inter-
national attorney at great length about protecting your products and services, 
including online properties and Internet strategy, and all aspects of trade dress—
which refers to the  look and feel of a product—before exporting them overseas. 
You’ll be glad you did. 

Exporting
41
 
■ Tip  The Guide to Law Online , published by the Library of Congress, is a portal of Internet 
sources of interest to legal researchers. It also serves as an annotated compendium of Internet links. 
It’s an excellent source for laypeople who don’t have a legal background but want to develop an 
understanding of a country’s legal system before entering into it and contacting their own attorney 
for advice. Every direct source listed in the guide was successfully vetted before being added to the 
list. To access it, head to   http://www.loc.gov/law/help/guide/nations.php . 
 Other Legal Considerations: Labor Laws, Contracts, 
and Agreements 
 Labor  laws  can vary overseas. You may find your export business growing by 
leaps and bounds, which is the goal of this book—to allow you to hire more 
American employees to support your exports and possibly even hire more 
people where your customers are: overseas. If that is the case, consult with 
your attorney and accountant to determine the best course of action based 
on the labor laws of the country you are contemplating entering and to fully 
understand the legal and tax consequences. 
 I would be remiss if I didn’t highlight the fact that it is nearly impossible to 
run an export business without creating some form of contract or agreement 
covering the following: exclusive distribution and supplier agreements (refer 
to Chapter   11 ), a joint venture, partnership, or licensing agreement, to name 
just a few. Think of it this way: every time you are about to enter into a rela-
tionship overseas that requires a long-term commitment and your company 
is on the line (i.e., could help you grow or take you down), consult with an 
attorney to compose one of these items to protect your interests.  
 Opening Your Bank Account 
 Opening up your company’s first  business bank account  is as simple as 1-2-3—
just don’t forget to mention that you plan to export. If you are an established 
enterprise, skip this section unless you want to be sure you’ve got everything 
covered. You’ll want to set up and maintain your account in an organized fash-
ion, because once you begin to receive money and pay bills, your statements 
will become the foundation of your accounting system. 
 Find a bank in your home country that has an international department 
(preferably one with extensive expertise on letters of credit), has a strong 
worldwide presence, and can provide strong personal service, because you 
will need it. Further, look for a bank that offers twenty-four-hour online access 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
42
from your desk or from a secured Internet line anywhere in the world and a 
mobile-payment feature with industry-leading security, including proven state-
of-the-art encryption software. Online banking allows you to quickly view 
account balances, monitor transactions, identify current foreign exchange 
rates, and send and receive payments—all specifically designed to increase 
efficiency and cost effectiveness at your business. Before you visit your bank, 
call or e-mail the branch and ask what you need to bring with you to open 
an account. Here are some of the documents you will typically be required to 
bring: personal identification, such as a driver’s license or passport; business 
papers showing your type of organization, such as a copy of your business 
license, certificate, articles of incorporation, and corporate seal or corporate 
resolution; and a copy of one of your most recent utility bills (to verify your 
mailing address). It is also helpful to have several hundred dollars or so for the 
initial deposit, so that you can get your account activated right away. 
 Be sure you have good rapport with your banking officer. He will play a very 
important position on your EDT! 
 Banking in and with different countries can be a challenge. Choosing an inter-
national bank that is networked to branch offices worldwide and has relation-
ships with other banks in the countries you intend to do business spares you 
having to open an overseas account and allows you to transact business in 
the currency of your choice. Further, choosing an international bank with a 
relationship to a bank in Japan will also allow you to save money by hedging 
extreme Yen-US dollar fluctuations. There will be also be times when you are 
unsure as to what currency you should pay in or be paid in (see Chapter   20 ). 
Other times, you might make a payment to an independent contractor as dis-
cussed earlier in one country via PayPal or Square and not know if you should 
withhold taxes. In some circumstances, the issue of withholding taxes may be 
reduced or eliminated altogether by a tax treaty between two countries. How 
will you know? That’s where your team of export specialists, in this case your 
international banker, is ever so vital in keeping you informed and handling all 
that comes before you on a case-by-case basis. 
 
■ Tip  I have known clients who have grown their exports to a point of necessitating the use of 
three different banks: one for domestic (local) support, one for a global reach and one for specific 
country assistance. 
 Effective Financial Planning Right from the Start 
 Whether you are operating as a sole proprietorship, a partnership, a corpo-
ration, a subchapter S corporation, or an LLC, you’ll need to monitor your 
profits and operating expenses and to plan for the payment of taxes. You don’t 
want to wait until you get to the end of your calendar year to find out where 

Exporting
43
you stand in terms of profit and loss. It’s best to prepare monthly financials—
income statements, balance sheets, and cash flow statements—as you go. If 
you haven’t made a sale yet, you are probably asking yourself at this point why 
you need to keep these detailed financial records. It’s simple: Even though you 
may have minimal sales, or none at all, in the first few months, you are still 
spending money. You have expenses!  And sooner or later, every business needs 
working capital in order to grow. 
 Another situation that requires monitoring expenses would be one in which, 
after running your company for a few months, you decide to go to a bank 
for a loan to help grow your business. Before the bank decides if you’re a 
good credit prospect, it needs to see some details on your company’s financial 
history—namely, your year-to-date sales, expenses, profit-and-loss statement, 
sales projections, and cash flow analysis (see Chapter   2 ). A financial statement, 
preferably prepared by your CPA or a reputable accounting organization, not 
only helps you to control costs but also tells you at a glance if you are making 
money or losing it and where adjustments need to be made. Monthly state-
ments are best for maintaining adequate financial records. If you discipline 
yourself to set up and maintain these financial records right from the start, 
it will be a snap to produce historical data on your business for anyone who 
might request it. 
 Your financials will also serve as a basis for you and your accountant to make 
the determinations I will go on to discuss, each of which will affect your tax 
liability and, accordingly, the profitability of your worldwide business.  
 Maximizing Tax Benefits for Your Multinational 
Business 
 Once you’ve got an organization set up and an accounting system that makes 
sense for the way you want to run your business, you’ll discover that your 
global growth will affect your financial planning. Depending on your form of 
organization, overseas business will present you with a whole new set of 
accounting and tax issues. Yet the name of the game will remain the same: 
minimize  taxes , maximize profits. 
 At some point, ambitious as they may now seem if you’re new to the export 
scene, scenarios like the following will become your reality:
• 
 You generate income through a salaried employee who 
resides in the country in which you do business.  
• 
 You generate income from an export intermediary who 
conducts business in a foreign country.  
• 
 You generate income from exports worldwide.  

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
44
• 
 You generate income through the writing of an export-
success article for a highly acclaimed blog in China.  
• 
 You generate income through your e-commerce site 
from individuals the world over.  
• 
 You generate income through a service export you are 
providing to a company in Bangladesh.  
• 
 You generate income from mobile payments made 
through PayPal, Google Wallet, and Square.  
 You are probably beginning to see how an accountant with international exper-
tise becomes indispensable. You wouldn’t want inappropriate accounting either 
to diminish the income you derive from any opportunities like these or to 
cause you to run afoul of tax laws. Don’t think for a minute that you can apply 
domestic tax rules to international transactions. For each case, you and your 
accountant must ask the following questions: How are these business arrange-
ments treated from a tax standpoint? Are you required to pay any domestic 
taxes? Are you required to pay any taxes on profits earned in a foreign coun-
try? Are you required to pay taxes online and, if so, where and to whom? If 
you need to transfer assets to a foreign entity, how do you do it? Will your 
exports involve any intercompany pricing rules or complex foreign currency 
provisions? Are you better off, from a profit or cash-flow standpoint, seizing a 
particular opportunity or passing it up? And, a very important question to ask 
you accountant, when you are involved in large cross-border transactions, how 
do you avoid double taxation? In the United States, for example, as a boost to 
businesses operating overseas, the government offers a reduction on national 
taxes based on the taxes you pay abroad, which is referred to as the US Foreign 
Tax Credit. Use the list as a discussion point with your international accoun-
tant. It will serve you well as you explore virgin overseas territories.  
 More Ways to Guard Your Bottom Line 
 Be aware of the several other traps (and opportunities) awaiting exporters 
that follow. 
 Trade and Customs Duties  
 Planning and managing customs duties plays an important role in pricing your 
export product so that it is profitable. First, pay attention to how your product 
is classified (see Chapter   19 to find out how to determine your product clas-
sification), because that classification will affect what duties are imposed and 
thus make or break your chances of exporting it at a profit. Be sure to get 

Exporting
45
your classification in writing from transportation and logistics experts and 
then check with them later on to see if there is ever a time when you can 
reduce or defer duties or even have your products cross borders duty-free. 
 US customs duties vary widely based on where a product is primarily made, 
the valuation of the goods, and the destination country. The duties raise rev-
enue for the federal government and protect domestic producers. There are 
three different types of duties: ad valorem, specific, and compound.
• 
 Ad valorem duties are assessed as a percentage of the 
value of the goods, in the form of either a transaction 
value or what you would pay in the country of origin. 
Always try to keep your invoice value at a net sales price. 
Don’t write up your invoice with commissions or trans-
portation factored into your selling price or you may end 
up paying a much higher duty!  
• 
 Specific duties are assessed on a fixed-basis per-unit price, 
such as ten cents per kilogram or forty cents per item, 
regardless of the transaction cost.  
• 
 Compound or  mixed  duties combine the bases of ad 
valorem and specific duties. For example, a shipment 
might be assessed at 5 percent of the transaction plus ten 
cents per unit. This works well on very high-priced items.  
 Keep in mind that certain countries offer privileges on some imports. Before 
you export, check with US customs, your local department of commerce, or 
a US Export Assistance Center to find out the duties for your product and if 
your product is eligible for any breaks. 
 You should also inquire with your tax accountant about  foreign trade zones 
(FTZs) and how they might help you reduce or eliminate customs duties. An 
FTZ is a domestic US site that is considered to be outside the country’s cus-
toms territory and is available for use as if it were in a foreign country. A US 
company can accelerate the process of duty drawbacks or tax rebates in one 
of these zones or even have a product imported, assembled on site, and re-
exported without any duties, taxes, or local ad valorem taxes being charged. In 
addition, there are duty drawbacks, which allow you to recover duties paid to 
US customs on exported merchandise, but you must perform feasibility stud-
ies to determine how this procedure might apply to and benefit your business. 
 For example, if a product is manufactured in the United States out of imported 
raw materials and then exported back out of the country, the imported mate-
rials used might be eligible for a duty drawback, less 1 percent to cover cus-
toms costs. The passages of US Free Trade Agreements enacted in more than 
twenty countries (e.g., the North American Free Trade Agreement [NAFTA]; 
the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement 

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
46
[CAFTA-DR]; and the Trans-Pacific Partnership [TPP, in negotiation; refer 
to Chapter   2 ]) along with bilateral free trade agreements (e.g., Singapore, 
Australia, Jordan, Israel) have brought about many favorable developments in 
the area of customs duties as well. Your accountant should keep you posted.  
 Foreign Sales Corporation  
 Whether you are a small, privately held, or multinational US company, setting 
up a foreign sales corporation (FSC; an offspring of the domestic international 
sales corporation [DISC]), can offer you an attractive tax incentive—exemp-
tion from a certain percentage of tax on net profits from export transactions. 
You need to be doing a substantial amount of exporting to make this worth-
while. Most international accountants can help you here. 
 For a business to establish an FSC, it must have no more than twenty-five share-
holders, must maintain an office outside the United States that issues invoices 
and keeps financial-activity summaries, and must include at least one non-US 
resident on its board of directors. An FSC is usually set up for a multinational 
US enterprise that is in a regular tax position with no excess foreign tax credits 
and that is exporting products for which 50 percent or more of the manufac-
turing process is carried out inside the country. Profits generated or dividends 
issued by the FSC that go back to the company’s US business are generally tax 
free. Check with the World Trade Organization Web site (  http://www.wto.
org  ) to ensure that FSCs are still in effect at the time that you read this and 
not merely of historical interest. For example, there has been much discussion 
on The Extraterritorial Income Exclusion Act. “The new legislation repeals the 
FSC rules and develops a new category of income that is excluded from gross 
income, absent an election to the contrary, and that does not require, but still 
permits, the use of a foreign corporation.”  iii Verify with an international accoun-
tant whether this new legislation can apply to your business.  
 Interest-Charge Domestic International Sales 
Corporation 
 An  interest-charge domestic international sales corporation (IC-DISC)  
can increase your cash flow, provide a reduced taxable base at the export 
level, and even in certain instances provide a lower effective tax rate. To 
qualify for an  IC-DISC  , you must form a corporation (such as an S corp 
or a closely held C corp) that exports and produces or manufactures US 
export property (e.g., fabricated metal products and electrical machinery 
equipment) inside the country. It must consist of a minimum of 50 percent 
US content, which is sold primarily outside the country. IC-DISCs are 

Exporting
47
“paper” entities and can defer commission payments of up to $10 mil-
lion, a limitation that was intended to restrict IC-DISC activity to smaller 
businesses. According to Joseph Englert, president and founder of Export 
Assist, the IC-DISC acts as a commission agent on the export sales of 
the parent company. The commission income of the IC-DISC is calculated 
based on the combined taxable income and expenses related to the export 
sales of the US exporter and the IC-DISC.  iv Consult with an international 
accountant to determine whether you should look into an IC-DISC for 
your business.  
 Summary 
 From the time you start out to the time you reach the mature stages of 
your export company, and from simple incorporation to mergers, acqui-
sitions, and reorganizations, your EDT of international legal, accounting, 
banking, logistic, and tech experts can add value and help create and maxi-
mize profit opportunities for you and allow you to succeed in the dynamic 
worldwide marketplace. Our discussion here is only an introduction to 
the legal, financial, logistical, and tech issues that will affect your export 
business, a starting point for your long-term planning and a demonstra-
tion of the absolute urgency of getting the very best advice. Do not be 
bashful about consulting with your experts! As your business expands, the 
issues that impact it will become more complex and sophisticated. The 
more questions you ask, the more you will build your own expertise—and 
become a valuable export player in your own right. 
 Now that you have seen how to line up professional advisory support and 
build a solid management foundation from which to grow, let’s turn to some 
practical concerns a little closer to the home front—by discussing how to put 
together the human side of your export enterprise.  
 Notes 
  i.   Tax Foundation, “An Overview of Pass-through Businesses 
in the United States,” last modified January 31, 2016, 
  http://taxfoundation.org/article/overview-
pass-through-businesses-united-states  . 
  ii.   Barbara Weltman, “How to Start a Sole Proprietorship,” 
Inc. Web site, last modified October 12, 2010,   http://
www.inc.com/guides/2010/10/how-to-start-a-
sole-proprietorship.html  .  

Chapter 3 | Prepping For Exports
48
 iii.   Neal Block, Baker & McKenzie, Chicago, Peter Connors, 
Orrick, Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP, New York, “The 
Extraterritorial Income Exclusion Regime Increases Scope 
of Export Incentives,” modified January 31, 2016,   https://
www.orrick.com/Events-and-Publications/
Documents/5030.pdf  .  
 iv.   Joseph Englert, “Interest Charge Domestic International 
Sales Corporation,” AICPA Store, last modified October 27, 
2011,   http://www.kluwerlawonline.com/abstract.php?id=
351470  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_4
 C H A P T E R 
 The Human Side 
of an Export 
Enterprise 
 Create an Environment Where People Will Flourish  
 If you have the wrong people on [your] bus, nothing else matters. You 
may be headed in the right direction, but you still won’t achieve greatness. 
Great vision with mediocre people still produces mediocre results. 
 —Jim Collins, business consultant, best-selling author and lecturer (2001)  i 
 Jim Collins has it right. No matter what brilliant idea or well-organized plan 
you have in place for exporting, the basic and most important side of your 
enterprise is still the human side. It starts with getting the right people on 
your export bus. Whether you hire employees with full benefits and perks 
or independent contractors, you want excellent people around you who 
are as passionate about your company’s prospects as you are and who can 
4

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
50
do something you can’t do that will help transform your export business. 
Complementary values help, but accumulating talent with qualities unlike your 
own fortifies achieving a vision faster. Although the vision is yours, the talent 
will be ones with the skill set to get things done. 
 At the start of running a business, it’s about you, your people, and your com-
pany’s capabilities. In “Twelve Tactics for Creating Powerful Global Leadership 
Connections,” I talk about how people are the engine of our success and 
every human contact is a chance for practicing great, enduring leadership—
taking your organization from mediocrity to superiority.  ii Yet, you’d  be sur-
prised at how long you can go without too much being accomplished—with 
all talk and no action. But as you expand internationally, you will discover 
that success becomes less about talk and more about execution. Executing 
anything requires highly motivated people. Luckily for you, due to technology, 
hiring globally to get the work done isn’t difficult and allows you to broaden 
your pool of exceptional candidates. 
 In Chapter   1 , I provided a shortlist of twelve personal characteristics that I find 
work in the export marketplace. These are based on my own hands-on expe-
riences and the observations of others who have achieved success in crossing 
boundaries in the business world. Some of those characteristics are: the abil-
ity to adapt, to sustain a high level of cultural and emotional intelligence, and 
to get things done with people from diverse backgrounds. If you skipped 
Chapter   1 , go back and read it. That’s where I highlight the fundamentals of 
what you need as a leader to bring out the best in others. It starts with devel-
oping a global mindset. Next, it’s about finding and developing your people. 
 
■ Tip  To fully allow people to realize their personal goals—and thereby contribute to the goals 
of your organization—you must provide them clear objectives, rewards, and the freedom to use 
creativity and imagination. 
 So, how do you find great people to, as Jim would say, get on your export bus? 
How can you make sure they  remain   happy and motivated? We’ll find out 
here. I will help you to create a functional team that thinks globally yet com-
municates locally with cultural sensitivity, to find the best places to outsource 
work, and to develop a plan to work effectively with others and nurture talent. 
 Creating a Functional Team 
 The first big characteristic to look for in people destined to do international 
work is their ability to be comfortable and confident in their own skin, along 
with a heightened sensitivity to others. After that, focus on integrity: can you 
trust them? Assessing a person’s integrity requires frequent dealings over 

Exporting
51
time. You can’t rush that. There are, however, other qualities you should seek 
from job candidates that are easier to ascertain in a limited time,  including:
• 
 An awareness of a new breed of communication (both 
online and offline) that exhibits cultural sensitivity  
• 
 Persistence (competitive drive)  
• 
 Initiative  
• 
 An interest in international matters  
• 
 Bi- or multilingual language capabilities  
• 
 Cultural empathy  
• 
 Good writing and speaking abilities  
• 
 Some international experience—and not just a vacation 
to Disneyland in France  
 Last, the individual must be sensitive to the human behavior of all races, cul-
tures, and ethnicities. They must have emotional intelligence beyond reproach. 
Meaning, the individual must care. If you find part or most of these character-
istics in a person, hire her. 
 
■ Caution   The best education in the world will not always produce the ideal hire. Initiative and 
international experience matter more. 
 Spotting a Good Global  Hire  
 A typical hiring  scenario  might unfold like this: Six people diverse in ethnic-
ity and from different parts of the world are situated in a conference room. I 
invite a potential hire, Steve, into the room for a preliminary interview. Steve 
is wearing casual clothes with sandals and no socks and immediately starts 
talking to everyone. He even manages to slip in a joke about his lousy plane 
flight. He plops down on his chair, gulps his water, and says, “I am sure you 
want to know how I am qualified for the job.” And from there, he jumps into 
talking about everything he has done during the past five years without tak-
ing a breath or ever noticing if anyone in the room was paying the least bit 
of attention to what he is saying. He fumbles for his business cards and then 
tosses one out on the table to each person and asks, “Any questions?” Later, 
you notice that his application had numerous unanswered questions, signaling 
his lack of attention to detail. 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
52
 We don’t need to concern ourselves with whether Steve is qualified for the 
job. Even if he has terrific skills in certain areas, he won’t cut it on manners 
and cultural sensitivity. 
 See how easy it is to spot immediately when someone falls short on manners 
and cultural sensitivity and etiquette? 
 You can see how this same scenario could play out on a Skype video call with 
a trade partner or client. Steve would sign in late, wearing a T-shirt and jeans, 
and, after fifteen minutes, abruptly leave for a moment to get a soft drink while 
the client wonders what just happened. 
 Would you want to have someone like Steve handling a critical part of your 
export business, like prospecting for new overseas customers? You need 
someone with an obsessive attention to details coupled with hypersensitivity 
to those around them. That’s what helps fuel an incredible export business. 
 Contrast Steve with Bob, the second candidate. Bob is invited the next day to 
a similar meeting. He responds politely when introduced to each person but 
does not say too much until called upon. You like that; you know that being 
a good listener only helps navigate complex issues in the global marketplace. 
Bob shares his experience as it relates to the job at hand but only after being 
asked. That conveys his discipline and decisiveness. 
 Another thing you notice: Out of respect and politeness, Bob sits down last 
to ensure each person has a seat at the table even without knowing whether 
there are enough seats in the room. People attending the interview witness 
that he is sensitive to others, even when it could put him in an uncomfortable 
position (left him standing up, for instance, due to the lack of chairs). Also, he 
doesn’t prompt the exchange of business cards. He pays attention to how busi-
ness cards are presented to him—with two hands and the card in English with 
a person’s credentials facing up—similar to Japanese-business-card etiquette 
and that of many other cultures as well. He responds exactly the same way 
and waits for others to step over to him to exchange cards—and responds in 
kind. Exhibiting confidence, Bob asks if he can get water for everyone during a 
break. Only after serving another person water does he sip his. Also impres-
sive—he wore a navy suit with a crisp white business style shirt, with a classic 
stripe tie and black lace-up shined shoes. It’s clear that he had found out well 
in advance of the interview what the appropriate attire would be. 
 As the interview progresses, Bob answers all questions posed to him in a 
seemingly honest and forthright manner. At one point, he even offers to get 
back to the team on a matter he is unsure about. The upshot: whatever is 
thrown Bob’s way, he keeps his cool, acts his true self, and proves effortlessly 
through the course of conversations that he has vast experience in export 
trade.  

Exporting
53
 Before hiring a person to be in charge of any responsibility within your firm, 
besides the usual questions you ask in doing your due diligence, also ask these 
 questions  :
• 
 “What makes you a good fit for the role we need filled 
and how will your international experience support it?”  
• 
 “Tell me about a time where you creatively collaborated 
with a diverse team or customer base worldwide. What 
did you do and what was the outcome?”  
• 
 “When you’re not working, what brings joy to your life?”  
 In response to the last question, someone might  answer  , “I get joy from finding 
export opportunities in our brave new world” or “I particularly enjoy travel-
ing internationally.” Surprisingly, they may also offer answers like “Watching 
thriller movies is my passion” or “Drinking Jack Daniel’s is my main source of 
enjoyment.” 
 It’s usually pretty easy to assess who will fit in and who won’t. Look for the 
person with the “Let’s go take on the world” label planted on his forehead. 
Then grab ’em. 
 When it’s time to negotiate a salary, research the rates (you can use    www.
payscale.com   or    www.salary.com  ) that you are willing to pay for a full-time 
employee so you don’t make an offer that’s too low (cheap) or too extrava-
gant. Find out what real people are earning in the market relative to the job 
you need done and vary your offer up or down by 10 percent. After settling 
on a reasonable figure, stick to it and nurture the relationship from there. 
Help your employees get everything they deserve and it will come back to 
you a hundred times over in the growth and success of your export business. 
 Hiring is one of the biggest challenges for business owners and particularly for 
exporters. Accept that you will never get it right all of the time. The stories 
in this section were included simply to help you see how a certain kind of 
person will help further your export goals while many other candidates will 
keep you from them. 
 My advice: Take it slow. Resist the temptation to fill a position quickly. Check 
references thoroughly. You can mitigate your risks by getting a second opinion 
on a candidate (internally or externally), and developing recruitment strate-
gies that avoid costly hiring mistakes. 
 
■ Caution   If someone you hire cannot do the job, eliminate them. If they are incompetent, 
eliminate them. If they are inaccessible, eliminate them. If they are rude, eliminate them. The 
longer you wait to let someone go, the longer the organization and others suffer. There’s a saying: 
“Hire slow and fire fast!” 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
54
 Developing a World-Class Team 
 Now that you’ve seen a couple of examples of how to assess whether some-
one has what you think it takes to succeed on your export bus, let’s take a 
look at what roles need to be filled as you grow your export  business  . 
 Success in exporting is directly related to a companywide commitment. That 
commitment is the responsibility of you alone if you are a sole proprietor, or 
in the case of a larger enterprise, of the executive committee as well as the 
heads of finance, operations, sales and marketing, legal, logistics, research, tech-
nology, and culture departments. Assuming you manage an organization that 
is already in place, you need to be sure each of these people is on the export 
bus and ready and willing to make the journey with you and happy about it. 
If they are not, you must get the wrong people off the bus and reassign new 
people to their seats. 
 Once you recognize the human resources available to you and what it takes to 
export a product or service, you’ll need to prepare a list of what is required 
from each of the functional areas of your company. Then it’s up to you to 
develop your world-class team, which will work in concert. Keep in mind that 
many if not most of these positions can be outsourced until you are ready to 
bring them in-house; I’ll say more about this later in the chapter. The team 
might look like this:
• 
 International Finance or Accounting Manager : This person 
oversees  international money  matters (preparation of 
financial statements, determining the best method of pay-
ment, and handling the payroll, for example) and reports 
to chief finance officer (CFO).  
• 
 Business Development Manager : This role is responsible for 
prospecting new markets and new customers.  
• 
 Export Operations  Manager : This employee provides assis-
tance to key-operations personnel on business issues 
linked to export business; tracks compliance measures 
and the use of export licenses; works closely with the 
international logistics manager, international legal counsel, 
and manufacturing manager. Note: As you expand, often-
times a manager of export control compliance is needed 
to manage day-to-day operations of a regulatory compli-
ance program.  
• 
 International Legal Counsel : This person oversees all legal 
issues pertaining to exporting (in-country compliance, 
contracts, trademarks, disputes, patents, and licenses).  

Exporting
55
• 
 International  Logistics or Supply Chain  Manager : This team 
member works closely with operations (manufacturing), 
marketing, and purchasing to create a seamless export 
transport, and handles all technical details of the export 
transportation, including choice of transport mode, docu-
mentation, and varying customs regulations. These can be 
one in the same depending on the size of the organization.  
• 
 Marketing and Social Media  Manager : This employee cre-
ates social media platforms, joins and manages appro-
priate online community groups, and is responsible for 
marketing the company to the world via all social media 
channels. As the company enters more overseas mar-
kets, a PR manager might come on board to promote the 
company through a variety of media channels that foster 
the growth of exports.  
• 
 Customer Service  Manager: This person makes sure cus-
tomers are happy and satisfied and want to return. She 
also handles customer complaints and disputes.  
• 
 HR Manager : This position plans, directs, and coordinates 
human resource management activities (including but not 
limited to outsourcing, compensation and benefits policy, 
equal employment opportunity matters, etc.) to maxi-
mize human potential and productivity. In addition, the 
HR manager and her staff (again, dependent on the size 
of company), recruits, interviews, and selects applicants.  
• 
 Internet Technology  Manager : This role oversees all Internet-
related issues, including but not limited to the develop-
ment and maintenance of online platforms, e-commerce 
sites, blogs, social media and cloud platforms, banner ad 
designs, apps, and e-mail accounts.  
• 
 Web Designer : The person in this position specializes in 
the design and development of user-centered Web sites, 
blogs, and platforms and manages search-engine optimi-
zation, opt-in newsletters, and globally friendly graphic 
designs.  
• 
 Administrative or Office  Manager : This person makes life 
for everyone far more sane by paying attention to such 
details as office supplies; sample mailings; answering the 
phone; acknowledging employee anniversaries, awards, 
or promotions; ensuring the company kitchen is well 
stocked; and coordinating and setting up meetings and 
web-conferencing calls.  

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
56
 
■ Note  Don’t be put off by the presumable number of people it takes to export. A friend and 
colleague of mine, Barbara Roberts, once told me that you don’t necessarily need a dozen people to 
pull off growing an international company successfully. Over a seven-year period, she grew a stock-
photography business from a $7 million to a $45 million, world-renowned, and technologically 
state-of-the-art company—all with just a handful of people. You can do this too, provided you take 
it one market at a time, hire on an as-needed basis, and persevere. 
 As you expand, you might have to hire additional people as situations 
develop—for example, to support a growth market that takes off rapidly and 
unexpectedly in India, Brazil, or China. Or you may need someone to handle 
new customer inquiries coming in online from China—in Chinese. And that 
even begets more decisions to be made: can the person who speaks Chinese 
reside in China or does he need to be located in the United States? These are 
just a few of the issues and considerations you must address, and oftentimes 
you don’t have the answers until you are well into it. 
 
■ Caution   Don’t assume the individuals who manage a function locally will have the time or the 
capabilities to manage that same function on the export front. Ask. And gauge as best you can their 
enthusiasm for the expanded job responsibilities. 
 In the start-up stage, my recommendation is to have someone from each 
department set aside one hour each day just to work on an  international sales 
strategy . It doesn’t matter if there are no sales pending; it is critical to arrange 
a structured amount of time for the purpose, which requires discipline, com-
mitment, and an exchange of information. You should have meetings to give 
everyone the feelings of importance and team spirit that are critical for the 
growth and prosperity of the company. 
 People will also need to be trained. You must first communicate the com-
pany’s vision, goals, and objectives. This can be as simple as sitting down with 
each individual to discuss them: What are we going after on this project? How 
fast do we expect to get there? How will we get it done? Who will work on 
the projects as they pop up? How will we get help if we don’t know how to 
do something? How will we measure results? 
 You’ll quickly realize that the desire to expand internationally takes a team 
effort and commitment, which will define and shape the export process. If you 
are a novice exporter, your employees and independent contractors will learn 
as you learn. The point is to get input as often as possible and insist that team 
members execute their portion of the plan. You also want to convey that you 
are in this endeavor together to learn, grow, and make it a success!  

Exporting
57
 Best Places to Outsource Work 
 Technology and the Internet have made it ridiculously efficient to search out 
people to do the tasks you don’t want to do yourself. How do you know when 
outsourcing is the solution? If you are seeking better-skilled workers than 
you currently have on your bus for less money, that’s the time to  outsource  . 
Another added benefit: Outsourcing allows you to access process superiority 
and physical resources. But here are a couple of questions to answer to know 
for sure:
 1.  Is there a competitive advantage to doing the job in-house? 
If you are a web developer, you most certainly don’t need 
to outsource IT, but perhaps HR or accounting is not your 
cup of tea and you are not at a point to hire a full-time 
person to oversee these areas.  
 2.  Is the task at hand related to your core competency? 
If not, outsource it! Focus on what you are good at and 
let someone else do the rest.  
 3.  Is the task at hand a one-off situation? You might have to 
manage an annual dinner conference with all your inter-
national distributors or put together an e-book on your 
company’s ethics policy for distribution to suppliers and 
distributors, for instance. In either of those cases, out-
sourcing would work.  
 4.   Would it be cheaper to have the task at hand be out-
sourced vs. performed internally?  
 5.  Do you look forward to the idea of getting rid of a 
responsibility that can easily be done by a more experi-
enced firm who does it all the time and at a much lower 
rate than you would pay internally? Payroll and HR are 
two examples to illustrate  this   point. 
 Jobs that are ripe for outsourcing are those of a writer, editor, and transla-
tor; of a web developer, programmer, designer, and drafter (engineer); of a 
call-center operator and medical professional; of administrative support and 
human resources (to handle hiring, firing, and payroll); of social media experts 
and business development experts; of export-trading intermediaries; of public 
relations, marketing, and computer professionals; and of consulting. 
 The best way to find the right people is to vet them in a way that drills down on 
their capabilities to determine if they are a good fit. But before you can do that, 
you must create job descriptions for each position you need to fill. Be specific. 
You are hiring someone to get something done. What is it? Spell it out. Use the 
description as a basis for filling out a job request and for comparing it against a 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
58
job applicant’s response. Here is a sample job description for an Export Manager 
at a consumer packaged goods (CPG) company called ABC Company. Note: 
This is for an Export Manager position, not an Export Operations Manager as 
referenced earlier. 
 EXPECTATIONS
• 
 Manage business relationships across a diverse worldwide 
geography of distributors, sales agents, and key retailers.  
• 
 Develop the sales plan to grow existing ABC Company’s 
export businesses and markets.  
• 
 Identify, prioritize, and implement business development 
plans in new, emerging markets for ABC Company’s brands.  
• 
 Deliver the annual plan for key sales performance indi-
cators, including profitable revenue, market share, and 
export trade as a percent of revenue.  
• 
 Collaborate with field sales agents, marketing teams, 
operations/supply chain, regulatory/legal, technology, and 
finance to create profitable, sustainable, brand-building 
programs across established and new customer bases.  
• 
 Manage all financials related to export customers includ-
ing demand planning monthly forecasts, annual market-
ing and trade budgets and actuals, and post promotion 
analysis to identify return on investment (ROI) on key 
programs. 
• 
 Communication of all ABC Company’s policies and pro-
cedures, pricing and trade programs, sales and market-
ing programs, and new products to field sales agents and 
distributors. 
• 
 Ensure compliance with related governmental export 
requirements. Maintain effective relationships with said 
entities. Keep senior leadership informed of key trends & 
opportunities within this field.  
• 
 Develop strong relationships with key ABC Company 
personnel including senior leadership, supply chain, cus-
tomer service, marketing, manufacturing, finance, legal, and 
technology teams. Leverage relationships to grow smart 
and fast and push ABC Company to accelerate growth 
in current and new export markets near and long-term.  

Exporting
59
 Desired Skills and Experience: 
 EDUCATION, EXPERIENCE, AND QUALIFICATIONS:
• 
 Bachelor’s degree required from an accredited college or 
university.  
• 
 Minimum of 8 to 10 years of experience in the consumer 
packaged goods (CPG) industry. Key account manage-
ment, sales planning, and field sales experience is essential.  
• 
 Demonstrated expertise and results in directly managing 
export sales and logistics in CPG industry is required.  
• 
 Excellent leadership, communication, collaboration, orga-
nizational, and cross-cultural skills necessary to manage 
multiple responsibilities and ability to work cross-func-
tionally in a dynamic environment.  
• 
 Proficiency required with Microsoft Office applications 
(i.e., Excel, Powerpoint and Word), Skype, and Citrix 
GoToWebinars, and working knowledge of syndicated 
resources (Nielsen/Information Resources/comScore).  
• 
 Full understanding of the export landscape (outside of 
the US and Canada), especially in emerging markets, and 
complete mastery of global market trends for a consumer 
product business, customer strategies, and competition.  
• 
 Ability to travel both domestically and internationally.  
• 
 Must be able to communicate effectively in English both 
written and oral. Second language beneficial. 
 The following sections offer a couple of places to look for good people to 
match the skill sets you need. 
 Freelancers and Independent Contractors: The New 
Gig Economy 
 To reach freelancers and independent contractors in what is considered the 
new gig economy, try  the   following resources. Be sure to inquire about fees; 
they are prone to change often. For example, credit card and other payment 
processing charges are typically in addition to a company’s fee.   
• 
 Guru :   http://www.guru.com . Guru is a highly populated 
job-hunting site with an easy-to-get-started process and 
a good payment system (it’s simple and secure, for one). 
Guru is free to sign up for but you can upgrade to a 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
60
paid membership, which gets you certain perks (Basic, 
Professional, Business, or Executive) and takes a project 
fee of anywhere from 5-12 percent of the freelancer’s 
invoice amount, predicated on the scope of the project. 
Credit card and PayPal payment processing fees are in 
addition to Guru’s charges.   Guru has more than 1.5 mil-
lion members worldwide.  
• 
 Elance :   http://www.elance.com .  Elance, now an Upwork 
Company, is free to join and set up an account and takes 
a standard project fee of 8.75 percent (the quote submit-
ted by the freelancer includes your fee). When the work 
is completed, Elance deducts its commission and trans-
fers the rest to the freelancer.  
• 
 Virtual Assistants.com :   http://www.virtualassistants.
com  . Virtual Assistants.com is good for finding secretarial, 
customer service, data entry, writing, and tech support 
workers. You can post a job and negotiate a fair and rea-
sonable rate based on your budget. For members who 
are VAs and wish to find a job, the subscription fee is 
$9.99 a month or $49.99 a  year  . Posting a VA job is free.  
• 
 Zirtual :   http://zirtual.com . Zirtual connects busy 
professionals with virtual personal assistants to do 
everything from research to legal and accounting to 
staff management. Zirtual charges $398 per month for 
the Entrepreneur Plan, $698 per month for the Startup 
Plan, and $998 a month for the Small Business Plan. The 
 fees  vary based on the work performed and the number 
of hours of assistance you need each month. All plans 
include a dedicated U.S.-based college-educated VA; 9:00 
a.m.-6:00 p.m. your time zone availability; and direct con-
tact via phone, SMS and email.  
• 
 Upwork:   http://www.upwork.com . In 2014, Elance 
merged with oDesk. In 2015, oDesk was relaunched as 
Upwork. Upwork is an online workplace for the world, 
connecting clients with freelance professionals from 
Chicago to Paris. The Upwork fee for freelancers is a 
sliding service fee (20%/10%/5%) and based on lifetime 
billings per client relationship.  

Exporting
61
• 
 TaskRabbit :   http://www.taskrabbit.com  . TaskRabbit is an
online and mobile marketplace where you can outsource 
everything from everyday errands (provided they are local) 
to skilled tasks. The pricing model is: TaskRabbit’s fee is 
equal to your task price (which you set)  plus   a service fee, 
which is 30 percent, excluding any reimbursements made 
to the Tasker (they get 100% of any reimbursements). A 
minimum payment of one hour is required per task.  
• 
 Freelancer :   http://www.freelancer.com . Freelancer is a 
large freelancing, outsourcing, and crowdsourcing market-
place for small businesses. You create milestones on your 
projects, and as the freelancer reaches the milestones, 
payment is released. The site’s fees are complicated and 
are based on the type of project and membership plan 
you sign up for. Be sure to review the site thoroughly to 
uncover any hidden fees. It is a good place to go for one-
off jobs or project-based work. You can post a project 
 for  free. 
• 
 Fiverr:   http://www.fiverr.com . Fiverr is a marketplace 
for creative and professional services. Jobs can start as 
low as $5. Fees vary widely. Be sure to review.  
 
■ Tip  Another interesting global, on-demand, 24/7 online task marketplace worth checking out 
to see if it fits your job requirements is Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (  http://www.mturk.com/
mturk/welcome  ), whose system is based on taking a job and separating it out for many different 
people to work on in pieces. The beauty of AMT is that the tasks are quick and very simple (you 
might write a product review or complete a multiple-choice survey, for example) and require only 
tiny payments. Try it out. 
 Top  Job Search Web Sites  
 You can also tap into what I consider to be online talent pools where people 
worldwide get social by making professional connections. Job candidates are 
only a mouse click away. These are the sites to consider when you are hiring 
for a full-time  position  :
• 
 CareerBuilder :   http://www.careerbuilder.com .  CareerBuilder  
is an all-around good egg—a large US-based online job site that 
has a presence in more than sixty markets worldwide. More 
than 24 million job seekers visit the site monthly and more than 
three hundred thousand employers work with CareerBuilder to 
find good people. 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
62
• 
 craigslist :  http://www.craigslist.org .  Craigslist  is a 
classified ad-placement service and forum. Postings are 
free, except in certain geographic or industry areas—be 
sure to check. The site works well for finding just about 
anything, including jobs, housing, goods, and services.  
• 
 Dice :   http://www.dice.com . Dice, now DHI Group, Inc.,  
is a career hub for techies and engineering profession-
als. The site also provides specialized websites for finan-
cial services, energy, healthcare, and security-clearance 
industries.  
• 
 Experience :   http://www.experience.com . Experience, 
acquired by Symplicity in June 2014,  is a good resource 
for tapping into the resource of young adults who desire 
to learn from the experience of others. The site works 
for finding people for internships.  
 
■ Tip  Instead of using Google, Yahoo, or Bing for a job search, try Juju.com. It’s not a job board; 
rather, it is a job search engine that will make a job search much easier. 
• 
 FlexJobs :   http://www.flexjobs.com  .  FlexJobs offers 
part-time, flex-time, and freelance jobs, with an emphasis 
on people looking to telecommute some, or all, of the 
time. Most jobs are US-based, with a handful going to 
people located in Canada, Europe, and Australia.  
• 
 GetHired.com :   http://www.gethired.com . What’s unique 
about  GetHired.com  is that once you have identified a list 
of applicants you want to interview, you can set aside time 
in your schedule and the site will invite the candidates on 
your behalf to meet with you in person, on the telephone, 
or via their embedded video-conferencing system to con-
duct a virtual interview.  
• 
 Glassdoor :   http://www.glassdoor.com .  Glassdoor  is a 
free jobs and career community. What sets it apart from 
other job-placement sites is the vast array of informa-
tion it offers on specific companies and specific jobs, 
from company reviews, to anonymous actual salaries, to 

Exporting
63
sample interview questions. Visit the site for job descrip-
tions (export manager or export compliance manager, 
for example) and to determine the going rate on salaries 
for positions you need to fill.  
• 
 Indeed :   http://www.indeed.com .  Indeed  is fast, and that’s 
the best part about it. It helps people get jobs and com-
panies to advertise those jobs, so it’s a good place to shop 
around. With more than 180 million unique visitors per 
month, Indeed is available in more than fifty countries and 
twenty-eight languages.  
• 
 Internships.com :   http://www.internships.com .  Internships.
com  , a Chegg service, is an internship marketplace for stu-
dents, employers and higher education institutions. The 
site enables students, employers and educators to optimize 
internship opportunities.  
• 
 LinkUp :   http://www.linkup.com . LinkUp, owned and 
operated by JobDig,  does things differently. The site con-
nects job seekers to jobs directly at employers’ Web 
sites. That’s the twist. Its international reach outside of 
the United States only goes so far as Canada and the 
United Kingdom as of this writing. The fees need to be 
checked.  
• 
 ManpowerGroup :   http://www.manpowergroup.com . 
 ManpowerGroup  is a workforce-solution company 
operating in eighty countries and territories. Whether 
your needs are local or global, Manpower can help you 
find talent.  
• 
 Monster.com :   http://www.monster.com .  Monster  is a 
global online employment resource for people seeking 
jobs and companies needing great people.  
• 
 SimplyHired :   http://www.simplyhired.com  .  SimplyHired  
is an online marketplace serving 30 million people a 
month and thousands of companies across twenty-four 
countries. Its unique value proposition is this: it operates 
job-search engines in twenty-four countries and twelve 
languages, reaching job seekers on the web, social net-
works, mobile devices, e-mail, and other partner sites 
such as Mashable, Bloomberg Businessweek, and LinkedIn.  

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
64
• 
 StartUpHire :   http://www.startuphire.com .  StartUpHire  
is a job search engine that recruits talent for promising 
emerging growth companies. Its focus is on start-up com-
panies because they are the most difficult to identify for 
job seekers. If you are in this boat, give the site a look.  
• 
 The Ladders :   http://www.theladders.com . The  Ladders  
focuses on career-driven professionals with salaries of 
$40K and up. Basic membership is free for job seekers 
previewing job titles only, with premium membership 
running $25 per month for access to everything on the 
job search site.  
• 
 USAjobs :   http://www.usajobs.org .  USAjobs  is a not-
for-profit public service organization that matches job 
candidates with employers. It’s a free web-based job 
board enabling federal job seekers access to thousands 
of opportunities across hundreds of federal agencies and 
organizations. 
• 
 Vault :   http://www.vault.com .  Vault  is a high-potential 
online job marketplace. The site is particularly good for 
insider information on what it’s really like to work in a 
company, industry, or profession.  
 Schools and  Universities  
 Many universities make it easy for US employers to hire students. Some 
schools even seek out companies that are more amenable to sponsoring 
overseas hires. Stanford’s Graduate School of Business, for instance, has an 
international advisor to guide US employers on hiring international students 
(see   http://www.gsb.stanford.edu/cmc/global ). The school itself helps 
facilitate employment authorization. In certain circumstances, an immigration 
attorney might be required. 
 It can be very beneficial to hire a student from an overseas market where you 
are considering exporting to. International students are eager to learn, relish 
the notion of working with an American firm, and are on the local ground, 
reporting firsthand to you on what market conditions are like. So if you are 
about to export to China, for example, look for Chinese students studying 
in your country (knowing they will return home after they complete their 
studies) with a worldly mind, fluency in both Chinese and English, and an 
understanding of the Chinese culture. 

Exporting
65
 
■ Tip  There are many other places to find good people. Check with peer-to-peer organizations 
(i.e., the Entrepreneurs’ Organization, Vistage, and the Women Presidents’ Organization); 
associations (i.e., The International Trade Association of Greater Chicago, the Small Business 
Exporter’s Association (SBEA), and the American Association of Exporters and Importers [AAEI]); 
universities (you can stay connected as an alum); and online community forums (banks, small 
businesses, and start-ups). 
 When to Hire; When to Outsource 
 How do you decide when to hire employees and when to hire contractors? 
Positions formerly reserved for  in-house employees  , such as those of a web 
developer, a designer, or a HR specialist, can often be done faster and more 
effectively with qualified remote contractors. If the following conditions don’t 
apply, it might be good to use a contract worker to fill a position:
 1.   Do you need a person to do the work every day?  
 2.   Do you have funding to support what needs to be done 
every day over a long period of time?  
  3.  Are you willing to pay the benefits (paid vacation, sick time, 
training and healthcare, for example) that come with hir-
ing a full-time employee? Payroll and social security taxes 
also represent a significant expense. Watch out for hidden 
costs that can impact a business in a negative way.  
 4.   Do you need the person to be physically in the office to 
get the work done? 
 5.   Do you need to control the work being done?  
 If you answered “no” to all of the above questions, hiring contractors is your 
short-term solution. One of the single biggest advantages for utilizing con-
tract help is that your company is not responsible for paying benefits to the 
contractor. Second to that is the added flexibility of having to hire staff only 
when you need them. Third is that you are changing the rules of competition. 
Big caution: Never treat a contractor like an employee. Misclassification of an 
individual as an independent contractor may have a number of costly legal 
consequences. Consult with your HR manager and international attorney for 
guidance. You don’t want to mess with the law. 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
66
 
■ Caution   Be sure to thoroughly review the key provisions in the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act designed to ensure that Americans have access to quality, affordable health 
insurance. “Depending on whether you are self-employed, an employer with fewer than 25 
employees, an employer with fewer than 50 employees, or an employer with 50 or more employees, 
different provisions of the Affordable Care Act may apply to you.”  iii Depending on the size of your 
organization, you may find out it is more advantageous to hire contractors vs. more employees. 
ObamaCare Small Business Facts can be helpful to review as well.  iv 
 In hiring independent contractors, set expectations right at the beginning of 
the project. You don’t want anyone wondering if the work they are per-
forming is adequate or not. In addition to an initial e-mail contact, consider 
setting up a phone appointment to further discuss your needs. This is the 
best way to build trust and negotiate fair compensation. If the contractor is 
located in another country, consider using Skype (  http://www.skype.com ) 
or Google+ (  http://www.plus.google.com ) to keep the costs down while 
you communicate. 
 Check in periodically with the contractor to make sure the work gets done 
and that it meets your expectations and is performed on time and within 
budget. You might set up daily, weekly, or monthly check-in points to ensure 
things are on track. Global projects can be coordinated on the move with your 
digital device, with everything stored in one place through such trusted online 
repositories as: Google Drive (  http://www.drive.google.com  ), DropBox 
(  http://www.dropbox.com ), SugarSync (  http://www.sugarsync.com ), Box 
(  http://www.box.com ), and OneDrive (  http://www.onedrive.live.com ). 
 The Hiring Plan 
 What’s the purpose of a good  hiring plan  ? It makes the hiring and training pro-
cess much easier and less stressful for all concerned. First thing’s first: decide 
on who will be responsible for hiring and then consider these issues:
 1.  What kind of people do you want to hire? Tie that in to 
your company’s value, vision, and goals—the equivalent of 
company culture.  
 2.  What can you afford?  
 3.  What is your timeline?  
 4.  Where will you find the candidates?  
 5.  How will you vet, choose, and notify candidates?  

Exporting
67
 6.  How will you make the hiring of the person official (by 
contract, for example)?  
 7.  How will you measure results?  
 8.   Who will be responsible for getting employees on board, 
training, and professional development (this applies more 
to full-time employees)?  
 Be specific about the skills and expertise you need from people when you 
interview them, and fill out a profile of the work you want done when you 
hire someone. Your goal is to enhance personal growth and development for 
each and every person you bring on board and to make each new hire feel 
like a stakeholder in the business. That can be accomplished by giving new 
hires your time, treating them with respect and care, and making sure they are 
an integral part of the decision-making processes that affect their job. That’s 
the best-kept secret to keeping employees and contractors motivated and 
happy and moving toward reaching unprecedented success with your export 
business. 
 
■ Tip  Delegate as much work as possible to others who can do it better than you. This will make 
your business life easier and your employees and independent contractors happy because you put 
trust and faith in their abilities. Just don’t overburden them. If you stay in constant contact, you will 
learn more quickly about little bumps in the road, and together you can fix them as they arise. Give 
employees the tools and resources to get a job done and then get out of the way so they can do it. 
 Outsourcing HR: Focus on Your  Core 
Competencies  
 Is your export company growing so fast that the notion of handling your own 
HR initiatives is overwhelming to you? You’ll have to devote a large portion of 
your resources for the purpose of maintaining records, nurturing employees, 
improving employee performance, HR management (hiring and firing), admin-
istering employee benefits, training new staff, and so forth. Or will you? You 
could consider outsourcing the entire HR process to an independent firm. 
There are several online; you just need to conduct a search to find a firm 
that is a good match for your organization. The reason to outsource HR is to 
alleviate the burden associated with the administrative cost and enable you to 
focus on your core competencies. 

Chapter 4 | The Human Side of an Export Enterprise
68
 I don’t recommend this route for business owners who are just starting to 
export because it’s good to have direct involvement in the nitty-gritty detail 
of hiring the right human capital for your business. This gets back to getting 
the right people on the export bus. If you are a $10 million-plus business and 
are currently generating a portion of your revenue from overseas exports and 
expanding rapidly, perhaps now might be a good time to consider outsourcing 
the global HR process to better enable you to think more strategically. Use 
your own best case study for hiring to gauge whether the outsourcer is a 
good fit for your needs and the best model for going forward.  
 Summary 
 While it takes a strong global leader and enthusiastic teamwork to achieve 
export success, true business victory cannot be obtained without an online 
social presence. After all, you want the world to find you, because without 
customers, there is no business. We’re on the export bus, so now we need to 
position ourselves for online success. Are you with me? If so, then turn the page!  
 Notes 
  i.   “Good to Great,” Jim Collins, Jim Collins Web site, published 
in  Fast Company , last modified October 2001,   http://
www.jimcollins.com/article_topics/articles/
good-to-great.html  .  
  ii.   “Twelve Tactics for Creating Powerful Global Leadership 
Connections,” 
ImportExport.About.com, 
accessed 
February 7, 2016,   http://importexport.about.com/
od/GlobalResourceCenter/fl/Twelve-Tactics-
for-Creating-Powerful-Global-Leadership-
Connections.htm  .  
 iii.   . “Health Care: Key Provisions of the Affordable Care Act,” 
SBA.gov, accessed October 23, 2013,   http://www.sba.
gov/healthcare  .  
 iv.   “ObamaCare Small Busines Facts, accessed February 7, 
2016,   http://obamacarefacts.com/obamacare-small-
business/  .  

P A R T
 Creating and 
Using Online 
Marketing 
Platforms 
 
II

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_5
 C H A P T E R 
 Online 
Fundamentals 
 Building a Web Site and Blog  
 Branding demands commitment; commitment to continual re-invention; 
striking chords with people to stir their emotions; and commitment to 
imagination. It is easy to be cynical about such things, much harder to be 
successful. 
 —Sir Richard Branson, CEO of Virgin 
 If you are good at it, people are going to read it. 
 —Seth Godin, best-selling author 
 The best damn marketing tool by an order of magnitude I’ve ever had. 
 —Tom Peters, the Red Bull of management thinkers  i 
 Many people believe that the best way to find customers is to look for them. 
That’s a mistake. In the digital age, customers from around the world should 
find  you . And they can, provided you create a sustainable positive  online  pres-
ence. The secret to billions of customers finding you is to build a world stage 
comprising of a Web site and a blog. These tools define who you are as a brand 
and shape what is yet to come for your export business. I will discuss how to 
5

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
72
market your business later on, in Chapter   10 , but understand this: not having 
a Web site and a companion blog is like keeping your door shuttered to the 
world. Think I’m wrong? Take a look. 
 In Pursuit of Global Power: Snatching and 
Grabbing Curious Online Customers 
 Due to the explosive growth of the Internet, a Web site alone is not sufficient 
to promote a business, at least not if you want the entire planet to find you. That 
planet includes more than 7 billion potential customers—and 3.4 billion of them 
are  online  .  ii Who wouldn’t want to sell to more than 3.4 billion people or even 
a tiny fraction of that? Whether you are a first-timer or an experienced pro, 
leveraging the web is a must to become globally competitive. To achieve a pow-
erful web presence, you must use a combination of social tools such as blogs, 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and Instagram, as well as cultivate a brand pres-
ence on mobile apps and other online databases. Already, your online presence 
can live on your wrist like a smartwatch and quite possibly replace everything 
(brick-and-mortar stores, paper resumes, photo albums, and in-person meet-
ings, to name a few), so you’d better aim to get it right the first time around. 
 Plan a Web Site 
 While a  Web site  is but a part of your efforts online, it is still the most impor-
tant one for e-commerce. First and foremost, your Web site should be inviting 
and reader friendly. When developing your Web site with exporting in mind, 
here are fifteen pointers that should make the build-out process a lot easier:
 1.  Keep content current, accurate, and relevant. There is nothing 
worse than visiting a site and seeing out-of-date content 
or links that don’t work. It’s a surefire way to lose a visitor. 
And not just for the moment but perhaps forever. First 
impressions count. Don’t make the information you present 
overly complicated or go wild with the graphics.  
  2.  Go mobile right out of the gate. According to network 
experts at Ericsson, smartphones are only going to get 
more popular over the next five years. “Its estimates show 
an enormous jump from the 2.6 billion smartphone users 
recorded in 2014 to 6.1 billion by 2020.”  iii That is the 
equivalent of 90 percent of the world population.  iv Make 
sure your Web site is configured and optimized for mobile 
use. If you find that most people visit your site from mobile 
devices, consider developing an app for your business to 
better serve customers. Messaging apps, for example, have 
become the center of online activity—don’t ignore. I will 
go into more detail on this in Chapter   9  .  

Exporting
73
 3.  Express yourself but don’t give your life story on your Web site. 
Your  message  should be concise—clear, consistent, and 
with an on-brand conversational voice—and interesting 
enough for visitors to stay with you and eventually take 
action. Add enough value so everyone can see that some-
thing vital would be missing if you left. Keep the content 
focused on your business and related to the action you’d 
like your visitors to take.  
 4.  Maintain your Web site so it not only looks beautiful but 
works beautifully, too.   Speed matters. Customers seek fast, 
simple solutions to their challenges. Put yourself in their 
shoes. When you visit your Web site, are you impressed? 
Compelled to take action? Motivated to return? If not, go 
back to the drawing board and improve it until it turns 
even  you on. All Web sites should contain a good layout, 
information about your company, a company logo, tar-
geted image placement, and other strategies that boost 
your brand. You want your site to be attractive  and useful. 
If need be, hire a professional designer to take your site 
to the next level.  
 
■ Tip  Web hosts provide the tools you need to easily build your own Web site, or, if you want 
something unique and special, you can hire a web designer to create a professional site. 
  5.   Review sites  you like, bookmark them, and try to incorporate the 
best elements of each on your site. I’ve done this many times 
for ideas on my own company Web site. I see something I 
like at another Web site and send the link to my designer to 
see if she can do something similar but distinct enough that 
it does not look like we are stealing or copying information 
from the other company. If you sell jewelry, what are the 
most popular jewelry sites and why? Use these ideas as a 
basis or model for developing your own Web site.  

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
74
 6.  Make sure that every page of your Web site has a   unique 
keyword message . To drive traffic to your site, you must 
achieve high rankings in search engines. To do that, you 
must establish keywords that match your firm’s capabili-
ties. Short primer: Keywords are what we type in when 
we search for products, services, and answers to our 
questions on search engines like Google, Bing, or Yahoo. 
Matching the words or phrases with the keywords we 
embed in our sites is called  search engine optimization 
(SEO)  . It is a means of getting people to click onto your 
Web site. Search engines like Google have an algorithm 
that decides which Web sites come up first in a search 
result. In order to be listed first in a Google search, you 
need to have the right keywords where Google’s algo-
rithm can find them. For example, if you were writing 
about the late Steve Jobs and how he helped change the 
world with the invention of the iPhone, it would be good 
to identify the post with the tag words  Steve Jobs, Apple, 
change the world , and  iPhone . When people search, “Steve 
Jobs, change the world,” for example, using those key-
words would greatly increase the chances of your post 
being listed first in a Google search. SEO is not easy. If 
done right, however, you have a global web green light 
blinking 24/7 for your business. If no SEO work is per-
formed, you are operating in the dark—the equivalent of 
being offline—and this will explain why customers can’t 
find you. Consider hiring an expert to ensure you get the 
most visibility out of your Web site. Once visitors arrive, 
your goal is to make it easy for them to find what they are 
looking for and purchase it easily.  
 
SEO CASE STUDY
 GlobeTrade, a company I own and manage, is a leading management-consulting 
and marketing-solutions company dedicated to helping entrepreneurs and small 
businesses go global. Our keywords for SEO purposes are:  global small business, 
going global, Laurel Delaney, small businesses go global, entrepreneurs go global , 
and  global trade . These keywords and phrases all relate to the content present on 
the respective Web pages. Every time an individual conducts a search using any of 
these keyword phrases, they find us. As a result, customers are rolling in, our page-
rank position has skyrocketed to at or near the top of people’s search results, and our 
business keeps growing. 
 Identify the products or services you sell. Now select keywords that are in  alignment . 

Exporting
75
 7.  Create  a culturally customized Web site when you know that 
what you have will appeal to people in a certain country or 
region. In other words, build a Web site that is adapted to 
local cultures. Nitish Singh and Arun Pereira, co-authors 
of The  Culturally Customized  Web Site, say, “Companies 
targeting global customers have little choice but to cul-
turally customize their websites if they are to successfully 
draw customers, build trust and loyalty and make them-
selves invulnerable to competitive marketing actions.”  v If 
you are interested in selling primarily in the United States 
with the hope that you export to customers in Morocco, 
then study up on the country to find out about its cul-
ture—what colors do Moroccans like, what symbols do 
they prefer, which Web sites are the most popular and 
why? David Ciccarelli, founder and CEO of Voices.com, 
says: “You can start locally and eventually build a market-
place that serves the needs of your users globally.”  vi 
  8.   Make it easy for visitors to buy. When choosing a company to 
host your Web site, it is important to consider all available 
standard and supplemental features that will make your 
 visitor’s  entire experience enjoyable. If you plan to sell 
products and services online, select a web host that can 
make that happen, especially the payment part, in an effort-
less way and without costing you an arm and a leg. (Later 
in the chapter, you’ll find links to potential providers).  

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
76
 9.  Create a newsletter and send it out regularly. Target cus-
tomers who are not only loyal in attitude and action 
but also profitable. This can be done during the building 
of the Web site by adding a newsletter sign-up area. As 
visitors stop in, they can sign up for the newsletter, or 
alternately, provided you get permission up front (after 
a presentation, you might ask people you meet if they 
are interested in receiving your newsletter), you can add 
people yourself. They will include prospective customers, 
existing customers, suppliers, employees, colleagues, and 
independent contractors. When you send out the  news-
letter , you might ask people on your list for help on the 
development of a new product or ask them their opinion 
on what key topics should be covered in a presentation 
you will give at an industry conference. For example, I 
recently sent out a newsletter to recipients with a call 
to action for suggestions on speakers for a Global Small 
Business Forum my company hosts annually. Within ten 
minutes, I received five different emails from subscribers 
recommending quality speakers for our program. Listen 
carefully to the answers. The end result will appeal to cus-
tomers because they were involved in the process.  
  10.  Care about your customer in a way that is evident on your 
site! Best-selling author Gary Vaynerchuk says it best: “In 
the end, no matter what obstacles a company faces in the 
 Thank You Economy, the solution will always be the same. 
Competitors are bigger? Outcare them. They’re cheaper? 
Outcare them. They’ve got celebrity status and you don’t? 
Outcare them.”  vii Thank your customers for stopping by. 
Don’t try to control an exchange; rather, facilitate the 
exchange by showing you are putting them in charge. 
Create pop-up windows that offer live support if a cus-
tomer is on a page for a set amount of time without 
asking a question or purchasing something. Make your 
offerings clear and totally transparent so  customers  can 
easily compare your offer with those of competitors. Ask 
customers to fill out a short survey that helps you better 
serve them. The objective is to pinpoint specific or pre-
ferred customers who might require tailor-made prod-
ucts or services. The message you are sending is this: We 
care and you are important to us. 

Exporting
77
 
■ Tip  Many web-hosting companies offer packages that include ongoing submissions of 
keywords to top search engines including Google, Yahoo!, and Bing. Be sure to check when you 
sign up for a package. These packages can be worthwhile because they help customers find 
you when they conduct a search, provided you properly conveyed your firm’s capabilities in your 
keywords. Another helpful SEO keyword research tool that matches ads to relevant web pages 
is Google’s Contextual Targeting Tool (  https://www.google.com/ads/displaynetwork/
manage-your-ads/targeting-tools.html  ). 
  11.   Cater to a   global audience . Ninety-five percent of the 
world’s population, and 80 percent of its purchasing 
power, are outside the United States.  viii It’s hard to have 
a two-way communication if visitors don’t understand 
you. Plan accordingly, but don’t fret. Take it one step at 
a time so you don’t get overwhelmed. Start with writing 
your Web site in one language and then expand based on 
interest and demand for your product and services. (I will 
cover web translation considerations in Chapter   15 .) My 
colleague John Yunker, a leading expert on web and con-
tent globalization, says as more of the world’s population 
goes online, web teams will need to build sites that catch 
as many of these users as possible. While a global gate-
way alone won’t make a Web site global, it’s an important 
step in making that site more globally usable. He goes on 
to say, “Successful global gateways cast wide nets so that 
most people find where they want to go.”  ix Casting a wide 
net means embracing languages. The more languages you 
offer, the greater your chance at capturing a bigger piece 
of the world pie.  
 
■ Tip  Don’t panic at the thought of having to translate your Web site into several different 
languages right at the start. You don’t have to. You can take it one language at a time and base 
it purely on customer interest. But beware: Yunker says, “Most websites were built under the 
assumption that mobile users have access to 4G networks, which many do not. Most of the world 
still relies on 3G (or slower) mobile networks.”  x 

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
78
  12.   Think about  country-code-specific domains  at launch, but 
don’t get caught up on them to the degree that you don’t 
move forward locally. A country code serves as a local Web 
site in a specific country. McDonald’s, for example, has 
  http://www.mcdonalds.com for the United States and 
  http://www.mcdonaldsindia.com/ for India. If you live 
in India and visit the main site, you can still access the 
India site by clicking on “McDonald’s Web sites” then 
going to “International Web sites” and scrolling down to 
India, which takes you directly to the Indian site. IBM has 
  http://www.ibm.com for the United States, and from 
there you can go to   http://www.ibm.com/planet-
wide/cn/  for China. Apple has http://   www.apple.com   in 
the United States, and from there you can go to   http://
www.Apple.com/br/  for Brazil. No two companies are 
alike on how they approach securing country domain 
names. The only rule of thumb is to try to plot out where 
you think you want to go. Consult with your export 
dream team, especially your lawyer, to see what it will 
take to get you there and to determine if it requires you 
secure domain names with country codes.  
  13.   Make the “Contact Us” area on your Web site so big that it hits 
visitors on the head like a hammer. If it’s  two-way communi-
cation you’re interested in having, allow visitors to reach 
out to you on numerous fronts—from sending an e-mail, 
to speaking with an actual human being, to filling out a 
form, to providing a Skype ID—and make sure responsive-
ness from your company is front and center. The Contact 
Us space on your Web site is an area sanctioned as the 
ultimate visitor conversation starter, so make it easy for 
them to communicate with you! Include your company’s 
address and phone number, too. The telephone still mat-
ters, even in a soon-to-come web 4.0 world.  
  14.   Breed visitor participation . Give visitors a reason to engage 
in a conversation with you and other like-minded folks. 
Entice them to share their thoughts, concerns, opinions, 
and experiences. To accomplish this, set up an online com-
munity forum, Facebook social plug-in (such as the Like 
button), or Twitter feed within your Web site or as an 
independent resource that is linked to your site. This will 
foster an even greater exchange of communications. You’re 
building a relationship that you hope will last a lifetime.  

Exporting
79
  15.   Prepare for growth. In addition to dedicated hosting of a site, 
many hosting companies offer hosting for e-mail and apps, 
blog incorporation, mobile-friendly adaptation, and cloud 
computing, where you sign up for free and only pay for 
what you use. Cloud computing allows you to collaborate, 
edit, and share files, applications, and business processes 
over the Internet whenever or wherever you need to. It’s 
helpful to use for peak-season fluctuations. For example, 
if 75 percent of your business is generated in the fourth 
quarter of a year, you need to prepare in advance for the 
heavy traffic time to ensure that visitor transactions run 
seamlessly. Cloud computing allows you to ramp up and 
pay for the service as you go and then remove it when you 
don’t need it, which is ideal for small businesses that don’t 
have the deep pockets to invest in sophisticated Internet 
technology to  grow their companies.  
 By using your web presence to facilitate two-way communication with any-
one in the world, you can build relationships with your customers, enhance 
your company image, fine-tune your products or services, and pinpoint your 
preferred profitable and loyal customers. Best of all, it doesn’t have to cost a 
lot of money. 
 Reserving a Domain Name and Building a Web Site 
 Here are places to get started in securing a  domain name and creating a Web 
site. Some platforms allow you to build your own site. Network Solutions is 
one of those platforms, and it has simple tools that are already built into the 
site. If you want a highly professional and sophisticated look, I suggest you hire 
a good web designer, especially one who knows the importance of how colors 
and symbols translate to a cross-cultural audience. As stated in point number 
one, first impressions count. Excluding Google+, all hosting platforms are scal-
able and have e-commerce capabilities. Here are the most popular along with 
some new entrants:
• 
 Network Solutions :   http://www.networksolutions.com  
• 
 GoDaddy :   http://www.godaddy.com  
• 
 Register.com :   http://www.register.com 
• 
 Verio :   http://www.verio.com 
• 
 Intuit :   http://www.intuit.com/website-building-
software/  
• 
 Rackspace :   http://www.rackspace.com 

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
80
• 
 Google+ Page :   http://www.google.com/services/ 
• 
 Weebly Website Builder:   http://www.weebly.com 
• 
 Wix:   http://www.wix.com 
• 
 Jimdo:   http://www.jimdo.com 
 Blog Exuberance: Brand Yourself Everywhere 
 Anyone can create a blog. Building a successful blog, on the other hand, 
requires hard work. Yet it’s worth every ounce of effort because, when used 
correctly, this low or no-cost communication vehicle can do many powerful 
things including: positioning you as an expert or thought leader in your indus-
try; helping you market your products or services globally; allowing you to test 
your ideas to see if they have wings; bringing your web presence to life; helping 
potential clients worldwide find you; and helping you engage in a conversation 
with your customers. 
 A  blog , short for “ web log  ,” is an instant online publishing tool that allows 
anyone to add fresh content to a web page, share knowledge, and reflect 
their personality. A few of the top blogs are:  Seth Godin (  http://sethgodin.
typepad.com  ),  Anita Campbell’s Small Business Trends (  http://www.smallbi-
ztrends.com  ),  Chris Brogan (  http://www.chrisbrogan.com/  ),  Mark Cuban 
(  http://blogmaverick.com/ ), and  Duct Tape Marketing , by John Jantsch ( 
  http://www.ducttapemarketing.com/blog/ ). 
 The sole  purpose of  a blog is to share information. You use it to let your audi-
ence know you are good at something, but at the same time they learn and 
grow on topics ranging from making jewelry to global trade consulting or 
flower arrangements. You rarely use a blog to sell a product directly, unless the 
product is directly derived from your own work, as in the case of a release 
of a new book, a webinar, a podcast or tweet chat you participated in, or a 
presentation that your readers might like to attend. 
 
■ Fact  If you have five thousand followers on one platform and two thousand on another, and all 
of those followers pass along your posts to their constituent base, and they, in turn, pass it along 
to theirs, you have the potential to reach more than a million people in a very short period of time. 
 You can create a blog from scratch and independent of your Web site or 
build it as part of your site if your web host has that capability. The advantage 
of adding it to your site is fivefold: It brings more life to your site, increases 
traffic, permits visitors to comment (which is an additional way to engage and 
grow your customer base), allows you to listen and join the conversation, and 
increases your search engine rankings. The disadvantage of adding it to your 

Exporting
81
Web site is that if your blog takes off in popularity and is dependent on your 
core business and you want to sell it (the  Pittsburgh Mom blog, for example, 
was purchased by the  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette ), you might run into an issue if 
you don’t also want to sell your business, which, by way of your Web site, your 
blog is dependent upon. 
 All blogs must  contain  the following:
• 
 A descriptive name  
• 
 An informative tagline, a small amount of text that clari-
fies and supports the name 
• 
 A focused theme to ensure the right visitors keep com-
ing back  
• 
 Catchy subject lines (headlines)  
• 
 Short, informative posts (skimmable by busy people)  
• 
 Compelling photos that tie into the content  
• 
 Attractive visuals  
• 
 Writing style that has a professional tone and pleasant 
personality  
• 
 SEO that allows readers to find you (refer back to num-
ber six of the “Plan a Web site” section) 
 
THE POWER OF A GOOD BLOG
 I created  The Global Small Business Blog (  http://www.globalsmallbusinessblog.
com  ), which is considered the number one blog in the world for entrepreneurs and small 
businesses interested in going global. I established the blog in 2004 for the sole purpose 
of providing a meaningful way to share our global trade expertise and engage with 
our target audience. The blog now has a world following of more than fifty thousand 
monthly readers, with most of our new business opportunities coming to us as a direct 
result of our blog. 
 You too can achieve this same level of blog success. 
 The following sections outline my suggestions for creating a blog that will help 
your export business succeed. 

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
82
 Pick a Main Stage and Understand Your Audience 
 It may seem simple, and obvious, but if you want your blog to be a go-to 
source for useful information, you need to understand your audience. In our 
case with  The Global Small Business Blog , our whole focus is on entrepreneurs 
and small business owners who are interested in going global. That can involve 
anything from taking a business global, to understanding globalization, to 
employing people who want to start a global career.  Global ,  entrepreneurs , and 
 small businesses are the three keywords and phrases that drive our posts. It’s 
our main stage and we never lose sight of that, nor do we vary from our focus. 
What will your world  main stage be?  
 Post Frequently, Consistently, and with the Reader 
Always in Mind 
 If you don’t provide new, useful, engaging, and relevant content on a regu-
lar basis, your readers will stop visiting your site. Web readers are busy and 
have short attention spans. Consistency is far better than any one-time act 
of greatness, especially when it comes to blogging. Posting new content every 
day is great, but providing actionable takeaways is what will keep people com-
ing back day after day. Whatever your style and format, stick to it. One other 
point: Don’t self-promote and talk about how great you are. You can post 
information you create relating to your world stage, but never lose sight of 
the fact that it has been created to add value to your reader’s  knowledge   pool. 
 
■ Tip  You can create a blog on a free blog platform and separately reserve a domain name 
through one of the web-hosting companies mentioned earlier. It is important to host the blog using 
your own domain name, as in “  http://www.mycompany.com/blog .” 
 Inspire Your Readers 
 Use different methods to tell your story. Shake things up to keep your blog inter-
esting for your readers. One day you might feature a guest blog post by a thought 
leader in your industry or post a YouTube video. The next, you might post your 
own how-to content that relates to your core theme. Ideas may be plentiful, but 
your time might be scarce. On some days, you might report everything a reader 
wants to know about a particular topic. On other days, you might do a short 
intro and go right to an outside link. Vary your posts in line with how readers 
process information. Sometimes they are in a hurry; other times they slow down 
and want to read every last word. Once in a while, they post a comment that 
requires feedback (see the next point). Vary the nature and scope of information 
and adjust it according to the times and what’s relevant to your  readers  .  

Exporting
83
 Make Thoughtful Comments When Warranted 
 A blog’s commenting function is a great way  to  engage with your readers. You 
don’t, however, need to reply to every single comment. In our case, with  The 
Global Small Business Blog (GSBB) , we do our best to comment when readers 
comment, but if it doesn’t seem necessary, we won’t. When traffic really grows, 
the level of commenting can too, so you might find you are spending more and 
more time managing comments, and begin to question whether it is worth it. 
Right now, we want to keep the conversation going at the GSBB. But you may 
find down the road that you’d rather chat elsewhere with your readers—
Facebook, Twitter and Google+, for example. Just remember, if you do, to keep 
your trackbacks, a way to notify another   of an update, enabled. 
 
■ Tip  Don’t let your readers think that you parachute into your blog and say what they want to 
hear or jump all over them when they are wrong. Strive to be thoughtful with your responses, lifting 
the subject matter to a higher level so everyone learns in the process. 
 Provide Links to Better Inform  Readers  
 You don’t have to create all the content for your blog on your own. Use the 
web to find valuable content from outside sources and link to those resources 
constantly. Say we post an article about the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement 
(  http://importexport.about.com/od/TradePoliciesAndAgreements/
fl/Trade-Agreements-are-Not-Just-about-Lower-Tariffs.htm  ) 
but 
our reader doesn’t know what TPP is. We can link to a video about New 
Zealand’s signing ceremony regarding the TPP (  https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=xsqoh9e5utA  ) to ensure that our site keeps our readers informed 
and constantly learning.  
 Feature Stunning Graphics  
 A blog with lots of words and no cool graphics, charts, illustrations, or photos 
isn’t an inviting page for visitors. Whether it’s your own photography, taken 
from the public domain, or purchased as stock photography, graphics should 
power blog posts. A strong graphic can tell the story, elicit emotion (e.g., a 
video of a starving baby being fed a nutritional product), or be used to enter-
tain (e.g., a photo of an elephant-sized shamrock on St. Patrick’s Day). Can you 
imagine reading and enjoying content on a popular Web site that doesn’t have 
an accompanying picture or chart? Make it a point to do the same on your blog.  

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
84
 Connect with Your Readers Intellectually and 
Emotionally 
 Sure, you can provide lots of great content on your blog, but if you don’t con-
nect with your readers on some sort of emotional  level , they might not come 
back. Colors, imagery, and symbols all affect the mood, feelings, and emotions 
provoked by a blog. If you want to achieve a global reach, be aware of the color 
preferences of different cultural audiences and then use colors accurately and 
effectively. The Chinese flag, for example, is mostly red. Red also represents 
good fortune and happiness in China. India, on the other hand, is known as 
a country of saturated colors, with red and green used as standard color 
choices for clothing and yellow and red for traditional weddings. In the United 
States blue is known for trust and stability and in New Zealand red is consid-
ered a sacred color. Color symbolism can be very powerful and can make or 
break the success of a blog. Understand the meaning of color and  you  will see 
greater success in blogging by reaching a far wider audience worldwide.  
 Check Your Facts 
 Blogging is a little like reporting:  One   mistake and it can be fatal in terms of 
tarnishing your online reputation. Check sources and resources not once, but 
twice, to make sure information is reliable and accurate. If it’s hearsay, don’t 
blog about it. 
 Market the Blog 
 I do not believe in the theory “If you build it, they will come.” Rather, I believe 
in doing hard work to  market  your blog everywhere you and your team go. 
That means if you write a guest-post column for a major newspaper, your sig-
nature or byline should include a link to your blog. If you write an article for 
a hot online property, a link to your blog should be included. If you conduct a 
webinar, mention your blog at the beginning and at the end of your talk. You 
should also take the media outlets in which your work appears and promote 
them through whichever social media and networking platforms you use, such 
as Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, or Pinterest.  
 Label Your Posts 
 Another thing you shouldn’t overlook is attaching  labels  to your blog posts to 
help identify your content to search engines (look back at number six in the 
“Plan a Web Site” section). Just because you create a blog with relevant con-
tent doesn’t mean it will be easy for readers to find. To gain insights into how 
to get to the top of the heap in search engines and to inspect traffic reports 

Exporting
85
about your Web site and blog, visit Alexa (  http://www.alexa.com  ), Google 
Analytics (  http://www.google.com/analytics/ ), Quantcast (  http://www.
quantcast.com  ), or Compete (  http://www.compete.com ). 
 Blog  Services  
 Here are my top five platforms for creating a blog. Most of them are either 
free or charge a nominal fee (around $30 a year per blog). That fee is based 
on whether you elect to go with a custom design upgrade (referred to as CSS, 
or cascading style sheets) to make major changes to the blog’s layout or point 
your existing domain name to a new IP address, which can be provided by the 
web-hosting provider.
 1.  Wordpress :   http://www.wordpress.com 
 2.  Blogger :   http://blogger.com 
 3.  Typepad:   http://www.typepad.com 
 4.   SquareSpace:   http://www.squarespace.com 
 5.  Wix:   http://www.wix.com 
 Summary 
 Don’t let your Web site or blog be doomed to mediocrity. Make it sing. 
Preferably, make it sing a song the world relates to. Impart your knowledge 
and share your passion with the world. Next, I will coach you on how to cre-
ate a social media and social networking presence where the whole world 
will find you.  
 Notes 
  i.   “The Importance of Blogging by Seth Godin and Tom 
Peters,” Personal Content Creation, October 23, 
2013. 
  http://professionalcontentcreation.com/
importance-blogging-seth-godin-tom-peters  . 
  ii.   Internet World Stats:   http://www.internetworld-
stats.com/  . 
  iii.   Digital Trends: 
  http://www.digitaltrends.com/
mobile/smartphone-users-number-6-1-billion-
by-2020/  .  
  iv.   Ibid.  

Chapter 5 | Online Fundamentals
86
  v.   Nitish Singh and Arun Pereira,  The Culturally Customized 
Web Site: Customizing Web Sites for the Global Marketplace 
(Oxford, UK: Elsevier, 2011): p. 3.  
  vi.   “When Creating an Online Marketplace, Start Local and 
Think Global,” The Wall Street Journal, March 3, 2015, 
accessed February 14, 2016,   http://blogs.wsj.com/
accelerators/2015/03/03/david-ciccarelli-
when-creating-an-online-marketplace-start-lo-
cal-and-think-global/  .  
  vii.   Gary Vaynerchuk,  The Thank You Economy (New York, New 
York; HarperCollins Publishers; 2011): p. 84.  
 viii.   Trade Benefits America, accessed February 14, 2016: 
  http://www.tradebenefitsamerica.org/
resources/benefits-trade-and-importance-tpp-
resource-kit  .  
  ix.   “Select Country; Select Country: Developing a User 
Friendly Global Gateway,” John Yunker, UX Magazine, 
last modified December 30, 2010,   http://uxmag.com/
articles/select-country-select-language  . 
  x.  The 2016 Web Globalization Report card:   http://byte-
level.com/reportcard2016/  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_6
 C H A P T E R 
 Creating a 
Social Media 
and Networking 
Presence 
 I just made my album. I did my best. And I uploaded the video just to 
YouTube. That was all. 
 —Park Jae-sang, better known by his stage name PSY  i 
 … it’s that anyone with a web connection can start a global conversation. 
Yes, it helps to be famous in real life. But the rise of social networks 
has leveled the playing field, allowing unknowns to command audiences 
rivaling those of real-world leaders, even if by accident. 
 —The 30 Most Influential People on the Internet, TIME  ii 
 What impact have social media and  networking tools  had on exporting? They 
are redefining the way we connect with people and how we innovate and 
conduct business across the world. Anyone with an Internet connection can 
start a global conversation. Social should be a business enabler. Using blogs, 
6

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
88
LinkedIn,  Facebook  , YouTube, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, and Google+ to 
globally establish and build your brand on the Internet is a great way for 
customers to find you online—so that it doesn’t have to work the other way 
around. Once that happens, you can open the online door to export your 
goods to a worldwide customer base. You’ll see how here. 
 The  Big Shift  
 Only a decade ago, brick-and-mortar retail operations, such as specialty baker-
ies, dry cleaners, and businesses displaying their newest fashions in store win-
dows, hummed along nicely based on a local community of loyal customers. 
When the customers fell short, the business owner ramped up his marketing 
efforts by way of telephone solicitations, direct-mail pieces, cross-promoted 
coupons, a big display ad in a telephone book, billboards, or in-store banners 
to get the word out to the neighborhood that the shop was not only  still open 
for business but also had some very cool things that they had just gotten in 
for sale. That marketing effort, considered a staple back then, always involved 
the same customer base: a local one. The business owner had a single-minded 
view of the possibilities of where his customers  could come from , and he didn’t 
have the means to go beyond those places to reach them. He also didn’t have 
the time nor the means to make a change that might lead to a brighter future. 
 Fast forward to now, when companies and individuals are making the big shift 
away from the old, entrenched way of doing things by offering goods and ser-
vices to a new export market-driven way of creating growth by developing 
a digital presence. This digital presence has the potential to reach more than 
three billion people and save—across all businesses that export—thousands 
of dollars in the costs of printing, real estate, education, distribution, human 
capital, and customer acquisitions. Further, when Alphabet Inc. launches its 
much anticipated balloons, referred to as Project Loon, into the stratosphere 
in such parts of the world as Indonesia and Sri Lanka, an additional four billion 
people, who had little or no Internet access, will have it.  iii 
 The need for all businesses to have a digital presence is here to stay and will 
only continue to evolve and grow in new ways. Individuals and businesses 
who fail to adapt and make the big shift will fall to the wayside and become 
irrelevant. Those who embrace the shift, leverage it, and discipline themselves 
to stay one step ahead of technology will allow every aspect of their business 
to prosper. The digital world represents one of the greatest challenges and 
opportunities facing individuals and companies today. 
 
■ Note  Think of the last time you were at a formal business gathering and a discussion came 
up about Facebook or LinkedIn. Did everyone jump in to talk about it? Those who don’t are either 
shy or probably won’t be part of tomorrow’s workforce.  Will that be you? 

Exporting
89
 Thanks to digital tools and resources, anything—from a book, to a watch, to a 
political campaign—can be launched, produced, or exported worldwide fairly 
cheaply. More and more companies are therefore using the Internet, particu-
larly social media platforms, to enhance the way their business is established, 
discovered, and operated outside their physical boundaries and, as a result, 
many are growing by leaps and bounds. After all, more than 43 percent of the 
world’s population is online.  iv The same folks who have a big online voice are 
redesigning how their teams work, reassessing how to best serve their cus-
tomers—no matter where they come from—and changing the very nature of 
their business. 
 What will your customers want tomorrow? Where will they be located? 
Provided you are curious and have the drive, the Internet allows you to find 
new customers, create the products they want, and export to them.  
 The Art of Getting Online Attention: Finding 
Digital Export Success 
 How do you make a digital dent in the online universe? Not everyone is as 
lucky as PSY, who had a music video in 2012 that exceeded one billion views 
on YouTube. Or, take Katy Perry, who has the largest Twitter following in the 
world with more than 82 million followers.  v Perry outpaces any pop star or 
person (including the president of the United States) on the social network. 
Getting online attention (usually) requires not only one single act of great-
ness but rather thousands of attempts at greatness spread across many online 
platforms over a protracted period of time—that’s how you capture atten-
tion and develop a following. There is not a one-size-fits-all digital strategy. 
Succeeding in the digital world requires hard work, discipline, organizational 
skills, something remarkable to talk about, and a long-term view. 
 What’s  digital-export success  ? It’s people worldwide finding you and opening 
their wallets to buy something from you, and you fulfilling their requests prof-
itably. To be found, you must participate and be active on as many of the top 
online platforms as possible. To have customers open their wallets requires 
developing a relationship with them, garnering their trust, and offering prod-
ucts they want. That causes people to take action. Don’t think for a minute 
you can foster online success with a single stunning Instagram platform. It’s a 
start but must be supported with a Twitter,  Facebook  , LinkedIn, Pinterest, and 
Google+ presence. Putting all these social platforms to work in concert cre-
ates a winning online strategy, provided you stick to one topic or theme you 
are knowledgeable about. Think TOMS, Dell, and Eli Lilly—all good examples 
of companies utilizing social platforms with a unified marketing message, and 
oftentimes associating their brands with a noble cause.  vi 

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
90
 The goal is to have a holistic or big-picture view of what you are trying to 
accomplish with your export business and make sure the right messages get 
in front of the right people at the right time. The beauty with this approach to 
online marketing is that any person at any age now has the capacity to create 
content, be consistent, control messaging, engage people’s hearts and minds 
to build a brand, integrate multiple platforms, and measure results—all things 
that are central to online success. 
 
■ Tip  If you sell kiwifruit, for example, your goal is to get as many people who need kiwifruit to 
buy kiwifruit. And the biggest challenge is to reach people who don’t yet know they need kiwifruit. 
That’s where online platforms can serve as a door-opener to the world, offering you the most 
potential for global growth. 
 PSY, of course, is a rarity. He came out of nowhere with his YouTube video sen-
sation. After being propelled to global stardom, he must now harness the atten-
tion and energy of Internet users worldwide, sustain the momentum—even 
raise the bar—and turn his stunning one-hit wonder into a profitable enterprise 
that supports his goals and values in life. It took Madonna decades to reach her 
pinnacle of global superstar success. Had she had the luxury of the web at hand 
when she started out, she could have shortened the discovery of her talent to 
that of PSY’s or Perry’s. When it comes to stardom, the Internet gives equal 
access to everyone—of all ages, backgrounds, and ethnic nationalities—and can 
make success happen overnight, provided all the social platforms are put to 
good use. 
 
■ Caution   Don’t underestimate the power of the unexpected. Clayton Christensen, one of 
the most influential business theorists of the last fifty years, coined the expression “disruptive 
innovation.”  vii An example of disruptive innovation is Coursera, which offers high-quality courses 
online for anyone to take for free, which is beginning to impact the education industry and could 
demolish the status quo. Other examples are: Veristride (  http://www.veristride.com ), 
Kolibree (  http://www.kolibree.com ), and Oculus (  https://www.oculus.com/en-us/  )—
each having the potential to dramatically disrupt existing businesses and industries. Disruptive 
innovation can blindside your business and tear down whole industries. Be on alert for every new 
online tool that comes your way, keep an open mind to it, and master it to strengthen your export 
business. 

Exporting
91
 The Internet: The Social Capital of the 
Universe 
 Which social media platforms are best for getting your message across and 
motivating your audience? All of them. However, if one platform is more widely 
used in a foreign market, such as WeChat in China (  http://www.wechat.
com/en/  ) or Russia-based VK (originally VKontakte), the largest European 
online social networking service (  http://vk.com/club200 ), that’s where 
you should take your messaging. Tell your remarkable story across multiple 
social media channels so that you can gain followers, retain those followers, 
and move a social media conversation to e-mail, the telephone, or direct con-
versation for further business development. Your first step, if you haven’t done 
 so  already, is to establish accounts on several different social media platforms. 
 When you set up accounts on different social media platforms, ensure that 
each reflects your brand (whether it’s you or a company) and be consistent 
when you complete your profile on each platform. Use a real name when 
possible to ensure transparency; add a nice photo of yourself (or logo of your 
company if that’s your brand); select a gorgeous background design that’s in 
line with your profile; include a URL link to your most popular online loca-
tion (Web site, blog, or LinkedIn); and declare yourself the go-to person on a 
particular subject matter. 
 In my case, each of my accounts—on  LinkedIn ,  Facebook  , Twitter—shows 
a photo of me, says that I am the president of GlobeTrade.com, features a 
background design image that reflects my experience doing business around 
the world, includes a link to my Web site, and indicates my passion for helping 
entrepreneurs and small businesses go global. That way, people clearly under-
stand what I do, expect me to stay focused in that area of expertise, and, thus, 
know who to turn to when they need a resource or help on going global. This 
clarity of purpose also helps for SEO purposes. 
 For example, if you run a bakery that makes exotic cakes, you should state 
on your Twitter account, for example, that you’re the CEO and include your 
photo or your company’s logo, have a beautiful background design of one of 
your most popular cakes, include a short description explaining what your 
bakery does, include a link to your Web site, and share that same information 
across all your social platforms. If you are a mechanical engineer who designs, 
develops, builds, and tests airplane engines, insert your photo, show a cool 
engine you built as a background design, write a nifty bio about your talent, 
include a link to your Web site or blog, and start sharing success stories about 
your engineering capabilities. How else will Boeing, Airbus, or Commercial 
Aircraft Corporation of China find you? This same practice holds true for 
building working relationships with journalists and pitching stories.  

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
92
 Become a Digital-Export Rock Star 
 As you establish your online-platform accounts, stick with using the same 
profile information about yourself, as mentioned earlier. Consistency matters. 
Focus on this question: where do you want to go with your export business? 
Take your messaging to where social platforms are used the most in overseas 
markets. 
 Let’s take a look at the top social platforms on the web—which I’ll call the 
magnificent seven—and see how each is vital to setting the world stage for 
becoming a digital-export rock star. 
 LinkedIn 
 Considered the world’s largest professional network, LinkedIn (  http://www.
linkedin.com  ), recently acquired by Microsoft, is a social Web site service 
used for professional networking and showcasing business talent. As of 2016, 
LinkedIn had more than four hundred million networked business-oriented 
members in more than two hundred countries and territories and in twenty-
four languages around the world. The membership grows by approximately 
two new members every second. 
 As of 2016, the countries with the most  LinkedIn users were:
• 
 United States : one-hundred twenty-four million members  
• 
 India : thirty-four million members  
• 
 Brazil : twenty-three million members  
• 
 United Kingdom : twenty million members  
• 
 China : sixteen million members  
• 
 Canada : twelve million members  
• 
 France : eleven million members  
• 
 Spain : eight million members  
• 
 Mexico : eight million members  
• 
 Italy : seven million members  
 
■ Tip  Map out where the LinkedIn users are in your export strategy. If you plan to export to 
Norway and find there are hardly any LinkedIn members there, that will indicate a piece of your 
online export pie might not work! Go elsewhere with your online social strategy—try China, for 
example, which is one of the fastest-growing countries using LinkedIn. 

Exporting
93
 LinkedIn  makes it easy to connect and stay connected with everybody all over 
the world—old friends, colleagues, suppliers, vendors, employees, indepen-
dent contractors, classmates, people you meet during international travels—in 
order to spread the word that you are looking for a serious business opportu-
nity. Their main app has gone through a complete overhaul, with new features 
such as: Home, Me, Messaging, My Network and Search—all aimed at making 
communication faster, more casual and expressive. It also offers multiple ways 
to keep in touch with your global base—from your own LinkedIn feed, to 
posts and comments of groups that you join, to direct messaging and group 
conversations. It enables powerful introductions to valuable new contacts and 
even allows you to give and receive endorsements. If you use it in a meaningful 
way, you can channel the activity to benefit your export business. 
 LinkedIn  allows you to set up a company page that is static until you change 
it. Visitors can click on tabs to access the sections of your company page they 
are most interested in. Think of it as another mini Web site—furthering build-
ing your brand. It helps others learn more about your company’s job oppor-
tunities and products and services. 
 LinkedIn also supports the formation of special interest groups. The largest 
groups are related to finding employment; however, all sorts of professional 
and career issues are central to LinkedIn’s focus. Joining a group is a great way 
to make connections peer to peer, share tips and experiences, ask and answer 
questions, and be on the lookout for customers and potential partnerships 
worldwide. Choose a group that is active and is central to your export busi-
ness. A couple of groups that I belong to:
• 
 China Trade Group  
• 
 Exporting Guide Group (MOOD)  
• 
 Global Intellectual Property & Business Lawyers  
• 
 Global Sourcing  
• 
 Global Trade Central  
• 
 Go Global—Internationalization Forum  
• 
 Import/Export Global Trading Group  
• 
 International Business  
• 
 International Entrepreneur Club  
• 
 International Trade Network  
• 
 Trade Professional.Net  
• 
 WAIB: Women of Academy of International Business  

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
94
• 
 Web Globalization  
• 
 Women Entrepreneurs GROW  Global 
• 
 World Entrepreneurship Forum  
 
■ Tip  If you can’t find a group that interests you, start your own! It’s a great way to declare 
your authority and develop a following. Whether through your own individual LinkedIn account, a 
company page, or a group membership, maintain a daily and consistent presence. 
 Facebook 
 Facebook  (  http://www.facebook.com ) is known to be one of the fastest-
growing and most popular web activities in the world. As such, it has been 
able to reach over half the U.S. population in 2016.  viii Facebook was founded in 
2004 with the mission “to make the world more open and connected.” People 
use Facebook to connect with friends and family, to comment on and like 
activities, to discover new things in the world, to stay relevant, to pass time, 
and to share and express what matters to them. With Facebook’s Messenger, 
a mobile instant messaging app, and its acquisition of the largest chat-based 
service in the world, WhatsApp, our ability to control the way we interact 
with people and businesses globally just got better. 
 As of December 2015,  Facebook  had more than 1.59 billion active monthly 
users, of which approximately 83.6 percent resided outside the United States 
and Canada.  ix As a whole, 21 percent of the entire Internet world was using 
Facebook as of November 2015.  x So, Facebook alone offers more than bil-
lion and a half users a month that your export business can reach. CEO Mark 
Zuckerberg has noted that “the next billion users will come from regions 
outside North America.  xi 
 
■ Tip  Facebook is the force to reckon with in North America, but there are other social networks 
that play in the same space, including Xing (  http://www.xing.com/en  ) in Germany; Renren 
(  http://www.renren-inc.com/en/ ) in China; Twoo (  http://www.twoo.com ) in Belgium; 
and MyMFB (  http://www.mymfb.com ) in Pakistan, a Muslim alternative to Facebook that is 
becoming popular in other parts of the world. It can’t hurt to look into these and, when you are 
ready, become a part of them through an intermediary who knows the lay of the land and the 
language. 

Exporting
95
 YouTube 
 YouTube  (  http://www.youtube.com ) was founded in 2005 with the sole 
intent of helping people broadcast themselves or their business. YouTube is 
an online place to share videos with friends, family, colleagues, and the world. 
By subscribing to a channel, you can connect with an individual or a company 
you are interested in and keep up to date on their activities. 
 YouTube Viewership 
 Now owned by Google, YouTube has more than one billion users, with 80 
percent of its traffic coming from outside the United States. YouTube is local-
ized in more than 70 countries and across seventy-six different languages.   
 Thousands of channels earn money from their YouTube videos by becoming 
a YouTube partner. When you become a YouTube partner, you can display ads 
on your videos, and when people click on those ads, you earn a percentage 
of revenue. 
 There is a bit of competition to YouTube. French company Dailymotion 
(  http://www.dailymotion.com/fr , or in the United States,   http://www.
dailymotion.com/us  ) also lets users share videos. It competes against 
YouTube. Dailymotion is owned by Vivendi. Other newcomers are: Vessel 
(  http://www.vessel.com ) and Amazon Video Shorts (  http://www.ama-
zon.com/b?ie=UTF8&node=9013971011  ). 
 
■ Tip  To earn money on your videos, you must set up an AdSense account (  http://www.
google.com/adsense  ). 
 Twitter 
 Twitter  (  http://www.twitter.com  ), established in 2006, is an online social 
networking and microblogging service comprising a global community of 
friends and strangers answering one simple question: What’s important to 
you ? You can answer that question via your phone or right on the web with 
an instant text-based message of no more than 140 characters. 

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
96
 
■ Tip  Link your Twitter profile to your other social media accounts and apply the use of hashtags 
to better organize and cement brand loyalty. A hashtag is a # symbol used before a relevant 
keyword or phrase with no spaces to make up a Tweet. It’s used to categorize Tweets and help 
them show up more easily in a Twitter search. For example, “#globalsmallbiz” is one I use often in 
my Tweets; it relates to expanding globally. If people do a search on “#globalsmallbiz,” my Tweets 
will show up. 
 Twitter Users 
 Twitter has 320 million monthly active users with 79 percent of the accounts 
located outside the United States.  xii The service is available in thirty-five 
languages.  xiii 
 To see who’s tweeting right now, visit A World of Tweets (  http://aworldoft-
weets.frogdesign.com/  ). Twitter is a great way to quickly share information 
and make strong global connections. Its new tab called Moments will allow 
you to discover the best of what’s happening on Twitter in an instant.  
 Instagram 
 Instagram  (  http://www.instagram.com ), established in 2010 and subse-
quently sold to Facebook in 2012, is a free, fast, and easy way to share your 
photos with friends, family, suppliers, colleagues, and prospective customers. 
You can snap a picture and then post to Instagram, where you can filter it 
several different ways to transform its look. You can easily share posts to 
Facebook and Twitter, too. 
 Instagram has more than 400 million monthly active users, with more than 
75 percent living outside of the US and more than half living in Europe and 
Asia.  xiv The fastest growing countries for Instagram use are Brazil, Japan, and 
Indonesia.  xv Its new video app, Boomerang, lets you turn everyday moments 
into something fun and unexpected.  
 Pinterest 
 Launched in March 2010, Pinterest (  http://www.pinterest.com ) is a con-
tent-sharing service that allows members to “pin” images, videos, and other 
objects that interest them to their virtual pinboard. It is a tool for collecting, 
organizing, and sharing things you are passionate about. 

Exporting
97
 Although Pinterest’s global reach is not as strong as Instagram’s, it is still a 
popular Web site in the United States. Pinterest has more than 100 million 
monthly active users.  xvi 
 With  Pinterest , you can browse other pinboards for inspiration, re-pin images 
to your own pinboards, and find a new and a more passionate audience to 
build your brand.  
 Google+  
 Established in 2011, Google+ (  https://plus.google.com ) is a social net-
working and identity service owned and operated by Google that gives you 
yet another unique way to build a social network, share information, and con-
nect with people all over the world. 
 According to Business Insider, there are about 2.2 billion Google+ profiles and 
of these, 9 percent have any publicly posted content.  xvii Your Google profile 
is what people find when they search your name (mine is:   https://plus.
google.com/+LaurelDelaney  ). You can include a brief bio, picture, links to 
other online platforms, and so forth. It becomes your online calling card to 
the world. 
 The concept of Google+ Circles is a major benefit to using Google+. This 
is where you choose who you want in your contacts. Circles lets you com-
partmentalize and keep the silos of your life separate. You can have a friends 
circle, a family circle, a colleagues in Japan circle, a suppliers in Korea circle, a 
customers in Germany circle, and so forth. Google+ allows you to share what 
you want with whom you want, making the control issue a major boon to this 
social platform. 
 Another great feature of Google+ is Hangouts. As the name suggests, Hangouts 
provides a virtual place for you and a group of up to 150 people to hang out. 
Through your computer or mobile app, the group can talk and see each other. 
This works great for impromptu gatherings or scheduled meetings to discuss 
status updates from around the world. 
 All of these Google+ tools and resources—from the Circle, to Hangouts, to 
hosting virtual meetings—allow you to reach a global audience and better 
manage your business relationships as you grow your export business.  

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
98
 Digital Road Map to the World 
 Remember the export business plans we covered in Chapter   2 ? My Laurel 
export business plan included a section on information technology and asked 
you what technology you will use (order taking, mailing lists, social media , 
finances, or e-commerce sales) and how you will use it. Let’s take a moment to 
map out  your  social media and networking strategy. It might look like the fol-
lowing list, using the airplane engineer we talked about earlier as an example. 
Don’t forget to assign someone to champion the cause—that champion can 
be you.
 1.   “Facebook—post once a day” : You might post a daily photo 
you’ve taken of one of your most successful projects, 
such as a shot of the latest airplane engine you built, and 
include a short paragraph on why it’s unique from any 
others on the market.  
 2.  “ YouTube —feature one video every month” : An informative 
video that you could come up with in a month would 
be one that shows a complete installation of an airplane 
engine, where you talk about what could have gone 
wrong technically but didn’t because you conducted five 
thousand hours of research beforehand. 
 3.  “ Twitter —post three times a day” : In order to get three 
Tweets up a day, you might first tweet about your upcom-
ing presentation on how airplane engines are developed 
nowadays to optimize and reduce fuel usage. Then you 
can tweet about a dramatic improvement on your air-
plane engine. Your last tweet can be about a survey that 
was conducted on airplane engines manufactured in 
China and should include a link to the survey results. Be 
sure to track the most talked-about stories in your indus-
try via Moments.  
 4.  “ Instagram —post once a day” : A daily Instagram photo 
might feature an airplane engine you spotted in an open 
lot that was ready for the trash bin. 
 5.  “ Pinterest —post once a day” : A post for Pinterest might be 
an infographic on how a clean airplane engine performs 
more efficiently than a dirty one.  

Exporting
99
 6.  “ Google+ —post twice a day” : Post a couple of related arti-
cles each day. The first could be about airplane engines, 
describing the maintenance and offering the contact 
information for your supplier in Korea; the second could 
be an article about airplane engine efficiency, which you 
send to all of your Circles.  
 7.  “ Blog —post three times a week” : You might make blog 
entries on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday sharing your 
own original content on designing, developing, building, 
and testing airplane engines. Your blog will allow you to 
intersperse your posts with other articles from outside 
sources that support your message. 
 You can understand why it’s important to be passionate about what you do—
because you must sustain the communications across all the social platforms 
for a very long time and never tire. 
 
■ Tip  Posting on a blog, whether once a day or once a week, counts toward your digital road 
map. I’ve always felt that blogging is the real meat and potatoes of your digital marketing strategy. 
 Emerging Social Media Networks That Will 
Shake Up the World 
 Emerging social media networks allow you to connect with new user groups 
beyond the magnificent seven. Here are a few to watch. These can be good 
places to broaden your brand reach, test new campaigns, and develop a fol-
lowing before your competitors do. Add these networks to your digital road 
map once you get comfortable using them. Think along the lines of: What do 
people need to know more about your business? What would they like to 
know more about? How can I be helpful to them? 
 Snapchat 
 Established in 2011,  SnapChat (  http://www.snapchat.com ), a video mes-
saging application, allows its users to send self-destructing images to each 
other, which is unlike other social networks where what you post online stays 
there forever. Millennials describe Snapchat as awesome.  xviii There are three 
key ways to communicate via Snapchat: through photos or videos, a story, and 
one-to-one text chatting.  

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
100
 Blab 
 Blab (  http://www.blab.com ), founded in 2012, is a world news aggregator 
that lets users add news from any news website and share and comment 
on news stories. Blab enables brands to target specific audiences. With its 
predictive visualization tool that highlights up-and-coming topics at any given 
moment, it can help companies decide which conversations they should join 
and which topics they should focus on.  
 Slack 
 Founded in 2009,  Slack (  http://www.slack.com  ), is a team-based cloud col-
laboration tool that provides services such as real-time messaging, archiving, 
and search for 21 st -century teams. It offers one-on-one messaging, private 
groups, chat  rooms , and direct messaging as well as group chats organized by 
topic. Everyone has a transparent view of all that’s going on.  
 Periscope 
 Periscope  (  http://www.periscope.tv ), established in 2014 and bought by 
Twitter the following year, is a mobile app that allows users to livestream 
whatever is happening around them for anyone who wants to watch. Unlike 
YouTube where a viewing experience is passive, Periscope is active. Viewers 
can comment, ask questions, and heart broadcasts in real time. Even The 
White House is on Periscope:   https://www.periscope.tv/WhiteHouse  . 
 Wanelo 
 Wanelo  (  http://www.wanelo.com ), launched in 2012, is a social shopping 
app that allows you to peruse millions of different products offered by major 
brands, online retailers (more than 550 thousand stores) and even indepen-
dent artists. Think of it as mall-browsing, with a click. You can create wishlists, 
make connections, and discover what your friends are interested in.  
 Summary 
 Your social media and networking presence will allow you to broaden and 
deepen existing relationships, attract new prospects around the globe, build 
thought leadership within your industry, create strong brand awareness, and 
grow your business. Be open to new experiences. Once you’ve mastered the 
basics, you are ready to use eBay, Amazon, Etsy, CafePress, and Zazzle—and 
even the popular Chinese site Alibaba—as stepping stones to exporting.  

Exporting
101
 Notes 
  i.   Jae-sang is a South Korean singer, songwriter, rapper, 
dancer, and record producer who is often considered 
the most famous Korean in the world. Jae-sang’s hit sin-
gle “Gangnam Style,” which went live on December 21, 
2012, exceeded one billion views on YouTube, becoming 
the first—and only—video to do so. As a result of his 
popularity, Jae-sang was invited to perform at the White 
House’s Christmas concert in 2012 and at South Korean 
President Park Geun-hye’s inauguration ceremony in 
2013.   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Psy . 
  ii.   “If we’ve learned anything from the   Dress That Broke the 
Internet  , first posted to Tumblr by a 21-year-old singer 
from Scotland, it’s that anyone with a web connection can 
start a global conversation. Yes, it helps to be famous in 
real life. But the rise of social networks has leveled the 
playing field, allowing unknowns to command audiences 
rivaling those of real-world leaders, even if by accident.” ß 
This quote appears in the body text. –LP   http://time.
com/3732203/the-30-most-influential-people-
on-the-internet/  .  
 iii.   “‘Project Loon’ Is Aloft in Sri Lanka,” accessed 
February 21, 2016,   http://www.wsj.com/articles/
project-loon-is-aloft-in-sri-lanka-1455661492  . 
 iv.   “Here’s How Many Internet Users There Are,” accessed 
February 21, 2016,   http://time.com/money/3896219/
internet-users-worldwide/  .  
  v.   Twitaholic:   http://twitaholic.com/top100/followers .  
 vi.  “10 ways brands are using social media marketing for 
good,” accessed February 21, 2016,   https://www.
clickz.com/2016/01/27/10-ways-brands-are-
using-social-media-marketing-for-good  . 
 vii.   Disruptive Innovation, Clayton Christensen: 
  http://www.claytonchristensen.com/key-concepts/  ,  
accessed February 21, 2016.  
 viii.   “Facebook to reach over half the U.S. population this 
year,” VatorNews, accessed February 21, 2016,   http://
vator.tv/news/2016-02-08-facebook-to-reach-
over-half-the-us-population-this-year  . 

Chapter 6 | Creating a Social Media and Networking Presence
102
 ix.   Company Info | Facebook Newsroom,   http://news-
room.fb.com/company-info/  .  
 x. 
 Internet User Stats For All the Americas on November 
30, 2015, World Total,   http://www.internetworld-
stats.com/stats2.htm  .  
 xi.   “Facebook ‘internationalizes’ awards with global bracket 
system,” Campaign US, accessed February 21, 2016, 
  http://www.campaignlive.com/article/facebook-
internationalizes-awards-global-bracket-sys-
tem/1378099  .  
 xii. 
  Company About, accessed February 21, 2016, Twitter: 
  https://about.twitter.com/company . 
 xiii. 
  Ibid. 
 xiv. 
  Celebrating a Community of 400 Million, accessed 
February 21, 2016,   http://blog.instagram.com/
post/129662501137/150922-400million  . 
 xv. 
  Ibid.  
 xvi. 
  “Pinterest finally shares its size: 100M monthly active 
users and counting,” VentureBeat, accessed February 21, 
2016, 
  http://venturebeat.com/2015/09/16/pin-
terest-finally-shares-its-size-100m-monthly-
active-users-and-counting/  . 
 xvii. 
  “Google+ Active Users,” Business Insider, accessed 
February 21, 2016,   http://www.businessinsider.
com/google-active-users-2015-1?r=UK&IR=T  . 
 xviii. 
  “How to Use Snapchat,” The Wall Street Journal, accessed 
February 21, 2016,   http://www.wsj.com/articles/
snapchat-101-learn-to-love-the-worlds-most-
confusing-social-network-1452628322  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_7
 C H A P T E R 
 Using 
e-Commerce 
and Social Media 
Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export 
Success  
 Right now there is a prime opportunity for all of us to change the 
rules of the game through e-commerce and shift the balance in favor 
of entrepreneurs like you. The Internet levels the playing field and gives 
everyone—be they big or small—a chance. 
 —Jack Ma, founder of Alibaba  i 
7

104
Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
 If you do build a great experience, customers tell each other about that. 
Word of mouth is very powerful. 
 —Jeff Bezos, American technology entrepreneur and investor; founder 
and CEO of Amazon.com  ii 
 Artist Gina Ayers Signore has been interested in art her whole life.   She 
remembers drawing and painting when she was five years old. Today, she sells 
her artwork on her own Web site, Dahlia House Art Studio (http://   www.
dahliahousestudios.com   ), as well as on Etsy, Zazzle, and Art.com. Is it a bad 
idea for Gina to sell her artwork on another company’s e-commerce platform 
that takes a small slice of her profits? Not at all. 
 Selling Goods, Services, and Unique Creations 
 Online 
 Whether you are like Gina and sell art or you sell hamburger buns or steam 
engines, using a proven e-commerce platform is beneficial, provided its visitors 
are in line with your ideal target market, it is easy to use, it has a global reach, 
and it can help you sell more goods worldwide at a profit. It also allows you to 
test the salability of your product on someone else’s proven successful infra-
structure before making a substantial investment to set up an e-commerce 
site from scratch. Not all buy-sell platforms will work to your advantage, but 
with a little effort, you can try out the top ones with minimal risk by creating 
multiple store fronts simultaneously. 
 
■ Caution   Not all the popular  e-commerce channels have the international part down pat. 
Some marketplaces charge a monthly fee; some don’t. Some claim they ship worldwide, yet at the 
same time, they state restrictions may apply based on if the company has a physical international 
presence in your location. When it gets confusing is at the point where a shopping-cart feature 
does not properly reflect customs duties for internationally bound packages. Don’t be intimidated 
or overwhelmed. Just as you are learning the export ropes, so are these e-commerce platforms 
learning them on the international front. Read the fine print on each site, and when in doubt, 
contact the company for additional assistance. 
 In getting started, you might want to set up a PayPal account to receive pay-
ments if you don’t already have one (  http://www.paypal.com ). Your custom-
ers, on the other hand, can pay you without creating a PayPal account. Most 
online stores process payments through credit cards, verified bank accounts, 
and PayPal.  iii (Refer to Chapter   20  for more on methods of payment.) 

Exporting 
105
 Let’s take a look at the most common e-commerce marketplaces that can 
serve as a stepping stone to exporting and allow you to get your products 
in front of the largest number of potential customers worldwide. I include 
Facebook, because you can set up a store on your Facebook page to sell 
products. I also include it because of its tremendous connectivity power and 
global reach. 
 
■ Note   Test the digital-storefront waters for a short period of time—say six months to a year—
and then decide whether the work you put into it is commensurate with the additional business you 
receive. If you find you are selling products like hotcakes on one site and in one specific overseas 
market, that is a sign there is customer demand for your products! At that point, it’s probably time 
to make a decision to set up your own e-commerce system so that you can pocket all the profits vs. 
just a portion. Like any new venture, you must market the heck out of each e-marketplace through 
your own social channels. How else will you be discovered?  
 Online Storefronts: Cash in at World 
Marketplaces 
 The following  online storefronts  —all US based except for Alibaba.com—are 
considered the most popular. Most are used primarily for selling products, not 
services (except for Amazon, where you can sell intellectual work in the form 
of a white papers, books, or e-books). 
 Don’t get discouraged by the lack of e-service representation. If you are 
exporting services, revisit Chapter   4  , because many of the freelancer and 
independent-contractor Web sites that I talked about—such as Guru, Elance, 
and oDesk—can be useful not just for finding freelancers and independent 
contractors but also for marketing and exporting your own services. Review 
all applicable fees, because they will vary on each project and on the type of 
membership you choose. You can also set up your e-services similarly to how 
an online store might set up a physical product, but check to see if you can 
disable shipping since you won’t mail anything out. Another option to bring 
attention to your services is to run paid ads on Facebook  iv or on Google 
(using AdWords,  v for example) based on keywords related to your business 
(refer to Chapters   6 and   10 ). 

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
106
 
■ Tip  Begin with the end in mind. At the same time that you are eagerly opening a store, find 
out how to close a store or cancel your subscription. Find out if there are any penalties or additional 
fees associated with the termination of your account. Can you do a redirect to a new site location 
(such as your own Web site or blog) when people attempt to reach you at your old location? 
 Amazon 
 When it opened in 1995,  Amazon  (  http://www.amazon.com ) was the world’s 
biggest online bookseller, and that alone. Since then, Amazon has transformed 
itself into “the Earth’s most customer-centric company, where customers can 
find and discover anything they might want to buy online, and endeavors to 
offer its customers the lowest possible prices.”  vi 
 Amazon has gone from being a simple Web site to an e-commerce and pub-
lishing partner to a sophisticated development platform. Some of the prop-
erties it owns include Audible (  http://www.audible.com/mt/anon-home ; 
offers downloadable audio books); AfterSchool.com (  http://www.after-
school.com/  ; sells kids’ sports equipment, footwear, dance, and crafts); 
Woot (  http://www.woot.com/ ; features new deals every day); CASA.com 
(  http://www.casa.com/ ; selling kitchen and storage items and everything 
for the home); Zappos (  http://www.zappos.com/ ; sells shoes and clothing); 
Alexa.com (  http://www.alexa.com ; provides commercial web traffic data 
and analytics), and CreateSpace (  http://www.createspace.com ; indie print 
publishing made easy), to name just a few. 
 Amazon helps sellers reach customers in thirteen marketplaces spanning across 
Europe, North America, and Asia. In addition to the United States, Amazon has 
Web sites for doing business in Brazil (  http://www.amazon.com.br ); Canada 
(  http://www.amazon.ca ); China (  http://www.amazon.cn ); France (  http://
www.amazon.fr  ); Germany (  http://www.amazon.de ); India (  http://www.
amazon.in  ); Italy (  http://www.amazon.it  ); Japan (  http://www.amazon.
co.jp  ); Mexico (  https://www.amazon.com.mx ); Spain (  http://www.ama-
zon.es  ); The Netherlands (  http://www.amazon.nl ); and the United Kingdom 
(  http://www.amazon.co.uk ). And the company continues to add countries 
to help sellers expand internationally.  vii When you set up your account, each 
overseas marketplace requires a different account, except for the EU! 
 
■ Tip  In deciding whether to go with one of Amazon’s local sites, determine if your products 
are in demand in that overseas market. Do you have the staff to support these areas—particularly 
that speaks the native language of the country you wish to conduct business in? Is this country 
selection in line with your export business plan developed earlier?  

Exporting 
107
 People from all over the world can shop at Amazon using a credit card or 
a verified bank account for payment. That means that if you sell on Amazon, 
your product can be purchased with ease. Amazon makes it user friendly for 
the buyer, by placing prices in the home currency of each site.  
 Setting up Your Own Amazon Marketplace 
 When you set up your own  marketplace  on Amazon, you have the potential 
to get in front of a huge volume of traffic—tens of millions of customers. 
Selling on Amazon requires you to do a simple five-step process:
 1.  List your items  
 2.  Get orders  
 3.  Ship  
 4.   Get paid  
 5.   Process refunds and returns  
 Amazon offers a training guide, “Getting Started Guide: How to Get Set Up 
Selling on Amazon,”  viii where you can check off tasks as you complete them. 
 
■ Caution   Amazon does not offer a language translation service. That is your responsibility. If 
you only have an English-speaking staff and want to sell to China through Amazon’s China site 
(  http://www.amazon.cn ), for instance, you’d better get a Chinese-speaking person on staff 
to handle that part of your business, including writing the listings to sell your products! Another 
option is to look into a professional translation service online (e.g., One Hour Translation 1 ), which 
can streamline the process. 
 Amazon  Global Shipping  
 Amazon.com ships orders worldwide with Amazon Global. Items can be 
shipped to a long list of countries, but bear in mind that this does not nec-
essarily mean Amazon has fulfillment capabilities in each of these countries. 
 Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA)  picks, packs, and ships inventory on your behalf. 
 Amazon only has fulfillment centers located in: China, France, Germany, India, 
Italy, Japan, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. They, however, 
ship to more than 75 countries.  ix 
 1 https://www.onehourtranslation.com/translation/press-releases/one-hour-
translation-becomes-official-amazon-web-services-technology-partner  

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
108
 To see if the items you are interested in selling on Amazon are included for 
global shipping, do a search for “items eligible for international shipping” at 
the Amazon site. Product lines, shipping rates, and fees vary depending on the 
delivery address, so be mindful of that when you conduct your search. 
 For certain eligible countries, Amazon Global offers customers estimations 
on customs duties and clearance, taxes, and import fees applicable during 
checkout. These expenses vary greatly from country to country and region to 
region. Amazon Marketplace sellers should check the site’s policies to ensure 
their product is covered, determine what fees will be levied on their shipment, 
and find out who will be responsible for these additional expenses. (Typically, 
it is up to the recipient of the product to pay these costs.) 
 
■ Tip  Consult your tax accountant and attorney on Amazon Global to find out the tax 
consequences, if any, to your business of using their services. It also can’t hurt to also consult with 
your entire export dream team to get its wise counsel. 
 Amazon Marketplace: The Full  Monty  
 You can sell to the world in two ways on the Amazon Marketplace—profes-
sionally (as a business) or individually.  x If you are looking to sell only a few 
products (fewer than forty items a month) or a one-off item as a test, sign up 
for an individual account because there is no monthly fee. You pay only when 
the item sells. The marketplace approach helps you avoid the time and costs 
of developing a stand-alone Web site on your own. 
 When you sell on Amazon, you also have the ability to use one of Amazon’s 
fulfillment centers (serving the nine countries mentioned earlier) and ship-
ping capabilities, which give you the tools you need to grow your business 
but without ever letting you know who is buying your product (yes, you read 
that right). You very rarely know who your customers are and thus lose the 
opportunity to tailor your offerings to their evolving needs. By putting your 
products in someone else’s hands, you are a step removed from the actual 
sales transaction. Hence, it will be hard to redirect your efforts accordingly 
should you decide to take back control and sell directly. The fulfillment part 
is also tricky. For example, if you have inventory that is located in a different 
country than one of Amazon’s fulfillment centers, you will need to export 
your products from the source country and import them into the destination 
country. You should consult with Amazon on the best way to do this, as the 
company has strict procedures for how shipments must be received. These 
include the size of pallets you use and the type of carrier you use. There are 
monthly costs and other selling fees associated when you sign up.  xi 

Exporting 
109
 Before you do anything, check to see whether your product is permitted for 
sale on Amazon within its selling categories. Then, calculate all costs—the 
wholesale price of your product, shipping costs, handling fees, taxes, duties, 
payment service fees, and Amazon’s fees and other related selling costs—to 
determine if you will make a profit on each item you sell overseas. After you 
look at your profit, ask yourself: is it worth it? To save money, you can opt 
out of the shipping option and do it on your own through a private carrier. 
This ensures that you have greater control over all aspects of the transaction, 
including knowing who your customers are. You also know who to contact if 
something isn’t working. It’s your choice.  
 Amazon Webstore: E-Commerce Store and Shopping Cart 
Solution No Longer  Exists 
 The Amazon  Webstore  (  http://services.amazon.com/content/webstore-by-
amazon.htm?ld=SCWBAStriplogin   ) used to be a one-stop e-commerce shop 
that enabled you to build and operate a profitable online store within Amazon 
to sell to the world but it is no longer available to new merchants. 2 Amazon 
now offers Shopify, the preferred Webstore migration, as a solution provider. 
Once complete, you can leverage Amazon’s infrastructure to build your online 
store on a solid and secure platform (it may require help from a designer to 
make it look visually attractive), utilize Amazon’s fulfillment, and tap into its 
expertise on an as-needed basis. Monthly subscription and per-transaction 
fees apply and vary greatly. Be sure to read the fine print. 
 
■ Caution   The biggest obvious downside to partnering with Amazon is that you will essentially 
compete against it on everything related to your product. If you sell jewelry and Amazon does too 
(which it does), you compete against the company for customer attention and acquisition. And, 
if Amazon raises your rates or decides to offer a product similar to yours at a lower price, guess 
whose ads will be next to yours? Go into this with your eyes wide open!  
 eBay  
 Founded in 1995,  eBay  (  http://www.ebay.com  ) is a leading e-commerce 
company and helps individuals and small businesses sell their products world-
wide. The company’s global portfolio of businesses enables hundreds of mil-
lions of diverse and passionate people to buy, sell, and pay online. 
 2 http://webstore.amazon.com/?ld=SCWBAStriplogin 

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
110
 You can buy or sell individual or multiple items on eBay. If you are selling multi-
ple items on an ongoing basis, you’ll probably want to start your own storefront, 
where buyers can learn about you and the products you sell. When you list an 
item on eBay (known as a business-to-consumer—B2C—sale), you’re charged 
a listing (or insertion) fee. Insertion fees are charged per listing, per category 
regardless of the quantity of items. If the item sells, you're charged a “Final value 
fee.” Final value fees are calculated based on the total amount of the sale. The 
total amount of the sale is the final price of the item, shipping charges, and any 
other amounts you may charge the buyer. Sales tax is not included. 
 Every item gets its own unique listing. You may need to pay extra for an 
upgrade or supplemental service, such as international site visibility, which 
attracts buyers from other countries by showing your item in search results 
on other eBay Web sites. These supplemental features, including global ship-
ping charges, will be included on your seller invoice as fees. 
 The site currently ships to about sixty-four countries, 3 requiring you to ship 
your items domestically to one of eBay’s US shipping centers. Some items are 
restricted (e.g., antiques, vintage collectibles, and real estate) due to export 
limitations and restrictions identified by designated global shipping providers. 
Other items have general restrictions, like child pornography, tobacco, and per-
ishable items, for example. To give yourself the best chance of success selling 
through eBay, review its “Taking It to the Next Level” (  http://pages.ebay.
com/sellerinformation/ship-smart/global-shipping-program/next-
level.html  ) on how to attract more international buyers to your listings. One 
best-practice tip from eBay is adding more countries to your selling program.  xii  
 
■ Note  The devil is in the details. In your listing, the buyer sees an estimate of the international 
shipping charges and the import charge. At checkout, she is presented with the final charges, 
which include the cost of the item, the international shipping charges, and the import charge. The 
international shipping charges include any US shipping costs as well as program fees, third-party 
international shipping charges, fuel surcharges, and processing and handling fees. The import 
charge includes applicable customs duties, taxes, and third-party brokerage. 
 eBay  Store  
 When you sell more than fifty listings a month on eBay, it’s time to consider 
opening an eBay store—an e-commerce solution that helps you leverage the 
eBay marketplace and tap the millions of buyers worldwide who shop on eBay. 
 3 http://pages.ebay.com/sellerinformation/ship-smart/global-shipping-
program/index.html  

Exporting 
111
You can classify your account as a business or an individual, should you want 
to test the waters discreetly on a solo basis. The site allows you to enter your 
current selling activity into what is called the Fee Illustrator to determine 
which eBay store subscription best fits your needs. If you meet the require-
ments to open a store, eBay makes it easy to get started. Any items you cur-
rently sell individually on eBay automatically become a part of your eBay store. 
 With your store comes exclusive marketing and merchandising tools from 
eBay plus customization features to build a strong brand. By staging all of your 
products in one central location, an eBay store creates a one-stop shop where 
buyers can learn more about you and your products. The site also provides 
demarcation by way of placing a red store tag next to your user ID to indicate 
you have an eBay store. 
 When you open an eBay store, you pay a monthly store subscription fee, 
which becomes effective immediately. Your next seller invoice will include a 
prorated fee for the number of days between your subscription date and the 
end of that month as well as subscription fees for the following month. Fees 
range anywhere from $15.95 to $199.95 per month based on your needs and 
the benefits of each subscription. 4 Store fees can change by way of company 
directives and other related fees may apply, such as PayPal (now a separate 
company from eBay) and seller tool fees.  xiii Always read the fine print on eBay 
when it comes to your costs. And it can’t hurt to e-mail or call customer sup-
port to confirm your understanding. 
 The benefit to using eBay is the opportunity to brand your store, receive 
payment through PayPal, and sell internationally, where eBay has a far greater 
reach than other sites in general.  
 Etsy 
 Conceived in early 2005,  Etsy (  http://www.etsy.com  ) is a vibrant mar-
ketplace spanning nearly every country in the world.  xiv Users on Etsy sell 
everything from handmade goods to vintage items and art supplies, with many 
professional artists using the site to make a living. 
 With Etsy, you can enhance and grow your brand by acquiring new customers, 
using built-in promotional tools, and becoming a part of a vibrant online com-
munity to help form relationships and gain mentors. There are no member-
ship fees with Etsy. It costs twenty cents to list an item until it sells. Once you 
sell your item, Etsy collects a 3.5-percent fee on the sale price. 
 4 http://pages.ebay.com/sellerinformation/stores/Subscriptions.html 

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
112
 When you create an  account  , you can sign up using Facebook, Google+, or 
your full name. Before you list a product for sale, Etsy highlights the fees you 
will be charged in order to inform you of what your net profit will be. As a 
shop owner, you are sent a bill at the end of every month containing the fees 
you owe. You have until the middle of the following month to pay it. Buyers 
can purchase products with Visa, MasterCard, American Express, Discover 
Card, PayPal, or the Etsy Credit Card Reader. If you use the Reader, be sure to 
first download the Etsy App. 5 
 Etsy has rolled out a direct checkout method, which allows you to pay with 
and accept payment by credit card, debit card, Etsy gift card, some bank trans-
fer services, PayPal, Apple Pay, Google Wallet, and the Sell on Etsy Reader—all 
in their local currencies. This solves the problem of how to efficiently get paid 
after you sell your wares online. 
 Like a lot of e-commerce platforms, perfecting the global end of transactions 
for Etsy continues to be a challenge and work in progress. If your desire is to 
easily cross boundaries on someone else’s e-commerce platform, it is better 
to find out in advance if it is feasible before you invest your time and energy 
using Etsy.  
 CafePress 
 Dubbed the world’s customization engine,  CafePress  (  http://www.
CafePress.com  ) began in 1999 as a nifty little idea—to apply printing and 
technology innovation to make it easier for people to express themselves 
on T-shirts. This expression has led to people quickly becoming e-com-
merce entrepreneurs with no risk and no overhead. Some of the brands 
CafePress currently manages are: CafePress.com, Great Big Canvas, Imagekind, 
  InvitationBox.com , and Canvas On Demand. 
 CafePress makes it easy enough to open a shop on the Web site—it’s free. 
There are no up-front fees, but, as is the case with all the online marketplaces, 
the site takes a piece of your selling price as profit. You create the idea for 
the product or choose one of the company’s, choose what type of product 
you are selling, and pick your retail price, and CafePress prints your product 
on demand when customers order it. CafePress also handles the fulfillment 
on the transaction.  
 5 https://www.etsy.com/reader?ref=ftr 

Exporting 
113
 
■ Note   If you have funds to invest and are serious about becoming an international e-commerce 
entrepreneur, get your personalized products printed by a third party, carry inventory, and start 
selling them in your own online store. That way, you pocket all the profits. If you don’t want to 
fuss with the production side of the business and don’t have a dime to throw into your creative 
endeavor, stick with CafePress provided they show signs of global growth! 
 Zazzle 
 Zazzle  (  http://www.zazzle.com ), established in 1999, is considered the 
world’s leading quality custom-products platform. You can upload images and 
create your own merchandise (see my store, the Global Small Business Depot, 
at   http://www.zazzle.com/laureldelaney ) or buy merchandise created 
by others. It does not cost you anything to open a Zazzle store, and you can 
customize your store to meet your design standards. Pricing is determined by 
you and includes an option to select your royalty rate, ranging from 5 percent 
to 99 percent. For Zazzle to pay you the royalty you select, it must increase 
the product price by a commensurate amount. On royalties of 20 percent or 
greater, a 5 percent transaction fee applies. Be careful not to raise the royalty 
so high that you price a product right out of the ballpark. For example, you 
wouldn’t want to try to get a 99 percent royalty by selling a T-shirt at $50! 
Keep the customer in mind: what are they willing to spend on a product like 
yours? A good royalty range is generally 12 percent. 
 Zazzle International (  http://www.zazzle.com/international ) spans four 
continents and includes seventeen countries, allowing users to shop in their 
native language and pay in their local currency. 
 Zazzle  ships worldwide and takes anywhere from two to seven days when you 
use express shipping or four to twenty-one days for standard shipping. If you 
choose United States Postal Service for your international shipments, do not 
expect to receive any tracking method. It’s only when you use Zazzle’s primary 
couriers (UPS or FedEx) that you can track the status of your shipments. The 
site indicates that international packages can be delayed for reasons ranging 
from customs inspections to the standard delivery times of local mail services. 
 As with Amazon, there are some big distinctions between what Zazzle ships 
worldwide free and clear of taxes and customs fees and what it doesn’t. For 
example, if you are based in the UK and order from the Zazzle.co.uk website, 
Zazzle will pay the import duties and local taxes for you. However, this may 
not be the case when that same order is placed through Zazzle.com. 

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
114
 You will be paid by check on the products you sell and in the primary currency 
denomination (Zazzle.com, for example, in US dollars). If you prefer, Zazzle 
will transfer your earnings to a PayPal account. You can also use your earnings 
to buy other items but that defeats the purpose of building of revenue stream, 
which generates sustainable profits over the long term. 
 Check all tools that are available on the site to help sell your products, includ-
ing store link, email to a friend link, international banners, and an RSS feed 
where you can send any store, product or search term to any RSS reader or 
website. All of these work to enhance your brand. Leave no stone unturned in 
finding out Zazzle’s true global reach.  
 Facebook 
 Launched in 2004,  Facebook  (  http://www.facebook.com ) is the world’s 
largest social network. It connects people with friends and others who work, 
study, or live around them. People use the site to keep up with friends and to 
promote their businesses globally. 
 With Facebook, individuals can build a page and businesses can create ads 
that will help promote any page you select, and reach your current as well 
as potential customers worldwide. The goal for the pages is twofold—to get 
more page likes and to promote page posts. If you have an idea of the ideal 
customer you want to target, you can choose the audience for your ad.   
 For example, if you sell kitchen aprons and want to sell to people age eighteen 
to thirty-five who reside in Germany and are in the broad category of cook-
ing, you can select the demographics that you want to reach. Facebook makes 
it clear that you will never exceed your budget, meaning there are no hidden 
fees and you’ll never pay more than what you set for your daily budget on a 
specific campaign to reach those people who are most likely to purchase your 
products. The site also provides tools to monitor and measure results. 
 Shopping carts, a piece of e-commerce software that allows visitors to an 
Internet site to select items for purchase, adapted for social commerce—
Shopify (  http://www.shopify.com/facebook ); Bigcommerce (  http://
www.bigcommerce.com/  ); EasySocialShop (  http://www.easysocialshop.
com/  ); ShopTab (  http://www.shoptab.net/ ); and Ecwid (  http://www.
ecwid.com  )—provide the infrastructure for Facebook stores. Businesses can 
then create a storefront with a shopping cart and promotions offering dis-
counts and coupons. 
 Many entrepreneurs and small business owners use Facebook to supplement 
sales at their local retail shop, while others use it to augment sales from their 
Web sites or e-commerce stores, including eBay, Amazon, and Etsy. 

Exporting 
115
 
■ Tip  Watch for up-and-coming online marketplaces such as Redbubble.com, Spreadshirt.com, 
and Customink.com, which allow individuals to design, buy and sell creative and personalized 
apparel and art. 
 China-Based Alibaba.com 
 Founded in 1999,  Alibaba  .com (  http://www.alibaba.com ) is a group of 
twenty-five business units that allows anyone located anywhere in the world 
to buy or sell online. Alibaba has come to dominate Internet retailing in China, 
with the goal of becoming the biggest e-commerce market in the world. 
 Alibaba  went public in September 2014. “The initial offering price valued the 
company at $168 billion, making it bigger than its closest American analogue, 
Amazon, and one of the  biggest  IPOs of all time.”  xv 
 Below are a few of the more prominent businesses within the Alibaba Group 
(unless noted as being an affiliate of the company):
• 
 Alibaba.com : (  http://www.alibaba.com ) An interna-
tional e-commerce platform for small businesses  
• 
 Alibaba.com China : (  http://www.1688.com/ ) A domestic 
e-commerce platform for Chinese small businesses  
• 
 AliExpress : (  http://www.aliexpress.com ) A global 
e-commerce marketplace for consumers  
• 
 Cainiao 
Logistics: 
(  http://www2.alizila.com/tags/
cainiao  ) Operator of a logistics information platform  
• 
 1688 .com: (  http://www.1688.com ) An online wholesale 
marketplace in China  
• 
 Alimama : (  http://www.alimama.com ) Online marketing 
technology platform  
• 
 Ant Financial Services Group (  http://www.alibabagroup.
com/en/news/press  ) Financial services provider focused 
on serving small and micro enterprises and consumers  
• 
 Taobao.com : (  http://www.taobao.com ) China’s C-to-C 
online shopping destination, which allows members of 
the public to sell to each other  

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
116
• 
 TMALL.com : (  http://www.tmall.com ) China’s B-to-C 
shopping destination for brand name goods, letting com-
panies sell directly to the public  
• 
 Juhuasuan : (  http://ju.taobao.com ) Shopping platform 
in China  
• 
 eTao.com : (  http://www.etao.com ) Shopping search 
engine in China  
• 
 Aliyun.com : (  http://www.aliyun.com  ) Developer of 
platforms for cloud computing and data management  
• 
 Alipay.com : (  http://www.alipay.com ) China’s leading 
third-party online payment platform and an affiliate of the 
Alibaba Group, not a business within it  
 Alibaba.com  is a leading global e-commerce B-to-B platform for small busi-
nesses that desire to source material from manufacturers, suppliers, export-
ers, and importers. Categories to buy-sell range from electrical equipment to 
shoes and accessories to toys and hobby items. As of January 16, 2016, Alibaba 
has more than 407 million active users.  xvi 
 
■ Note  Alibaba just took a 5.6 percent stake in daily-deals company Groupon. Watch for growth 
in coupons, discounts and online ticketing and the like soon. 
 Alibaba makes all the basic services it offers free to both buyers and sellers. It 
earns money through online advertisements and extra value-added services it 
offers clients, such as website design. Many sellers pay for beautifully designed 
storefronts and online advertisements to help them stand out from the crowd. 
 International brands like Tabasco, Mars, Nike, Apple, Burberry, and 3M are 
all on Tmall. Some use Tmall as the exclusive channel for online purchases in 
China; others are experimenting with having both their own site and a Tmall 
storefront. 
 In order to get the most out of Alibaba, register your company at the site. 
That readies you to use their TradeManager software program (  http://
trademanager.alibaba.com/  ), considered the best tool of the entire site for 
staying in close touch with key people, including Alibaba support personnel. 
If you are looking for manufacturers, suppliers, importers, exporters, business 
partners, market information, upcoming trade shows, and the like, Alibaba will 
serve you well in those areas. If you wish to sell products to consumers in 
China, definitely consider setting up a Tmall storefront. No matter what you 
decide to do, do your homework on potential suppliers or customers. 

Exporting 
117
 Through its Chinese language Web site Taobao, Alibaba offers a C-to-C online 
shopping experience similar to that of eBay and Amazon for small businesses 
and individual entrepreneurs operating in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, 
and Taiwan. Listings are free as of the time of this writing. 
 If you want to sell products through any of  Alibaba’s  Chinese sites, it is best 
to find a Chinese partner to interpret and assist you because you will have 
to deal with supply-chain issues, import duties, regulations, packaging adjust-
ments, shipping considerations, returns, refunds, and marketing your products 
to stand out from the crowd, all conducted in Chinese. 
 
■ Tip  If you like what you see through Alibaba.com, pay a visit to Tencent (  http://www.
tencent.com/en-us/index.shtml  ), which has set up a stand-alone e-commerce platform 
called Paipai (  http://www.paipai.com/ ) to compete directly with Taobao. The company 
recently bought 51buy.com (known as Yixun in China:   http://www.yixun.com/ ), to compete 
with Tmall. Also, strictly for manufacturers and suppliers, look into Global Sources (  http://www.
globalsources.com  ). 
 Summary 
 Each e-commerce marketplace has its own strengths, weaknesses, opportuni-
ties, and infrastructure—those come into play based on what you are selling, 
the intensity of competition in your category, the marketplace restrictions, 
shipping fees, fulfillment capabilities, payment mechanisms, and the extent of 
your global reach. Exporting can be as straightforward as testing your prod-
ucts in new  online marketplaces w  here you can enjoy significant revenue 
returns or delving further into expansion by developing an e-commerce site 
within your own Web site. The opportunity for export success is everywhere. 
 Now that you’ve sampled what’s involved in selling your products through an 
intermediary online marketplace channel, it’s time to advance and create your 
own e-commerce platform to sell to the world and pocket all the profits. Let’s 
move on to Chapter   8 , where we’ll look at the e-commerce craze!  

Chapter 7 | Using e-Commerce and Social Media Sites as Stepping 
Stones to Export Success
118
 Notes 
  i.   Excerpt from the “Official Alibaba.com Success Guide: 
Jack Ma’s Foreword Part 2,” Alibaba Team, AliBlog, 
accessed October 21, 2013,     http://aliblog.alibaba.
com/2009/12/02/excerpt-from-the-official-alib-
aba-com-success-guide-jack-mas-foreword-part-2/  .  
  ii.   “What Is Customer Experience?,” Huffpost Business, 
accessed 
February 
28, 
2016, 
  http://www.huff-
ingtonpost.com/don-dodds/what-is-customer-
experience_b_8936286.html  .  
 iii.   You can find a description of PayPal’s fees on its site: “PayPal 
Fees for International Payments,” accessed February 
28, 
2016, 
  https://www.paypal.com/us/cgi-bin/
marketingweb?cmd=_display-xborder-fees-outside  . 
 iv.   See “Advertising on Facebook,” accessed February 
28, 
2016, 
  https://www.facebook.com/business/
products/ads  .  
  v.   See “Google AdWords | Google (PPC) Pay-Per-Click 
Online Advertising,” accessed February 28, 2016, 
  https://www.google.com/adwords/ . 
 vi.  Amazon Fulfillment – History & Culture, accessed 
February 28, 2016,    http://www.amazonfulfillment-
careers.com/about-amazon/history-and-culture/  . 
 vii.   Amazon sites from around the world can be found at: 
“Amazon International Around the World,” accessed 
February 28, 2016,   http://www.amazon.com/gp/fea-
ture.html?ie=UTF8&docId=487250  .  
 viii.   “Selling on Amazon; Getting Started Guide: How to Get 
Set Up Selling on Amazon,” Amazon Services, last modi-
fied July 1, 2008,    http://g-ecx.images-amazon.com/
images/G/01/AmznServices/en_US/files/Getting_
Started_Guide1._V181643274_.pdf  . 
 ix.   “Amazon Where We Ship,” Amazon, accessed February 
28, 
2016, 
  http://www.amazon.com/b?ie=UTF8&n
ode=11533661011  .  
 x.   “Sell on Amazon and Reach Hundreds of Millions of Amazon 
Customers,” Amazon Services, accessed February 28, 
2016, 
  http://services.amazon.com/selling/ben-
efits.htm/ref=as_mnu_soa?ld=SCWBAStriplogin  . 

Exporting 
119
  xi.   For an overview of the procedures and costs associated 
with the fulfillment centers, see “Fulfillment by Amazon,” 
accessed February 28, 2016,   http://services.amazon.
com/fulfillment-by-amazon/pricing.htm?ld=SCWB
AStriploginAS  .  
  xii.   “Taking it to the next level” – Global Shipping Program 
| eBay Seller Center, accessed February 28, 2016, 
  http://pages.ebay.com/sellerinformation/ship-
smart/global-shipping-program/next-level.
html#faq=faq-2  .  
 xiii.   For an overview of selling fees, see “Standard Selling 
Fees,” accessed October 18, 2013,   http://pages.ebay.
com/help/sell/fees.html  .  
  xiv.   About Etsy, accessed February 28, 2016,   https://www.
etsy.com/about/  . 
  xv.   “Alibaba Just Went Public,” NYMag, accessed February 
28, 
2016, 
  http://nymag.com/daily/intelli-
gencer/2014/09/alibaba-just-went-public.html  . 
  xvi.   “76 Amazing Alibaba Statistics (February 2016),” accessed 
February 28, 2016,   http://expandedramblings.com/
index.php/alibaba-statistics/  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_8
 C H A P T E R 
 The e-Commerce 
Connectivity 
Craze 
 Buying and Selling Globally and Managing an 
International Supply Chain  
 Communications is at the heart of e-commerce and community. 
 —Meg Whitman, president and chief executive officer of 
Hewlett-Packard 
 The sooner we drop the ‘e’ out of ‘e-commerce’ and just call it commerce, 
the better.  
 —Bob Willett, former President of Best Buy International 
and CIO of Best Buy  
8

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
122
 If you want a symbol of how technology is transforming the way we conduct 
business worldwide, look no further than e-commerce, which refers to buying 
and selling on the Internet. It’s easy to forget that as short as 15-18 years ago, 
buying books or shoes online seemed novel. Not anymore. The new digital 
reality is upon us. Is there anything you can’t buy online almost anywhere? The 
driving force behind e-commerce growth is the proliferation of tablets and 
smart phones, technology improvements, greater convenience, competitive 
prices, global choices, and bountiful product information. 
 The Future of Selling: The E-Commerce 
 Revolution  
 Welcome to the future of transcendent selling, where there will be an oblit-
eration of lines between the traditional old-world way of commerce and 
e-commerce. Soon they will merge into one seamless function, as former 
President of Best Buy International Bob Willett suggested, be treated the 
same way, and simply be called digital business. In-store retail shopping will 
never fully go away, but in the future there will be less of it. How will you set 
up your business to react? Will you be prepared? More people are spend-
ing an inordinate amount of their time surfing the Internet—sometimes not 
even thinking about why. That’s why harnessing these people and their buying 
power worldwide is the key to success for small business owners. 
 The problem is that many small business owners don’t have the technical 
know-how or capital to set up their own e-commerce platform. This chapter 
prepares you for the e-commerce revolution and how—astonishingly—you 
don’t have to go broke or be a technical wizard to become part of it! The 
end result is that you will easily and affordably export by selling online. In the 
1990s, Dell became the e-commerce leader by hitting a milestone of $1 mil-
lion in Web site sales per day. What the company didn’t anticipate was that its 
e-commerce business would grow to be one of its largest revenue-producing 
sources. That could be you. All the more reason to get e-commerce right 
from the start. 
 In this chapter, I will look at the growing scope of e-commerce, discuss why 
it is important to your business (think of the power of China’s Tmall and 
Taobao discussed in Chapter   7 ), and help you target your market.  i In addition, 
I’ll give some pointers on finding a manufacturer for a product you may want 
to export and a primer on the ten thousand-pound gorilla: your international 
supply chain and how best to manage it. 
 Then we’ll review an array of e-commerce platforms for your business from 
which to choose, while assessing what makes e-commerce sites reliable and 
secure for business transactions. Last, we’ll look at how to measure e-com-
merce success. Depending on the stage of your business’s growth, some of 

Exporting 
123
these topics may not apply, so feel free to jump in anywhere that applies to 
what you are looking for. The intent here is to keep you focused on learning, 
growing, and pushing boundaries with your business. 
 
■ Note   When setting up an e-commerce platform, don’t forget to consider translation solutions. 
You may not need to translate your site into multiple languages immediately, but down the road you 
will. Even with the best, most seamless e-commerce solution, your customers must understand 
the language in order to buy. I’ll cover web globalization more thoroughly in Chapter   15  . 
 The  Growing Scope  of E-Commerce 
 There are more than 7 billion potential customers in the world, and 3.4 bil-
lion of them are online. How many of those customers is your company 
reaching outside your own borders? Let’s say your international sales last 
month included three products sold through Zazzle, one through Amazon, 
five through eBay, five at CafePress, and four on your own Web site by way of 
a shopping cart adapted for Facebook. Do you think you’ve captured enough 
sales? Hardly. Sure, you generated more sales and profits than you would have 
had you not created these accounts, but could you sell more? 
 Nearly 87 percent of world economic growth during the next five years 
will take place outside of the United States, according to the International 
Monetary Fund. Are you prepared to tap into it? 
 According to A.T. Kearney, “Sales [e-commerce] increased more than 20 per-
cent worldwide in 2014 to almost $840 billion, as online retailers continued 
expanding to new geographies and physical retailers entered new markets 
through e-commerce.”  ii 
 “Total e-commerce sales for 2015 were estimated at $341.7 billion, an increase 
of 14.6 percent (±0.9%) from 2014. Total retail sales in 2015 increased 1.4 percent 
(±0.4%) from 2014. E-commerce sales in 2015 accounted for 7.3 percent of 
total sales. E-commerce sales in 2014 accounted for 6.4 percent of total sales, 
according to the U.S. Census Bureau News, U.S. Department of Commerce.”  iii 
 eMarketer projects (refer to Figure  8-1 ) that “Retail ecommerce sales, those 
purchased over the internet, will make up 7.4% of the total retail market 
worldwide, or $1.671 trillion. By 2019, that share will jump to $3.578 trillion, 
yet retail ecommerce will account for just 12.8% of retail purchases.”  iv 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
124
 It is also projected by  eMarketer  that Asia-Pacific will be the main driver 
behind this growth, “accounting for over half of global retail ecommerce sales 
in 2015, or $877.61 billion. We [eMarketer] expect ecommerce sales in the 
region to climb $1.459 trillion by 2019, contributing to over three-fourths of 
the worldwide growth of 1.907 trillion.”  v 
 What’s in store for future digital buying from country to country? The fol-
lowing chart (Figure  8-2 ) shows the growth in the number of people buying 
goods over the Internet:  vi 
 Figure 8-1.  “Worldwide Retail Ecommerce Sales: eMarketer’s Updated Estimates and 
Forecast Through 2019,” Douglas Clark, eMarketer, March 6, 2016. Used with permission.  
 

Exporting 
125
 Figure 8-2.  “Worldwide Retail Ecommerce Sales: eMarketer’s Updated Estimates and 
Forecast Through 2019,” Douglas Clark, eMarketer, March 6, 2016. Used with permission.  
 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
126
 Why Do I Need a Stand-Alone E-Commerce 
Site? 
 Having a  stand-alone e-commerce site  —on which you can sell your products 
beyond eBay, Amazon, or Etsy—offers greater control over the sales process, 
larger revenue and profits for your business, more focused global brand devel-
opment, new interactions with people across the world, and a 24/7 open-
for-business model. A hosted stand-alone e-commerce solution will provide 
everything from domain name registration to the tools and resources you 
need to build an e-commerce Web site with minimal technical and Web site 
design knowledge.  
 Selling in a Digital World: Business-to-
Business, Business-to-Consumer, Consumer-
to-Consumer, or Business-to-Government 
Experience? 
 When you set up an e-commerce shop, you must decide who your primary 
customers are going to be: other businesses, consumers, or the government. 
Let’s go over what each means. Please note, it is possible to focus on two at 
once, provided you make it clear on your Internet  platform  . 
 Business-to-business (B-to-B)  describes commerce-based transactions 
between two businesses, such as between a manufacturer and a retailer. 
 Business-to-consumer (B-to-C)  describes commerce-based transactions 
between a business and a consumer, such as a retailer selling directly to you. 
Target, for example, sells directly to you, the consumer. (Target’s supply chain, 
on the other hand, would be B-to-B.) 
 Some companies are both  B-to-B and B-to-C  . Think along the lines of my 
business, GlobeTrade.com. My customers are primarily other businesses, so 
it’s B-to-B, but I also have consumers who come to me directly asking for 
help before they start a global business. That’s B-to-C. Another example of 
B-to-B that moves into B-to-C is Procter & Gamble, which manufactures Tide 
laundry detergent. The company’s production supply chain involves B-to-B 
transactions, but once Tide is in finished form, P&G shifts its selling to B-to-C 
where you, as a consumer, buy Tide.  vii 
 Consumer-to-consumer (C-to- C ) describes commerce transactions between 
consumers. Think of eBay and Alibaba’s Taobao. You, as an individual, as 
opposed to a legal business entity, would sell directly to other consumers. 

Exporting 
127
 Business-to-government (B-to-G)  describes commerce transactions between 
a business and the government, including ones that are local, federal, and state-
based. Think along the lines of a business bidding on governmental oppor-
tunities in the form of a  request for proposal (RFP)  and offering those bids 
through an online marketplace. 
 An easy way to figure out which type of customer is best for your business is 
to ask yourself: where will I get the biggest bang for my buck? If you sell ham-
mers, will you sell more hammers directly to consumers (B-to-C) or through 
a business that buys twenty-four hammers in a box at once and resells them 
individually to consumers (B-to-B)? Either way, you must fulfill the orders or 
have the vendor do it. 
 In the case of selling directly to consumers, can you handle shipping individu-
ally to every consumer who buys your product? That’s where most business 
owners stop dead in their tracks. They either don’t want to do it or aren’t set 
up to do it at the outset. It’s too labor intensive. If that is the case with you, go 
with B-to-B to minimize additional handling and labor costs. You can always 
change course or do two different selling avenues at once, provided you make 
it clear on each of your sites who your target audience is. 
 Now let’s really change courses. A challenge you could be faced with involves 
the sourcing of a product domestically or overseas. You may want to familiar-
ize yourself with these pointers on how to go about it.  
 Finding a Manufacturer for the Product You 
May Want to Export 
 To  find manufacturers  —which can be located in different countries in different 
continents—for the product you may want to export, you’ll need to consult 
some specialized sources. Sourcing a product globally for a particular brand 
offers many benefits for the exporter, including lower costs, faster go-to-mar-
ket time, and a broader resource pool. You can identify an existing product you 
think might sell in other countries and make a deal with the producer (more 
on this in Chapter   11  ). But you can also contract manufacture (also known as 
outsourcing), where your company arranges with a manufacturer to make a 
product to your specification (or those of the manufacturer you represent). 
Here are a few places to get started (some are more United States centric): 
 
■ Tip  A five-point strategy for making your first global sourcing foray successful should include 
sourcing from a country with low labor costs and good quality (look for  ISO certification ) where you 
can take a plane ride with comfort and ease; where you can understand the language; where you 
can respect and abide by the laws; and where you can trust the people you do business with. Oh, 
and did I mention the importance of access to a huge and growing market?  

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
128
• 
 ThomasNet :   http://www.thomasnet.com/  . The ThomasNet 
is a free platform designed for sourcing components, equip-
ment, MRO (maintenance, repair, and operations) products, 
raw materials, and custom manufacturing services.  
• 
 The   Gale Book  of Associations :   http://www.gale.cen-
gage.com/DirectoryLibrary/  . Gale lists associations 
related to your product type; e.g., if you look under 
“Consumer Household Products” you will find “National 
Housewares Association.” If you contact the National 
Housewares Association, you may find that it offers a 
membership, manufacturer lists, exhibition dates, and 
industry mailing pieces. These references will be invalu-
able to your exporting efforts.  
• 
 Global Sources :   http://www.globalsources.com  .  Global 
Sources is a B2B marketplace that connects global buyers 
and suppliers.  
• 
 Alibaba :   http://www.alibaba .com . Find products, sup-
pliers, manufacturers, and exporters by categories.  
• 
 United States Manufacturer Directory :   http://www.manu-
facturerusa.com/  . Find links to manufacturer websites, 
browse for wholesalers, business, and manufacturing ser-
vices in the United States.  
• 
 National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) :   http://www.
nam.org/  . NAM is a top manufacturing association in the 
United States.  
• 
 Alliance for American Manufacturing :   http://www.ameri-
canmanufacturing.org/  . The Alliance for  American 
Manufacturing  explores common solutions to public pol-
icy topics such as job creation, infrastructure investment, 
international trade, and global competitiveness.  
• 
 Kompass :   http://www.kompass.com . Search and find sup-
pliers across the world by industry, products, or services.  
• 
 Maker’s Row :   http://www.makersrow.com  . Access indus-
try-specific factories and suppliers across the United 
States.  
• 
 IndiaMART :   http://www.indiamart.com . IndiaMART is 
India’s largest online marketplace, connecting buyers with 
suppliers.  

Exporting 
129
• 
 MFG.com :   http://www.mfg.com . Source suppliers and 
get pricing at the same time. After you post a request 
for quotation, complete with engineering drawings, MFG.
com matches your requirements with suppliers around 
the world (or anywhere you choose). 
 Once you find a contract manufacturer to your liking, here are your next 
steps. Let’s say you are looking for a manufacturer that can produce an all-
around tote bag for cleaning products. Think of it as swag—a branded tote 
bag with your company information embroidered on—that provides value to 
your customers and enhances the brand for your family of products. You plan 
to offer this tote for free when consumers show proof of purchase on six or 
more of your products within ninety days. Historically, consumers buy one of 
your products within the same time period. Here’s how you get started with 
a potential manufacturer.
 1.   Send your idea sketches and screenshots to him for 
review. Indicate you are interested in importing a test 
production run of 1,000 all-around tote bags (or what-
ever number of totes you can afford to buy on the initial 
trial run) and state, according to your market analysis, 
that you need a price point of U.S. $5 a tote to go to 
market competitively.  
 2.   See whether the supplier can produce what you need 
within your specific timeframe, manufacture a minimum 
production run quantity without a glitch, and maintain 
your price point.  
 3.   Anticipating future success, ask for volume pricing, too. 
For example, let’s say your swag campaign works so well 
that you need to order 20,000 totes as opposed to 1,000 
at a time! You might find that your pricing drops from $5 
a tote on 1,000-tote orders to $1 a tote on 20,000-tote 
orders. Talk about a customer response and profit boost. 
You may end up selling six times more product within the 
ninety days!  
 4.   Confirm that pricing is FOB (also known as Free on 
Board or Freight on Board) from the factory, meaning all 
charges (taxes, duties, transport and insurance) are your 
responsibility once the product leaves the door. You can 
always get a logistics expert to help you on the import.  
 5.  How will you pay the manufacturer and will there be any 
chance to receive extended terms—thirty, sixty, or ninety 
days—as opposed to an immediate wire transfer?  

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
130
 6.  Lastly, ask for three to five complimentary samples made 
to your specs and find out when they can be delivered. 
Then sit tight. While you wait, draw up a plan for your 
online swag campaign party.  
 As for suppliers, not all are equal. Some can be timely and send requested 
samples in a heartbeat. Others can take forever but can meet your pricing. 
The worst case is when a supplier provides poor-quality samples of products. 
Even asking at the very beginning for ISO 9000 certification proof from a 
supplier  viii does not guarantee that product samples will meet your quality 
standards and be to your liking. 
 What if you receive shoddy product samples from a potential new supplier? 
Although the answer seems like a no-brainer, you’d be surprised at how many 
companies expend an inordinate amount of time trying to work things out. 
Let’s take a look at how the scenario plays out when the first round of prod-
uct samples is not up to par. 
 Within forty-five days, suppliers send you samples made to your specification 
for review and within the price range you desire. Even the minimum order 
requirement meets your budget! But four out of the five all-around totes are 
crappy quality. What should you do? 
 Go with the supplier with the best quality and start thinking about how you 
will visit the supplier in person at some point to evaluate operations. For now, 
reject the other four and tell them why. No ifs, ands, or buts. If you start out 
with poor product samples, do you really think product quality will improve 
over time? Don’t be fooled. First impressions count. Quality matters. 
 Now that you’ve covered selling in a digital world, who your customers are, 
and where your products are originating, it’s time to manage your global sup-
ply chain.  
 Managing a Global Supply Chain  
 After deciding who your customers are going to be and setting up an e-com-
merce site designed to attract them comes the responsibility of managing 
an effective and efficient supply chain. This process focuses on the flow of 
goods from the origin source; through the distribution channels; to the end 
consumer; and, finally, to disposal and recycling. Supply chains that were once 
purely local are now global in nature and more complex and interconnected 
as goods, services, and information flow across borders easily. 
 When entering new markets, as often is the case with exports done via 
e-commerce, the goal is to service the customers efficiently and in a fast man-
ner, at the lowest possible cost, and with minimal inventories to keep your 
profits soaring. 

Exporting 
131
 A plan of action for a supply chain might look like this:
 1.  Source components or products (if required)  
 2.  Produce products (at your own manufacturing facility)  
 3.   Manage the handling and storage of raw materials and 
finished products (from your own manufacturing facility)  
 4.   Combat cyber crime activities by developing a frame-
work for evaluating and responding to risks  
 5.   Develop transportation and logistics strategies, including 
customs processing and border crossing  
 6.  Integrate transportation strategies with production and 
marketing plans  
 7.  Analyze, plan, and monitor the global supply chain process  
 8.  Check profits  
 9.  Measure customer satisfaction  
  10.  Develop a process to convert returns or defects into 
recyclable materials for subsequent use  
  11.   Design a way to dispose of and recycle products on an 
as-needed-basis  
 We’ll touch on some of these elements in subsequent chapters, but for now it 
is essential to be aware of them in the understanding of maximizing customer 
value and achieving sustainable profitable growth for your business. 
 
■ Tip  Most companies start out manufacturing a product domestically and then exporting 
it. When they achieve success in a single export market, they consider setting up a contract to 
manufacture the product in the overseas market where the product is in demand—all with the 
intent to lower costs, increase profits, and expeditiously fulfill customer demand. 
 Tips for Managing a Global Supply Chain 
 Your global supply chain should be short, simple, and  manageable  . Whether 
sourcing a component part used in the production of a product or finished 
goods, treat the chain as a strategic asset—one that, handled deftly, can pro-
vide a competitive advantage. 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
132
 It is worth mentioning that many large companies use software programs for 
managing the export supply chain process, for purposes including item clas-
sification, order taking, compliance with export regulations, and generation 
of export documentation. The use of export software enables companies 
to manage the supply chain with greater ease and efficiency. Conducting an 
Internet search for third-party vendors using “export supply chain manage-
ment software” or similar search terms will generate a number of specialized 
companies who offer sourcing, transportation, and fulfillment services. Due to 
the complex nature and the costs associated with export software manage-
ment, most small businesses tend to manage their supply chain by working 
closely with logistics experts that offer you approved vendors who integrate 
their technology into your business applications and software solutions. These 
companies include UPS, FedEx, and DHL; UPS will custom fit a solution based 
on your supply chain needs. 
 Here are ten tips to assist you in managing a global supply chain:
 1.   Source products from countries where regulations and 
restrictions are minimal. You want the ability to transport 
materials in and out of a country fast. 
 2.  Focus on minimizing costs but not to the detriment of 
sacrificing quality.  
 3.  Make sure that in performance-based contracts the sup-
plier has a stake in where the product is sold. That way, 
you share risks and rewards.  
 4.  Establish a secondary source of supply to ensure that 
your primary source can be replaced easily. The perfor-
mance of a primary supplier can quickly go south. Perhaps 
the company runs into financial problems, produces 
shoddy products, or falls short on delivery times. Should 
this occur, you will need a backup supplier.  
 5.  Tailor the locations of the supply chain directly to those 
of your customers, wherever they are.  
 6.  Test the reliability of the supplier. When you order, how 
long does it take for the company to respond and deliver? 
Does it invoice you accurately?  
 7.  Address cultural differences at the outset of the relation-
ship, because if not treated skillfully, it can create barriers 
that impede or completely stymie the global supply chain 
process. 
 8.   Know where all your materials are coming in and out of 
and what the costs are to move them to any point.  

Exporting 
133
 9.  Retain as much control as you can over the entire supply 
chain process. 
 10.  Conduct regular assessments of every supplier contracted 
to manufacture your products in order to ensure they are 
meeting labor, health, safety, and environmental requirements.  
 Efficient global supply chains can be a weapon of widespread competitiveness. 
And keep an eye out on how you might use drones—unmanned aerial vehi-
cles—as part of your supply chain strategy. It’s not too far out in the future, 
because drones are finding a niche, especially in remote areas of the world.  
 Get to Know the  Suppliers  in Your Supply Chain 
 Today, most supply chains are built on a sourcing strategy that emphasizes 
value creation. What that means is that instead of looking for the lowest pos-
sible price of a product, you should first determine what value you are trying 
to achieve for your business. You could determine that what is most impor-
tant to you is exercising control, minimizing risks, balancing costs, or gaining 
speed-to-market. 
 
■ Caution   What’s the likelihood of having a critical supply shortage and how would it impact 
your business? Always have a contingency plan in place for the most catastrophic event ever. 
 A working global supply chain must be responsive and flexible on a local level 
as well as overseas. It will morph several times during the course of a prod-
uct’s lifetime. Whatever it takes to fulfill the needs of your customers world-
wide, that should be your goal.  
 Finding the Best E-Commerce Store for Your 
Business 
 Before you do anything, draw up a list of what you need to do to establish the 
features you need for your e-shop based on what you are selling. Factor in the 
supply-chain process we just covered. For example, if you are selling knit caps 
for babies, your list might look like this:
 1.  Integrate e-shop that accommodates all major social 
media platforms; 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
134
 2.  Have a program with the ability to serve customers 
worldwide when collecting payments;  
 3.   Calculate the cost of shipping on demand, where an 
all-inclusive shipping rate can be quoted to customers 
(including taxes, currency conversion, duties, insurance, 
and payment fee, if any) through UPS, FedEx, DHL, TNT, 
or USPS; and  
 4.   Organize 24/7 customer support.  
 Run the list by your potential e-commerce-platform vendor to make sure the 
company can accommodate your needs. The type of product you are selling 
affects the features you want for your e-shop.  
 Factors to Consider 
 What follows is a list of fourteen  factors to consider  when researching your 
e-commerce storefront platform. This is the list I use in working with clients; 
however, there are likely more factors than what’s included here. Not all of 
them will apply to your current business needs, but it’s better to be aware of 
them in advance than be blindsided by a lack of needed support later on. Let’s 
take a look at the features a platform should offer:
 1.  It should be simple to set up, have the ability to use your 
own domain name, and be affordable and easy to run . Most 
e-commerce stores are free to set up, but they cost any-
where from $29 a month for 100 products or fewer to 
$179 a month for unlimited bandwidth. Some platforms 
allow you to use your own domain and others don’t, so if 
using your own domain name is important to you and a 
company can’t do it, go elsewhere with your business.  
 
■ Tip  Many popular web-hosting companies (e.g., Network Solutions, Go Daddy, Bluehost, and 
Verio) offer e-commerce solutions such as tools, resources, and storefronts. And some blogging 
platforms allow you to transform your Web site into an e-commerce store for free. (Check out 
WooCommerce [  http://www.woothemes.com/woocommerce/ ] and Jigoshop [  http://
jigoshop.com/  ].) Before making a move, investigate your existing host’s complete e-shop 
capabilities, including order fulfillment. 

Exporting 
135
 2.  It should have a good selection of design templates and excel-
lent shopping-cart functionality. Look for an e-commerce 
platform that offers hundreds of beautiful design tem-
plates along with the ability to preview and customize 
the design with the help of your own technology designer. 
Make sure photos can be easily uploaded so that they will 
look fantastic on your site. Having a smooth shopping 
cart and checkout experience will create an exceptional 
buying event for your customers.  
 
■ Tip  A bad e-commerce design with ineffective functions can damage your whole online 
business before you know it. You can minimize shopping cart abandonment—whereby a customer 
gets almost to the finish line at checkout and leaves the site for whatever unknown reason—
by making the checkout process one step. Some e-commerce platforms offer a special add-on 
feature at a minimal cost to treat shopping-cart abandonment issues. 
 3.  It should have unlimited e-commerce hosting . Whether you 
are selling two products or two thousand, ask your ven-
dor if there are any hosting restrictions. For example, you 
don’t want an additional charge for increased traffic to 
your site. Success shouldn’t bring you lower profits—it 
should bring you more! It’s always best to look through 
the lens of the best-case scenario and seek vendors that 
offer scalability and the opportunity to quickly add more 
capacity.  
 4.  It should offer real-time carrier shipping that includes com-
plete international coverage and calculates real-time rates . 
Real-time carrier shipping connects your storefront with 
a UPS, USPS, or FedEx account that your customers can 
use to calculate shipping costs. This means you don’t 
need to manage your shipping rates manually. Pushing that 
concept further, inquire as to whether the e-commerce 
platform provider can quote international shipping costs 
in real time, quote customers without including shipping 
costs, and build the shipping into the customer’s cost.  
 5.  It should accept currency from all over the world . Be sure 
the e-commerce stores you set up will be able to accept 
payment from all around the world, whether dealing in 
your own currency or another country’s. When operat-
ing beyond U.S. borders, adopt a local payment platform 
and you will see your revenue skyrocket.  

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
136
 6.  It should be able to serve as your host platform if you don’t 
already have a domain name . Shopify is a good example of 
a platform that provides this. You will then add content, 
design, products, payment methods, taxes, shipping, and a 
domain name. Then you are ready to sell to the world.  
 7.  It should offer a web host if you don’t have one already . All 
Shopify plans, for example, include secure, unlimited 
e-commerce hosting for your online store. On the other 
hand, Network Solutions requires you to have a domain 
name registration and web-hosting package before you 
can use its e-commerce Web site.  
 8.   It should have mobile-friendly add-ons . Shoot for  respon-
sive web design (RWD)  , which allows web visitors to 
access the same site and content no matter what kind 
of device they are using—whether it is a PC, tablet, or 
mobile device. Snowboard retailer Burton (  http://www.
burton.com/  ) and Houzz (  http://www.houzz.com ) are 
both good examples of companies that have designed 
their Web sites for their customers to use from their 
phones and tablets.  
 9.  It should not require you to have IT experience to build and 
maintain your site . Choose a platform that offers a plug, 
play, and sell e-shop. You should be able to plug in all the 
information about your company and products, play with 
it to get it looking good and working right, and then start 
selling. It should take only a couple of hours to get things 
up and running.  
  10.  It should offer 24/7 service and tech support . Inquire as to 
how the vendor would handle a situation where your 
e-commerce platform crashes. It should have a cloud 
backup, offer support after hours and on weekends, and 
operate in several different time zones. For every min-
ute you are down online, you lose existing and potential 
business.  
  11.  It should have social media support . Ensure that it has but-
tons to connect to Pinterest, Instagram, Twitter, and so 
forth. Strategic use of social media will increase your cus-
tomer base and your bottom line.  

Exporting 
137
 12.   It should have app support . Some e-commerce sites, like 
Magento, offer what are called white-label e-commerce 
apps. These apps essentially translate an existing e-com-
merce site into a mobile app that fits each device, com-
plete with a full catalog, a product-search mechanism, a 
shopping cart, and the ability to offer ratings and reviews. 
A few sites now also offer an app for order fulfillment. 
Inquire.  
 13.   It should have built-in search engine optimization (SEO) 
and conversion tools to scale your business globally.  
 14.   It should offer strong protection against potential fraud, 
viruses, and scams while not getting in the way of e-commerce . 
Security—or the lack of it—is at the top of the list con-
cerning e-commerce, so cover this issue extensively with 
your vendor until you are convinced that the company 
can protect your business interests and your customer’s 
business interests. Some e-commerce platforms provide 
a badge that you can install on your design to show your 
customers that your checkout is safe and secure. Despite 
the absolute importance of security, the bottom line is 
that security measures must be implemented so that they 
do not inhibit or dissuade the use of e-commerce.  
 
■ Note   Educating the consumer on security issues is still in the infancy stage but will prove to 
be the most critical element of the e-commerce security architecture in the future. 
 Creating Your Own  E-Commerce Platform  
 As discussed, setting up an e-commerce platform is a fast way to expand 
your market base, exercise greater control, and increase sales and profitability. 
Starting an e-commerce platform on your own rather than contracting with 
a hosting vendor comes with additional legal and financial considerations. The 
most significant of these are in the areas of online business protection, includ-
ing security (making it payment card security compliant, known as payment 
card industry [PCI] compliant—both keep your customers’ credit card data 
safe); reliability; and intellectual property issues. 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
138
 Also be aware that you must adapt to an international market’s import regu-
lations (tariffs and taxes, for example). This includes but is not limited to 
shipping prohibited and restricted items, which vary by country. Further, it is 
your responsibility to comply with export laws, as some governments do not 
permit companies to legally ship to specific countries. Here are a select few 
stand-alone e-commerce platforms to get started with that can be integrated 
into your existing Web site (they all offer robust e-commerce solutions with 
greatly varying monthly price points):
• 
 Bigcommerce : (  http://www.bigcommerce.com ). This site 
gives you everything you need to sell online.  
• 
 GoEcart : (  http://www.goecart.com ). GoECart is a fully 
integrated web-based ecommerce suite that offers 
ecommerce storefront technology with inventory man-
agement, fulfillment, and warehouse management and 
customer relationship management (CRM).  
• 
 Intuit : (  http://www.intuit.com/websites/ecommerce-
how-to/  ). This site, which is now powered by Homestead, 
gives you a free thirty-day trial period. You can build a 
store with up to a hundred products, integrate it into your 
Web site design, and give customers an easy-to-use check-
out experience.  
• 
 Magento : (  http://www.magentocommerce.com ). The Magento 
platform is a leading platform for open commerce inno-
vation with over $50B in gross merchandise volume 
transacted on the platform annually. Magento is built on 
open-source technology, enabling businesses of all sizes 
to control and customize the look and feel, content, and 
functionality of their online stores.  
• 
 NetSuite SuiteCommerce :   http://www.netsuite.com/
portal/products/netsuite/ecommerce/products.
shtml  ). NetSuite  SuiteCommerce  offers a great shopping 
experience on any device, in any language, and through 
any business model.  

Exporting 
139
• 
 Pitney Bowes : (  http://www.pb.com/ecommerce/ ). 
 Pitney Bowes  provides an interesting feature—fully 
guaranteed landed (door-to-door) cost quotes along 
with everything else you need to facilitate the global 
e-commerce experience.  
• 
 Shopify : (  http://www.shopify.com ).  Shopify  does a good 
job with plug-ins (special functions) and also offers you 
pay-as-you-grow usage. They also give you a free 14-day 
trial. When you add features or services to your e-shop, 
you will be charged extra.  
• 
 Volusion : (  http://www.volusion.com  ). Volusion is worth 
a look purely from the standpoint that the company cur-
rently has more than forty thousand online stores, fos-
tering more than $21 billion in online merchant sales 
worldwide to date. You can try it free for 14 days. Volusion 
also owns Mozo (  http://www.mozo.com ), another com-
merce platform for the global marketplace.  
 Here’s a sampling of a few  foreign-based e-commerce platforms  :
• 
 base.com (Japan):   http://www.base.com 
• 
 Rakuten (Japan):   http://global.rakuten.com/en/  
• 
 Ozon.ru (Russia):   http://www.ozon.ru/ 
• 
 E-bit (Brazil):   http://www.ebit.com.br/ 
• 
 Flipkart (India):   http://www.flipkart.com 
• 
 SnapDeal (India):   http://www.snapdeal.com 
• 
 Rocket Internet (Germany):   http://www.rocket-inter-
net.com  
• 
 Souq.com (Dubai):   http://www.uae.souq.com/ae-en/ 
 
■ Tip  See if your e-commerce vendor allows for customers to pin a specific product or anything 
that you’re selling to a Pinterest pinboard. This helps get the word out on your product offerings to 
increase purchases. Some platforms have built-in apps for this, and others provide a step-by-step 
guide on how to get it done. The goal, in this instance, is to have every pin become a “buyable pin” 
on Pinterest. 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
140
 The Ultimate E-Commerce Must-Have: 
Trustworthiness 
 You can have all the bells and whistles operating perfectly on your new e-com-
merce site, but the key ingredient to customers enjoying their visit and actually 
buying products or services online is  trustworthiness  . If you lack trustworthi-
ness, customers won’t stick around, and those who give your shop a chance 
better be treated right or else they will never return. Convince your custom-
ers that you can be trusted. How can that be done? Here are some tips based 
on what has worked for many of my clients on their Web sites:
 1.  Showcase a reputable security badge such as Verisign, TRUSTe, 
PayPal, or McAfee . Feature more than one to make cus-
tomers feel secure and confident with their purchase. 
Other things that reinforce trust are large corporations 
that praise you (but get permission from individuals at 
the companies to use testimonials), awards you received, 
a mention in the press—all these should be promoted 
on your e-commerce site with links to the source if still 
active.  
 2.  Show a phone number, e-mail address, and real physical 
address—not a P.O. Box . Or have a live chat button that 
is easy to find. If people plan to purchase a product from 
your e-commerce site, they want to know how to get 
ahold of you to ask questions. Or let them know how 
they will get help if a purchased product arrives damaged.  
 3.  Respond to every customer’s question . The question can be 
about the size of a product, the material used in the mak-
ing of it—“Do your earrings contain lead? Because I am 
allergic to lead”—or if its color is sky blue or turquoise 
blue. The more you offer candid and direct communica-
tions with customers and address their needs, the more 
likely you are to produce sales and repeat customers. 
From their perspective, you showed you are responsive 
and care. 
 4.   Use psychology to your advantage with your customers . There 
are a variety of meanings, interpretations, and percep-
tions between cultures and contexts. Use color wisely. 
If trust is critical to your brand, think along the lines of 
using lots of blue on your site, because it reflects honesty, 
trust, and reliability. Red, on the other hand, emits excite-
ment, attention, and love. Certain colors appeal to certain 
cultures and markets. 

Exporting 
141
 5.  Test it in a real-world scenario . Monitor the system to see 
what can go wrong—especially from the customer’s per-
spective. Test it yourself, have an employee do a dry run, 
ask a family member to go through it step by step, or 
select someone from your Facebook fan base to give it 
a try (then offer him something in return for his effort, 
such as a free sample product, a helpful how-to book, or a 
gift card). One bad impression from a customer not only 
costs you that customer but also hundreds and thou-
sands, if not millions, more customers largely due to the 
power of social media where people can say what they 
want when they don’t like an experience.  
 
■ Caution   Capturing low-hanging fruit or tiny export deals by offering a “Buy Now” or “Buy 
With” button on your site to be used with PayPal, Google Wallet, Apple Pay, or Amazon Checkout 
won’t power up your export business. Yes, these functions are reliable and trusted to sell to anyone 
with an email address and funds in their bank account, but do you want to sell one product a day 
or millions of products a month? That’s the difference between selling via a Buy Now button versus 
a secure, reliable and easy-to-use platform that addresses the full range of e-commerce needs. 
 Measuring E-Commerce Success 
 Now that we’ve looked at everything involved in setting up an e-commerce 
shop, how can we measure results? That’s a challenge, because you cannot 
predict customer behavior nor can you forecast sales and profits accurately 
at the start, but you will be able to after a couple of months. However, if you 
address these five questions concerning your site, you are more than likely to 
discover quickly if your e- commerce   program is working or not:
 1.  What is the dollar value (revenue) of the activities com-
pleted through e-commerce? 
 2.  What is the number of visits—site traffic?  
 3.  What is the number of new customers gained through 
e-commerce?  
 4.  What is the site’s profitability?  
 5.  What is the cost factor involved in running the e-com-
merce platform? 

Chapter 8 | The e-Commerce Connectivity Craze
142
 The goal of an e-commerce initiative is to increase the revenue and growth of 
profit for your business while decreasing costs, thus contributing to the long-
term success of the corporation.  
 Summary 
 Building a powerful, cost-effective, and complete e-commerce site prepares 
you for takeoff in the export world. As more and more consumers adapt to 
Internet technologies in the coming years, there will be a huge demand for 
mobile functionality and apps that power user engagement. After all, the world 
works better when it’s connected in every way imaginable, including making 
an export sale. One final thought: Who does not get excited over the notion 
of taking the world by surprise? That’s what happens when you build a great 
e-commerce site that tells people in a compelling way what your business 
brings to the world. 
 In the next chapter, we’ll look at mobile commerce and computing, apps, and 
cloud computing. All of these enable you to continue to build your brand, find 
and service new customers, engage and deepen your user base relationships, 
and grow revenues and profitability through exports.  
 Notes 
  i.   The markets include business to business (B-to-B), busi-
ness to consumer (B-to-C), consumer to consumer 
(C-to-C), and business to government (B-to-G).  
  ii.   “Global Retail E-Commerce Keeps On Clicking,” 
accessed March 6, 2016,   https://www.atkearney.com/
consumer-products-retail/e-commerce-index/
full-report/-/asset_publisher/87xbENNHPZ3D/
content/global-retail-e-commerce-keeps-on-
clicking/10192  .  
 iii.   “Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales, 4 th Quarter 2015,” 
U.S. Census Bureau News, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
accessed March 6, 2016,   http://www.census.gov/
retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf  .  
 iv.   “Worldwide Retail Ecommerce Sales: eMarketer’s 
Updated Estimates and Forecast Through 2019,” 
eMarketer, accessed March 6, 2016,   http://www.
emarketer.com/public_media/docs/eMarketer_
eTailWest2016_Worldwide_ECommerce_Report.pdf  . 

Exporting 
143
  v.   Ibid.  
  vi.   Ibid.  
 vii.   For Tide’s B-to-C Web site, see “All Products,” accessed 
March 6, 2016,   http://www.tide.com/en-US/product-
Landing.jspx  .  
  viii.   ISO 9000 is a certification of the production process only 
and does not guarantee a manufacturer produces a qual-
ity product.  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_9
 C H A P T E R 
 The Mobile 
World at Work 
 A Great Challenge and Opportunity for 
Businesses Today  
 If you look out, maybe five or 10 years, when all 5 billion people who have 
feature phones are going to have smartphones, we’re soon going to be 
living in a world where the majority of people who have a smartphone—a 
modern computing device—will have never seen in their lives what you 
and I call a “computer.” 
 —Facebook Founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg (2013)  i 
 A Facebook page is an instant mobile marketing strategy, and a way for 
you to have a mobile presence really easily and free of cost. 
 —Bess Yount, who heads up Facebook’s efforts to engage with smaller 
businesses in North America (2016)  ii 
 My morning starts with coffee and a check of the news on my tablet. I’ll also 
check out my social media sites, starting with accepting LinkedIn invitations 
before heading to Facebook to see what others are up to. As I start making 
breakfast, I switch from tablet to smart phone to see if anyone has sent an 
9

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
146
important text message. I scan my e-mail, open a few apps to skim more news, 
and receive a prompt that my phone has not been backed up on the cloud 
for several weeks. I turn back to my tablet for the TuneIn radio app, which 
streams music that I can listen to as I make breakfast. 
 That is a glimpse of my typical Sunday morning, and it’s quite possibly the same 
for you and for many others who have access to web-enabled devices. Why 
mobile Internet? In 2015, networking giant  Cisco  estimated that mobile data 
traffic grew 74 percent in 2015.  iii More than half a billion (563 million) mobile 
devices and connections were added in 2015. Smartphones accounted for 
most of that growth. Global mobile devices and connections in 2015 grew to 
7.9 billion, up from 7.3 billion in 2014.  iv According to Cisco, “‘smart devices’ 
refers to mobile connections that have advanced multimedia/computing capa-
bilities with a minimum of 3G connectivity.” 
 Over and above that, three-fourths (75 percent) of the world’s mobile data 
traffic will be video by 2020 and global mobile data traffic will increase nearly 
eightfold between 2015 and 2020.  v 
 No matter how you view the mobile world, get this straight: mobile  devices  
will soon be used by everyone on the planet and will become the center 
of online activity for researching, connecting, sharing, collaborating, buying, 
exporting, and producing local content worldwide, revolutionizing all methods 
of communication. And it is no secret that millennials and Generation C (the 
connected consumer) are key drivers of this usage through a strong attach-
ment to their mobile devices. 
 The potential of mobile  Internet  is huge and has already started by opening 
our lives to the world with a swipe, tap, click or zoom on a digital device that’s 
right in your pocket or sitting next to your bedside table. Each of us has the 
capability to become a roving global merchant with a digital device in hand and 
a connection to the Internet, capturing customers for life. 
 And that leads us to where your next export might come from. In this section, 
I’ll cover mobile and what I call  MAC (mobile, apps, and cloud computing), and 
I’ll show you plenty of profit potential. What I can’t do here is cover the topic 
as thoroughly as I would like because that would entail a separate book and 
mobile technology is rapidly changing and evolving. So consider this a start—a 
primer of sorts—in understanding the power of mobile, what it means to you 
and your export business, and how to create and harness the mobile Internet 
experience to build a better future for your business. In addition to reading 
this book, you should connect in chat rooms and online forums to further the 
conversation and get up to speed with new technology  and   developments. 

Exporting
147
 Case Example: Low-Cost Internet Device 
Taking India by Storm 
 Aakash  (  http://www.akashtablet.com  ), an Android-based, low-cost, seven-
inch-screen tablet computer, officially launched in New Delhi in October 
2011. Distributed by British company Datawind, Aakash was manufactured by 
the India-based company Quad Electronics and was procured by the Indian 
government to help enhance the quality of education. The government’s goal 
is to equip the country’s 220 million students with Aakash tablets and other 
similar products in the next few  years . 
 Originally projected as a $35 laptop, the device was sold to India’s government 
and has been distributed to university students—initially at US$50. When 
there is more demand, the price will drop until it reaches the target goal of 
the $35 selling price. The tablet price continues to change regularly. 
 Datawind’ s CEO Suneet Singh Tuli has said: “DataWind is open to driving the 
pricing down even further as it scales up. The company’s roadmap charts a 
path to sub-$20 tablet in less than two years.”  vi 
 Datawind has risen to become one of the top three tablet suppliers in India, 
alongside Apple and Samsung.  vii 
 Another India- based   company poised for growth is  Ringing Bells  Freedom 251 
with its Android smartphone for just Rs 251, which is less than USD 4 (actu-
ally $3.65 at present rates).  viii 
 Expect more of these affordable Internet devices to be manufactured and 
sold, because they level the playing field and allow everyone a chance not just 
to connect, but to sell or buy things with anyone in the world. All the more 
reason to get your business tuned up for global mobile.  
 Harnessing Mobile Business Opportunities 
 For many people, checking the Internet has quickly become a habit, like brush-
ing your teeth, making your bed, or combing your hair. As the world is revo-
lutionized by the availability of more low-cost tablets and smart phones, the 
Internet will serve as the CCV—chief communication vehicle—  for billions of 
people. 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
148
 How will mobile technology affect small businesses? For any company offering 
information, e-commerce, tools, or deals, apps and mobile-friendly Web sites 
or blogs will be the ultimate way to communicate and interact quickly with 
consumers worldwide. Because mobile technology has conditioned people 
to expect instant gratification, the information you offer must hit the mark 
right away, be digestible by anyone, and be in sync across all devices. What will 
come out of this warp-speed activity? A new breed of global mobile business 
leaders attempting to predict not only what customers buy, but also precisely 
where, when, and how they are most likely to buy it. There will be an increas-
ing use of mobile to drive revenue and profit margin growth—not to mention 
a further complete analysis on how and why consumers shop on their mobile 
devices. The future effect of mobile technology on exports and global trade in 
general will be huge. It will help erase distances and allow you to quickly share 
information and buy and sell cost-effectively from any corner of the world. 
 Consider these findings about smart phone owners and Internet usage by a 
recently released  Pew Research Center r  eport:  ix 
• 
 Smartphone ownership rates have skyrocketed in many 
countries since 2013. This includes increases of over 
25 percentage points among the total population in 
large emerging economies such as Turkey (+42 points), 
Malaysia (+34), Chile (+26) and Brazil (+26).  
• 
 South Korea stands out as the country with the high-
est smartphone ownership rate, with 88% of respon-
dents saying they own one. The countries with the least 
smartphone ownership rates are also among the poorest: 
Tanzania (11%), Uganda (4%) and Ethiopia (4%).  
• 
 In a number of emerging and developing countries, more 
people have access to the internet and are also using it 
more frequently. In 12 emerging nations surveyed in 2014 
and 2015, there were significant increases in the share of 
adult internet users who say they access the internet sev-
eral times a day, including in Nigeria (+20 points), Ghana 
(+19) and China (+13).  

Exporting
149
• 
 There are gender gaps in many aspects of technology 
use. For example, in 20 nations, men are more likely than 
women to use the internet. These differences are espe-
cially stark in African nations. Elsewhere, equal shares of 
men and women use the internet. But large gender gaps 
also appear in reported smartphone ownership (men 
are more likely to own a smartphone) in many countries, 
including Mexico (+16), Nigeria (+13), Kenya (+12), and 
Ghana (+12).  
 Take a good look at the following graph (Figure  9-1 ) from eMarketer  x to see 
what the top content activities were among mobile phone users in February 
2015. What is striking about the data is how buying and selling goods and 
services on mobile Internet devices (referred to as m-commerce), is not high-
lighted in the chart. Yet, eMarketer indicates this: “The ecommerce audience 
on mobile is also growing robustly. This year, eMarketer forecasts, 121.8 mil-
lion US consumers ages 14 and up will make at least one purchase via a mobile 
browser or app this year, whether on a tablet, smartphone or other device. 
That represents 70.9% of the total US digital buying audience this year. While 
nearly 100 million people will make a purchase via tablet this year, fewer than 
80 million will do so on a smartphone—but that’s up from 67.2 million in 
2014, and is expected to reach 105.6 million by 2019, when nearly half of all 
smartphone users will make a mobile purchase.”  xi 
 All the more reason to ready your business for mobile now, before everyone 
else gets to your customers before you do! 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
150
 Figure 9-1.  From “Mobile Content and Activities Roundup,” eMarketer, April 2015. Used 
with permission. 
 

Exporting
151
 The MAC Attack 
 MAC is an abbreviation I coined. It stands for mobile, apps, and the  cloud  . 
These are really three modes in which a mobile user can experience the 
Web. The more you understand the experiences of users (think of users as 
potential customers), the better your chance of succeeding with your mobile 
efforts, especially on an international scale. Let’s examine what each type of 
experience involves and how to go about creating ones that are compelling, 
engaging, and useful for your customers—wherever they might be located. 
 Mobile 
 Mobile  consists of all the devices designed to provide on-the-go widespread 
communications and computer power via the Internet. Mobile acts as the glue 
that connects various elements together to ensure a seamless user experi-
ence. A  quick response (QR) code  , for example, is a matrix bar code that is 
readable by smart phones. I only reference this now because you’ll see more 
QR being used in the future to engage people. It’s a way to integrate mobile 
and traditional media across various mediums, including product packaging, 
print publications, and billboards.  
 Applications 
 Applications (apps)  facilitate efficient use of mobile power. The top US 
smartphone apps are Alphabet’s Google Play, Maps, Search, and Gmail and 
Facebook’s Instagram and Messenger.  xii An app is a compressed software pro-
gram that runs on a mobile device without the use of a software license, as 
explained by author and respected colleague and friend Anita Campbell, who 
runs Small Business Trends.  xiii Apps are relatively cheap to make, easy to dis-
tribute, and effective for small business owners, and they connect people with 
information and business processes wherever they may be at the moment. 
Apps are especially good technology for remote workers, allowing them to 
manage workflow and communicate user status to colleagues, suppliers, and 
customers. 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
152
 Cloud Computing and Storage  
 Using  cloud computing and storage  involves sharing and transmitting files and 
applications over the Internet through a remote digital-storage system that 
offers unlimited capacity. Some cloud-storage providers offer free trials to get 
started and then charge you on a pay-as-you-go model, so you pay only for 
what you use. All of these technological advancements—from cloud comput-
ing, to storage, to apps—force old-line industries and businesses to rethink 
how they conduct business. As an exporter, you must leverage all these 
mobile mediums to best communicate, interact, and conduct business with 
everyone across the planet.  
 In Pursuit of Global Power: Mobile Will 
Overtake Desktop Access 
 Mobile Internet is making it easier for business owners to export by allowing 
them to find customers when they are outside the confines of the office and 
turn those export sales into working capital. Instead of issuing regular invoices 
with thirty-sixty-ninety-day terms, business owners can ask for payment via a 
mobile-payment service such as Square, Google Wallet, Apple Pay, PaySimple, 
Intuit GoPayments, or PayPal Here and get cash on the spot (refer to Chapter 
  20 for more on mobile-payment vehicles). Many of these payment applications 
come with credit and debit card readers for mobile devices. The benefit of 
these mobile-payment technologies is speedier cash flows, which helps busi-
ness owners focus more on what counts: growing a business one export at 
a time as opposed to worrying about how to meet payroll, paying vendors, 
buying supplies, and funding a new product launch. 
 
■ Caution   There is a lot of talk about the increased likelihood of fraud on mobile payments. 
Provided you use a name-brand payment service, mobile payments can be as safe as using a 
credit card over the telephone or making an in-person charge at a restaurant. Of course, there’s 
a risk with a stranger accessing your credit card information, just as there is an inherent risk in 
making payments online. Don’t be intimidated. Be vigilant. 

Exporting
153
 Getting Started: Create and Design a Great 
Mobile Web Site 
 Just because you’ve created a  Web site  doesn’t mean it’s mobile friendly. Web 
sites that haven’t been designed for a mobile platform often show up wrong 
on mobile devices or are hard to use when accessed. Start by checking with 
your hosting company to see if it provides a mobile-ready site based on your 
existing regular site. Some don’t. Blog-hosting platforms such as Blogger and 
WordPress (see Chapter   5  ) allow you to choose a mobile setup in addition 
to your regular blog platform. If your Web site runs on WordPress, you can 
install a free plug-in such as WPtouch, which will automatically transform your 
WordPress Web site for mobile devices. It even includes an option for visitors 
to switch between WPtouch view and your site’s regular theme. 
 Social platforms like Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn have what is called 
responsive themes, which automatically adjust to fit your viewer’s mobile 
browsers, so no worries or concerns there. 
 To find out if your Web site is mobile friendly and how to convert it, go 
to Internet domain registry  Afilias  (  http://afilias.info/mobile  ). Its 
 MobiReady  affiliate (  http://ready.mobi ), also provides a free analysis and 
testing tool to evaluate your site’s mobile readiness and to see how well your 
site performs on mobile devices. It’s that simple. Conduct your check on all 
important stand-alone platforms, including but not limited to your Web site, 
e-commerce platform, and blog. What happens if they don’t easily convert 
over to a mobile platform? You can inquire with Afilias or your current host 
provider to see what tools it has available to convert your platform so that 
it is mobile ready. You can also talk with a web developer who specializes in 
converting platforms to become mobile friendly.  
 Valuable Business Tools: Using Apps and  Cloud 
Storage  
 Apps and cloud computing have taken the world by storm in a positive way, 
but only for those who know how to use them. In that spirit, I’ll highlight some 
of the most important aspects to these types of technology and show you 
how to use them to grow your export  business  . 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
154
 Apps  
 The killer app isn’t a program, game, or map, but access to computing power 
itself. For some individuals, as Facebook’s Zuckerman points out, having access 
to the Internet via a smart phone in maybe ten years will be their first experi-
ence with what we all call a computer.  xiv Small businesses are still at the early 
stages of discovering how best to build and use apps, but the primary reason 
for using an app is to save time, increase productivity, and reduce costs. Some 
business owners desire to build their own app so they can tap into a new 
revenue stream or marketing channel. The challenge with that notion lies in 
taking an app from conception to high-tech reality. With that comes a series 
of questions that need to be addressed:
 1.  What is the purpose of building the app?  
 2.  Who is your customer and what do they value (refer 
back to Chapter   2  )?  
 3.   Should you build or farm out the coding for the app?  
 4.  How will users interact with the app?  
 5.  How will you promote the app and be there for moments 
that matter for your customers?  
 6.   How will you find new ways to be useful to your custom-
ers as they try to find or buy on their smartphone?  
 7.   How will you monetize the app (to charge or not to 
charge)?  
 Once you answer all the questions, it’s a matter of turning to an outside devel-
oper to build your app, which could be either a large firm that specializes in 
this type of coding work or an individual freelancer (refer to Chapter   4 ). The 
cost can be anywhere from $1,000 to $1 million depending on what you are 
trying to accomplish and how many bells and whistles you want on your app. 
 
■ Tip  To attract global customers, gain loyalty, and deliver value with an app, you might read 
“Principles of Mobile App Design: Engage Users and Drive Conversions” – Think with Google, 
  https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/collections/principles-of-mobile-app-
design-engage-users-and-drive-conversions.html  . 
 Many companies are now launched entirely on the premise of an app, connecting 
buyers and sellers of a particular unique item such as designer clothing, jewelry, or 
refurbished computer equipment. The use of apps without any additional technol-
ogy relies on the theory that many individuals will bypass computers altogether 
and go directly to mobile for accessing everything they need and want in life.  

Exporting
155
 Benefits  of an App 
 Apps provide useful information, make us more efficient, give customers an 
alternative way to shop, fill a void in how to get tasks done if you have to cut 
positions, and might even help you grow without adding staff. 
 What follows are a few examples of messaging apps where people from all 
over the world can speak to each other by sending text messages, photo appli-
cations, and voice notes: WhatsApp (  http://www.whatsapp.com/  , owned 
by Facebook); Kakao Talk (  http://www.kakaotalk.com.ph/  , South Korea); 
Line (  http://line.naver.jp/en/ , Japan); WeChat (  http://www.wechat.
com/en/  , China); Kik Messenger (http:// kik.com, Canada); and Facebook 
Messenger (  https://www.facebook.com/mobile/messenger ,; United 
States). Why are these apps important?  Because  they give you another outlet 
to find, service, and sell to customers.  
 Best Apps in Town 
 Here’s a roundup of the apps that enhance my business and help me focus 
on achieving results faster. Many of them are free. Some have fees or carry a 
monthly subscription, so be sure to check before installing. All are available for 
iPhone, Android, and Blackberry devices (except where noted). 
 
■ Tip  If you would like to learn more about why apps have become such a powerful force 
in our daily lives, download the white paper published by comScore, Inc., “The 2015 U.S. 
Mobile 
App 
Report:” 
  http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Presentations-and-
Whitepapers/2015/The-2015-US-Mobile-App-Report  
• 
 Desk . com : (  http://www.desk.com ; a Salesforce.com 
company). This is a customer support app for small busi-
nesses that allows you to see your customers in one 
place and engage them across all your support channels 
and social media (Twitter, Facebook, phone, chat, email, 
discussion boards, and so forth), enabling users to quickly 
address requests or assign them to others in a team.  
• 
 Evernote Business : (  https://evernote.com/business/ ). 
 Evernote Business  includes all the features of Evernote 
and Evernote Premium—easily taking notes and snap-
shots or recording audio and sharing it between as many 
digital devices as you need, anywhere at any time—plus 
special business-only tools and capabilities. The cost is 
$12 per user per month.  

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
156
 
■ Note  There are thousands of small business apps not listed here that can help you better 
manage your business. They cost anywhere from $100 to thousands of dollars apiece. Among 
them are Adobe Acrobat, KoolSpan, TrustCall, and Parallels Desktop. Do an Internet search using 
the keywords “Best small business apps” to find the most popular apps that fit your specific needs. 
Start budgeting now. 
• 
 Google Translate : (   www.google.com/mobile/translate/   ).
This app lets you translate languages from around the 
world while on the run. It is used for quick translation 
solutions (communicating with a taxi driver or asking a 
hotel concierge for directions in a foreign country where 
you don’t speak the language, for example), not for a 
seamless mobile-translation experience. 
• 
 Perka : (  https://perka.com ). This app lets small busi-
nesses set up customer loyalty programs over their 
mobile phones and track shoppers’ purchases automati-
cally. The cost is free for consumers to get the app, made 
by First Data Corp. For businesses, inquire with FDC on 
costs involved in creating multiple offers and accessing 
additional features.  
• 
 Polaris : (  https://www.polarisoffice.com ). This app 
allows users to manage Microsoft Office files from the 
road. Polaris Office 5 version, considered the best edition, 
is $12.99, whereas the Android version is free. 
• 
 QuickBooks : (  http://quickbooks.intuit.com ). This 
app, run by Intuit, allows you to organize your business 
all in one place and to handle a variety of financial tasks 
that can be accessed at home or on the go. Prices start 
at $10.36 a month based on your needs for the first 12 
months; $12.95 and up after. For all QuickBooks apps, 
visit:   https://apps.intuit.com .  
• 
 Skype : ( http://   www.skype.com  /en/ ). This app allows 
you to talk for free with anyone, anywhere in the world! 
Who can resist? If you can’t use Skype Mobile, Skype to 
Go numbers are also available without an Internet con-
nection. These numbers offer discounted international 
calls as well as access to Skype’s services without down-
loading or installing software.  

Exporting
157
• 
 Slack : (  http://slack.com ). This app lets users set up 
instant group or private chats and direct messages, and 
drop in videos, images or files. The cost is free for limited 
use; up to $15 per user a month for additional features.  
• 
 Square : (  http://www.squareup.com  ). This app collects 
credit card payments from anyone anywhere in the world 
via the Square Card Reader, which plugs directly into 
your smart phone and allows you to accept credit and 
debit card transactions at a fee of 2.75 percent per swipe. 
I’ll never forget the first time my technology expert used 
the  Square reader  at my office after he had taken care 
of some Wi-Fi issues. He finished his work, invoiced me 
while standing there, and asked if I wanted an e-mail or 
text receipt for accounting purposes. Done. The funds 
were available to him the next day.  
• 
 Webex : (  http://www.webex.com ). A Cisco product, 
 WebEx  allows you to schedule, attend, and host meet-
ings with anyone, anywhere. You can get a free account, 
or full-featured account for an affordable monthly fee. 
Separately, you might also check out Google+ Hangouts 
to start a video chat with up to ten people.  
• 
 Yaldi : (  http://yaldiapp.com ). This app enables users to 
track key performance indicators for their business, such 
as revenue, profitability, cash flow, and customer-acquisi-
tion costs. It also integrates QuickBooks accounting soft-
ware. The cost is $9.99 a month; $99 a year. Note: Not 
available for Android.  
• 
 When I Work : (  http://wheniwork.com  ). This app tracks 
everyone’s schedule in one place to see who’s available, 
when, and where. The cost ranges from $29 to $99 per 
month depending on the number of users.  
 
■ Caution  Whether for a site, blog, or mobile platform, translation is not a simple matter (see 
Chapter   15  for a discussion of web translation). It involves keeping your fingers on the pulse of 
who’s buying your products from what part of the world, finding out what language your customers 
speak, and then planning accordingly by choosing a translation platform that fits your business and 
your budget. A good mobile translation solution can increase your user base and improve customer 
engagement worldwide. 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
158
 Apps for  Global Shipping  
 Here are a few apps that can help you make and track your shipments:
• 
 UPS Mobile : (  http://www.ups.com/content/us/en/
bussol/browse/iphone.html  ). With this app, you can 
access shipment information anytime and anywhere.  
• 
 FedEx : (  http://www.fedex.com/us/mobile/ ). This app 
helps you find the FedEx drop box, office, or authorized 
shipping center location nearest you “without leaving the 
app.” You can also manage and track your shipment sta-
tus. FedEx indicates its app for Android is coming soon.  
• 
 DHL Activetracing : (  https://activetracing.dhl.com/
DatPublic/smartphoneApps.do  ). This app allows you 
to order, track, and trace your DHL shipments while on 
the go.  
• 
 TNT Express Mobile : (  http://expressmobile.tnt.com ). 
Using this app, you can track, trace, and get real-time 
updates on the progress of your  shipment .  
 Apps Specific to International Trade 
 There are also some apps out there designed for  international trade  :
• 
 Incoterms : (  http://m.darkpsytrancer.store.aptoide.
com/app/market/com.icc.incoterms/1/3747697/
Incoterms  ). The Incoterms rules are an internation-
ally recognized standard developed by the International 
Chamber of Commerce (ICC) and are used worldwide in 
international and domestic contracts for the sale of goods. 
For Android use only.  
• 
 HS Code Handbook : (  http://www.appster.org/app/hs-
code-handbook-418821351  ). HS stands for Harmonized 
System and is administered by the World Customs 
Organization. The app features a search engine for the 
full list of six-digit international export codes that serve 
as the foundation for the import and export classifica-
tion systems used in the United States. You can search 
by product, keyword, or number. Available for iPad and 
iPhone only.  

Exporting
159
 
■ Tip Many banks catering to small businesses are just beginning to develop apps for 
international trade. In most instances, you must be a client to use them. Wells Fargo, for example, 
offers the TradeXchange product under the CEO Mobile App. Citigroup rolled out its Trade Advisor 
product (not necessarily an app, but close), which provides online updates on letters of credit, trade 
finance loans, and documentary collection. Check with your bank to see if it has an app available 
for imports, exports, and other B-to-B transactions. 
 We are only at the tip of the iceberg when it comes to creating apps and 
leveraging them to grow a business. Watch for more to come in the future, 
and definitely stay in front of the trend. Meanwhile, connect in chat rooms 
and forums online to further the conversation and get up to speed with new 
technology  and  developments.  
 Cloud Storage and Computing 
 Cloud storage and computing make web-scale computing easier for develop-
ers and enable small business owners to back up critical computer files online. 
They give you the flexibility of accessing all your files anytime (24/7) from 
anywhere in the world, securely, and in sync with all your devices. Don’t get 
confused. The apps that enable them generally offer a set amount of informa-
tion you can store plus some ability to sync files to your devices, along with 
other features. But there are surprisingly subtle and not-so-subtle differences 
between what the cloud service providers offer businesses—businesses that 
require a more advanced, customizable file-storage tool should look beyond 
a single free app (Dropbox, for example) and consider a pay-as-you-go cloud 
spot. 
 Benefits  of Cloud Storage 
 Cloud storage simplifies document sharing and collaboration, reduces risk, 
saves money, increases business capacity when you need it, enlarges access, 
and strengthens mobility—all of which is a huge boon for productivity. It also 
makes for a perfect backup system for the on-the-go export warrior.  

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
160
 Best Cloud Storage Spots in Town 
 The top US cloud storage spots are as follows (fees range from $.99 a month 
to more than $55.00 a month depending on the number of users and storage 
capacity):
• 
 iCloud : (http://   www.apple.com/icloud  ). This cloud stor-
age spot, run by Apple, allows you to store data such as 
photos, music, apps, calendars, and documents for down-
load to multiple devices. The service also allows you to 
wirelessly back up all your devices.  
• 
 Google Cloud Platform : (  https://cloud.google.com/  ). 
This platform lets you build applications and Web sites 
and store data as well as analyze data on Google’s 
infrastructure.  
• 
 Cloud Drive : (  https://www.amazon.com/clouddrive/
home  ). The storage tool, run by Amazon, allows you to 
store your photos, videos, documents, and other digital 
files in the cloud.  
• 
 OneDrive : 
(  https://onedrive.live.com/about/
en-us/  ). Microsoft’s cloud storage allows you to store 
photos, documents, and other important files to your 
phone, tablet, PC, or Mac. If you're on Windows 10 and 
signed into a Microsoft account, information is baked 
right into the operating system, so that your background, 
your display, and your settings also roam with you.  
• 
 Dropbox : (  https://www.dropbox.com/mobile ). This app 
lets you store your photos, documents, and videos any-
where and share them easily with anyone.  
• 
 SugarSync : (  http://www.sugarsync.com/free/ ). This 
storage site offers online backup, file synching, and file 
sharing. Prices range from $7.49 a month to $55.00 a 
month depending on storage and user capacity.  
• 
 Box : (  https://www.box.com/apps/ ). This app offers 
online sharing, storing, accessing, and content manage-
ment from anywhere. Prices range from $5.00 a month 
per user starter plan to $15.00 a month per user for a 
business plan. 

Exporting
161
 Cloud computing is positively impacting the way businesses work globally. Yet, 
the market is still very young. Even Microsoft recently opened up Office so 
that businesses can access all their Box files, for example, from Office on an 
iPhone. Watch for more similar dramatic changes in the future where com-
panies recognize how important it is to maintain an open work environment 
for managing, sharing, storing and collaborating worldwide from any device.  
 Summary 
 If there is one key takeaway from this chapter, it’s this: get your business 
global by going mobile. Prepare to sell to anyone on the planet who has a 
digital device and an open e-wallet. The mobile movement is about fulfilling 
potential customers’ needs instantaneously and capturing business profits in 
the process. Now that we can see how MAC allows the Internet to flow into 
every hand, everywhere, and in every circumstance, you’re ready to market 
your business. Turn the page to learn how to boost your online visibility and 
get those exports rolling!  
 Notes 
  i.   “Mark Zuckerberg Lays Out His Vision for the Future and 
How the Next 5 Billion People Will Use Computers,” 
Nicholas Carlson, Business Insider, last modified 
April 5, 2013,    http://www.businessinsider.com/
mark-zuckerberg-lays-out-his-vision-for-
the-future-and-how-the-next-5-billion-people-
will-use-computers-2013-4# ixzz2R8rHMjSC  . 
  ii.   “Mom-And-Pop Shops Get Facebook’s E-Commerce 
Message,” Wendy Lee, SFGate, accessed March 13, 
2016, 
  http://www.sfgate.com/business/arti-
cle/Mom-and-pop-shops-get-Facebook-s-e-
commerce-6885585.php  .  
 iii.   “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data 
Traffic Forecast Update, 2015-2020 White Paper,” 
accessed March 13, 2016,   http://www.cisco.com/c/
en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/
visual-networking-index-vni/mobile-white-
paper-c11-520862.html  .  
 iv.   Ibid. 
  v.   Ibid. 

Chapter 9 | The Mobile World at Work
162
  vi.   “Datawind’s $38 Tablet Is Turning the World Upside 
Down,” Josh Ong, accessed March 13, 2016,   http://
thenextweb.com/insider/2014/01/17/datawinds-
38-tablet-turning-world-upside-better/#gref  . 
 vii.   Ibid. 
  viii.   “Ringing Bells Freedom 251: Cheapest Android 
Smartphone for Just Rs 251 ($3.65),” Raju PP, accessed 
March 13, 2016,   http://techpp.com/2016/02/17/
freedom-251-specs-price-features/  . 
  ix.  “Smartphone Ownership and Internet Usage Continues 
to Climb in Emerging Economies,” Pew Research Center, 
accessed March 13, 2016,   http://www.pewglobal.
org/2016/02/22/smartphone-ownership-and-
internet-usage-continues-to-climb-in-emerg-
ing-economies/  . 
 x.   “Mobile Content and Activities Roundup,” eMarketer, 
accessed March 13, 2016,   https://www.emarketer.com/
public_media/docs/eMarketer_Mobile_Content_
Activities_Roundup.pdf  . 
  xi.   Ibid.  
  xii.   Facebook, Alphabet Dominate U.S. Smartphone App 
Field, Brian Deagon, accessed March 13, 2016,   http://
www.investors.com/news/technology/facebook-
alphabet-dominate-u-s-smartphone-app-field/  . 
  xiii.   “What the Heck is an ‘App?,’” Anita Campbell, Small 
Business Trends, last modified March 7, 2011,    http://
smallbiztrends.com/2011/03/what-is-an-app.
html  . 
  xiv.   “Mark Zuckerberg Lays Out His Vision for the Future and 
How the Next 5 Billion People Will Use Computers,” 
Nicholas Carlson, Business Insider, last modified 
April 5, 2013,    http://www.businessinsider.com/
mark-zuckerberg-lays-out-his-vision-for-
the-future-and-how-the-next-5-billion-people-
will-use-computers-2013-4# ixzz2R8rHMjSC  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_10
 C H A P T E R 
 Marketing 
Your Business 
Worldwide 
 You can buy attention (advertising). You can beg for attention from the 
media (PR). You can bug people one at a time to get attention (sales). 
Or you can earn attention by creating something interesting and valuable 
and then publishing it online for free. 
 —David Meerman Scott, marketing and leadership speaker  i 
 When we care, we share. 
 —Jonah Berger, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania 
professor; expert on word of mouth, viral marketing, social influence, 
social contagion, and trends; author,  Contagious: Why Things Catch On  ii 
 You need loyal and passionate advocates, ambassadors, and supporters, who, 
in their own potent words, will share with the world just how great you are, 
and how important and helpful it is for others to collaborate with you as well.  
 — Kathy Caprino, international career success consultant, writer, speaker 
and trainer dedicated to the advancement of women in business  iii  
10

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
164
 The twenty-first century will belong to the Internet consumer. So it follows 
that if content is the soul of an online enterprise, marketing is the heart. Put 
the two together and you can assemble the next wave of Internet consumers 
who have unlimited options and freedom of choice. Our digital experience is 
now about engaging consumers with information, new products, new brands, 
new movements, and new individuals that they care about. To that extent, you 
don’t want to just market a product or service to Internet consumers; you 
want to own or dominate the space you operate in. You want to become, for 
lack of a better descriptor, an export rebel with a cause. What is critical is to 
watch and learn as you go, seize the opportunity when you can, exploit it, and 
inspire others to get involved. 
 In this chapter, we look at how marketing has changed over the years due to 
technology and how to create an international marketing plan that hits the 
mark every time, serves customers the way they want to be served, and helps 
promote your brand worldwide. I will also provide a few additional resources 
that take us back to the good old days of cold calling—all with the intent of 
getting your online business found around the world. 
 The  Four Ps of  Classical Marketing  
 Traditional marketing, through newspapers, radio, television, and print 
advertising, for example, has its place and value. Remember the four Ps of 
classical marketing—product (or service), price, promotion, and place? This 
is better viewed as the marketing mix and the foundation for satisfying 
customers’ needs. You can also use the four Ps to anticipate and create the 
future needs of customers in order to profit from them. However, thanks to 
the Internet, traditional methods of marketing have changed and improved. 
Online marketing, as you will learn later on, is not a replacement for marketing 
basics. Rather, it’s a new, more cost-effective way of interacting with customers 
and other stakeholders. Consider it to be another tool in your toolbox to use 
for marketing purposes. 
 Promoting products, brands, and businesses on a new and different stage—
the Internet—calls for a different mindset from the one used in the old 
days, where you could simply tell or push consumers over and over to “Buy 
this!” Now, it’s about pulling users in as needed, rather than pushing them, 
developing a relationship, having a conversation, and engaging consumers in a 
way that creates trust, loyalty, and dedication. If you do these things, they will 
be customers for life. That’s why organizations are now facilitating two-way 
communications via social channels. 
 Take Procter & Gamble (P&G), one of the world’s largest consumer products 
companies. Its brands include Tide detergent, Ivory soap, and Crest toothpaste. 
P&G used to spend gazillions of dollars on direct-mail coupons and television 

Exporting
165
and print ads to reach its target market. The company still spends a good 
deal on similar activities, but a large portion of its marketing dollars are now 
apportioned to where most people spend their time: on the Internet. This 
includes P&G’s Web site; blo;, Facebook page; Twitter handle; and Google+, 
Instagram, and Pinterest accounts. 
 
■ Tip  Procter & Gamble’s classic marketing rules, such as emphasizing a solution and not a 
problem or showing a package in the first eight seconds of a television ad, will never go out of 
vogue. If anything, these principles become the foundation for online social conversations now and 
well into the future.  iv 
 Internet marketing is about creating a solid marketing plan, increasing visibility, 
staying the course, monitoring results, and making appropriate changes along 
the way on an as-needed basis. Instead of focusing primarily on the four Ps, we 
need to look at the four Cs of social media: content, conversation, community, 
and connections. The ultimate goal with Internet marketing is immediacy and 
to make your online platforms the go-to resource when people want informa-
tion on your type of product or service.   
 Making the Most of the Internet: The New 
Rules of Marketing Your Business to the World 
 Online marketing should rely on strategies that leverage the Internet and 
mobile devices. The goal is to manage your brand and increase revenue and 
profits for your business by targeting potential customers using different 
online channels. Let’s take a look at a few key tactics of online marketing that 
get you from here to there—how to get to excellence in online marketing. 
Many of them should be used when drafting your international marketing plan. 
 Search Engine Marketing 
 Search engine marketing ( SEM)  is about procuring a favorable position on 
search engine results pages. SEM is done by building links and writing strong 
content for your site and submitting data to search sites. People trust search 
engines because of the perceived objectivity of the results. Studies have shown 
that online visitors are likely to click on an organic, or nonpaid, result vs. a paid 
result—all the more reason to get to that top rank organically.  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
166
 Display Ads 
 Display ads  are a type of graphical advertising that is positioned next to related 
content on a web page. They usually contain a company’s logo; a text descrip-
tion of what is being sold; images, illustrations, or photographs; contact infor-
mation, such as the company’s web address, phone number, or e-mail address; 
and rich media (a video or animation link).  
 Affiliate Marketing 
 Affiliate marketing  is a way to make money online whereby you as a site’s
 publisher are paid a commission for helping a business by promoting its 
product, service, or site on your platform. As the publisher, you earn a 
commission, referred to as a conversion rate, when someone follows a link 
on your blog to another site where he then buys something. Commissions 
are often a percentage of a sale but can also be a fixed amount per action 
(a click-through rate or pay-per-sale conversion rate, for example). 
 Conversions can be tracked when the publisher uses a link with a code 
(exclusive to that entity) embedded into it, enabling the advertiser to track 
where conversions come from. Other times an advertiser might give a 
publisher a coupon code for her readers to use that helps to track conversions. 
 Another variation on this is when you earn something for referring a 
visitor to another site through an online campaign who then takes some 
kind of action—for example, signing up for a newsletter, taking a survey, or 
providing an e-mail address. Affiliate marketing works best when there’s a 
relationship of trust among an advertiser, a publisher, and its readers; you advertise 
relevant products; and you have a huge following. It’s all about generating extra 
revenue, and that becomes easy when you know your customers’ needs.  
 E-Mail Marketing 
 An  e-mail marketing   campaign, such as a weekly newsletter, is about reaching 
consumers where they tend to go most: their e-mail inbox. 
 
■ Tip  Constant Contact and MailChimp are good e-mail marketing platforms should your own 
Web site host not have this capability. 
 E-mail marketing—considered the ultimate marketing asset—involves directly 
marketing a commercial message to a target group of people that has given 
you permission to contact them via e-mail. It’s a cost-effective solution that 

Exporting
167
allows you to keep in constant touch with your existing or soon-to-be 
customers. Using e-mail marketing, you can provide a free white paper, PDF 
file, e-book about your company, or anything else your customers might 
consider to be of value, when they visit your site. You should also put a 
sign-up form on your Web site (review Chapter   5 ) and a link to sign up in 
your e-mail signature. You can also invite people to sign up via your social 
media circles. Remember to use the same logos, colors, and slogans in your 
newsletter as you do everywhere else.  
 Inbound Marketing  
 Rather  than  conducting outbound marketing to the masses of people—many 
of whom are trying to block you out—inbound marketing can be used to 
help people who are already interested in your industry find you. In order 
to do this, you need to set your Web site and blog up like a watering hole 
for your industry and attract visitors naturally through search engines, the 
blogosphere, and social media. Most global marketers spend about 90 percent 
of their efforts on outbound marketing and 10 percent on inbound marketing. 
Once marketers understand the power of inbound marketing, you’ll see those 
percentages shift dramatically.  
 Referral Marketing  
 Word-of-mouth  marketing   (also known as referral marketing) leverages 
your existing customers to advocate for your business. It costs little to 
implement and can be as simple as asking people to refer business to you with an 
incentive tied to it. Testimonials further help validate your work as long as 
they are given by well-known and respected individuals in your industry. 
 
■ Tip  Use a Referral Fee Agreement to get paid for referring potential customers, or to 
compensate someone else for sending a customer your way. Try:   https://www.rocketlawyer.
com/document/referral-fee-agreement.rl  
 Social Media Marketing 
 Social media marketing (SMM)   can help break barriers and is designed to 
foster attention and traffic through conversations you have on social media 
sites such as Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Google+, and YouTube. Keep 
messages consistent (in your slogans, pictures, colors, and contact information, 
for example) to ensure that branding on all platforms works together. 

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
168
 
■ Tip  Creating a video—via YouTube or Periscope, for example—for your business, product, or 
service offering is a compelling way to get people to take action—like visiting your Web site and, 
preferably, buying something. You can create a video yourself or hire a professional to do it for 
you. Think about how it will be used to market your business. Make it entertaining, educational, 
and short. Focus on the value it will have for the visitor and not on specifically selling something. 
 Content Marketing  
 Content marketing is   communicating with people in a way that makes 
them feel like you are not directly selling them. Instead of pitching, you’re 
storytelling, educating, or entertaining people through blogs, Web sites, web 
casts, podcasts, videos, articles, and e-books.  
 Mobile Marketing  
 Mobile marketing  is marketing that is conducted through a mobile device 
such as a smart phone or tablet. The only difference in strategy between 
mobile marketing and other forms of marketing is that you should keep it 
short, sweet, and to the point. Convenience is crucial. For example, consumers 
expect to take out their phone, ask for service, and get it. They don’t want to 
wait. A key advantage to marketing to smart phones is the ability to send and 
receive text messages and buy on the move. 
 Now that you thoroughly understand the importance of online marketing and 
the major tactics used, you are ready to draft an international marketing plan.  
 Creating an International Online Marketing Plan 
 If you want to export to more than 3.4 billion people online who are 
interested in buying your product, it will most likely be accomplished through 
using search engines and other social media channels. You should put all the 
different marketing mediums previously mentioned to work simultaneously in 
a highly targeted yet seamless fashion. Diversification is best when you want 
to maximize resources and to increase online visibility. It will take time and 
effort, but the payoff will be worth it in terms of bringing the world to your 
online export business. 
 When drafting an  international marketing plan  , the simpler, the better. Begin by 
addressing these five key questions:
 1.  What do I want to accomplish with my business online?  
 2.   How much money do I have to spend?  

Exporting
169
 3.   Who will work on the marketing procedure?  
 4.  How much time will I devote?  
 5.  How will I make it happen (which tools will work best)?  
 Let’s take a look at a sample international marketing plan for a fictitious 
company we’ll call Organic Berry Company, which takes into consideration all 
of the above. 
 Organic Berry Company 
 San Francisco–based  Organic Berry Company (OBC)  grows, packages, and 
sells certified organic blackberries, blueberries, raspberries, and strawberries 
throughout the United States. Established in 2014, OBC has $2 million in 
annual revenue and fifteen employees, and has established that each customer 
spends an average of $50 a year. The company’s marketing plan might look 
like this:
  1.  What do we want to accomplish with our business online? 
 “OBC wants to create an international marketing plan 
that will enable it to increase its online visibility—and 
sales—to Southeast Asia, specifically Taiwan, Vietnam, 
Singapore, Hong Kong, and Malaysia.”  
 2.  How much money do we have to spend? 
 “OBC has set aside $50,000 for the first year of online 
marketing. Once it generates enough new business to 
offset that initial expenditure, the company will allocate 7 
percent of after-tax profits to future marketing efforts on 
a worldwide basis.”  
 3.   Who will work on the marketing procedure? 
 “The company will ask one employee, who is excellent 
with communications, to work on the online marketing 
activities. The company will make sure to get her buy-in 
first and confirm that she is passionate about taking on 
this new initiative.”  
 4.   How much time will we devote? 
 “The one key employee will devote herself full-time 
to online marketing activities until such time that the 
company needs more people to come on board to 
assist her.”  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
170
 5.  How will we make it happen (which tools will work best)? 
 That gets us to the plan! The first step of creating that 
plan is to figure out where our customers are most likely 
to look for us. 
 “OBC will devote time and energy to all online platforms, 
with heavy emphasis on search engine optimization, since 
that is where consumers worldwide search and find 
information. OBC will support the SEM efforts with qual-
ity blog posts, podcasts, Tweet chats, Skypecasts, webinars, 
videos, published articles, and e-books that will help to 
further promote our business to the world as well as 
transact business in every corner of the planet.”  
 Building Brand Recognition  through the International 
Marketing Plan 
 The international marketing plan should be strategic in nature and executed 
in a consistent manner. The goal is to get more customers from around the 
world to export to and to increase your business’s profits. (I am assuming at 
this juncture that you have already read Chapter   6  and set the world stage for 
becoming a digital export rock star; if not, go back and read it.) Here’s how a 
plan might look. Keep in mind how the four Cs of social media (content, con-
versation, community, and connections) might play into each  point  :
 1.  Define a keyword strategy (set objectives) . As we discussed 
in Chapter   5 , you need to come up with a string of key-
words that best describes your business. Think of it this 
way: If you were to call a bunch of folks together at an 
online water cooler every week to talk about something 
related to your keywords, what would they be? Mine is, 
for example, “Global small business.”  
  2.  Optimize your Web site to get found . In Chapter   5 , we dis-
cussed how to optimize your  Web site  . That effort is 
critical for getting found by the billions of consumers you 
are interested in selling to. While keywords are not the 
only search engine ranking factor, they do support the 
relevancy of your page and they’re within your control 
when creating new page content. Consider controlling 
keywords by optimizing content across all of your pages, 
including those in different languages. Feature your blog 
on your homepage and provide clear ways that people can 
connect with you on their favorite social media platforms. 
All of these efforts in combination will determine how 
well you rank in a Google, Bing, or Yahoo! search result.  

Exporting
171
 
■ Tip  There’s a lot of talk that you don’t need a Web site. That’s bunk. A Web site serves as your 
single biggest business calling card on the Internet and a lead nurturer of sales. It’s where you 
post your best content and carefully craft what you are about and how you serve customers. More 
important, you own this online real estate by way of a great domain name hosted by a company 
you pay to take care of that real estate. If customers get lost about what you do when looking at 
Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, or Google+, they can always go to your Web site for reassurance of 
your capabilities. Keep it current, vibrant, and inviting. 
 3.  Create a   blog  and other related marketing content . Your online 
success is directly proportional to the quality of your 
web design and the information you provide. Consider 
creating podcasts, Tweet chats, Skypecasts, YouTube 
and Periscope live streaming Q&A session videos, and 
webinars to further promote your business to the world, 
better connect with existing and potential customers 
using these platforms, and transact business around the 
world. Write articles, white papers, and e-books in your 
area of expertise. Internet consumers visit and return 
to those sites that consistently provide a high-quality, 
informative, and engaging online experience.  
 4.   Promote content and participate in  social media . Set 
up a schedule, start promoting, and stick to it on a 
regular basis. Here’s what you might be dealing with: a 
Web site, blog, and Facebook page; LinkedIn, Google+, 
Twitter, Pinterest, Instagram, and Periscope accounts; and 
an app and mobile site. Whether you start with a daily 
blog post, an affiliate marketing program, a display ad, or 
an e-mail campaign, keep the conversation going until you 
generate new business.  
 5.   Convert site traffic  into leads . Getting lots of visitors to 
your Web site and social media channels is terrific, but 
how do you turn those visitors into leads and then into 
customers? Here’s a simple four-step solution that I 
encourage you to implement:
• 
 Step 1: Decide on your offer (give ’em something 
they can’t refuse!  ).  
• 
 Step 2: Create a call to action (can be an image, video, 
text question, or survey, for example).  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
172
• 
 Step 3: Create landing pages (these are where your 
visitors end up after they click on your call to action).  
• 
 Step 4: Test what worked best—in the form of a 
text question, poll, or survey, for instance—in terms 
of converting visitors to quality leads and to new 
customers. 
 6.  Nurture leads  with targeted messages . One of the best 
ways to build a relationship with your leads and convert 
them into sales is to find out more about the people 
who are visiting your site. They might e-mail questions, 
view newsletters, comment at the end of blog posts, fill 
out opt-in forms, or take a brief poll. It’s a courting pro-
cess. You want to reach engagement (serious interest) 
and then marriage (a purchase). The objective is to start 
the conversation, be sensitive to moods and needs, and 
respect privacy by not pushing too deeply, instead inquir-
ing about things such as what your visitors want to see 
more or less of on social platforms as it relates to your 
business and their interest. Stay in the picture—keep the 
conversation going—until the lead is ready to buy. It’s that 
simple. 
 Whether you’re dealing with positive conversations or 
complaints over social media, avoid negativity at all costs. 
Be polite and appropriate. In other words, don’t ridicule 
or defame, be unresponsive, or waver during complaints 
or adversity. It’s the test of your strength and resolve dur-
ing the courting process. Take the high road and have the 
attitude that the customer is king and can do no wrong. 
Serve everyone politely and with respect and you will 
encourage a great fan base and returning customers.  
 7.  Optimize  your marketing for mobile . Mobile users want 
quick, actionable access to relevant and useful informa-
tion on the move, wherever they might be, and at any 
given time. So put the users in control. Test out your 
social platforms to make sure they are mobile ready (see 
Chapter   9 ). Enabling consumers to have an active hand 
in choosing how, when, where, and why they wish to be 
marketed to results in a highly targeted, highly engaged 
audience. It gets back to the basics of starting a conversa-
tion with customers, listening to them, and understanding 
what they want. Then you need to deliver on it.  

Exporting
173
  8.   Develop a mobile campaign that leverages your existing, highly 
visible marketing assets and also invests in creativity . These 
might include in-app ads, app games, mobile banners, and 
blogs and social media channels (i.e., Twitter, LinkedIn, 
Facebook, and Google+), and allow users to engage with 
your business in the unique ways that  mobile devices  allow.  
 
■ Tip  Keep the messages in your mobile marketing efforts short, sweet, and easy to understand. 
Stick only to helpful tips. That’s what consumers on the go can handle. Always keep the line of 
communication open with consumers. 
 9.  Evaluate, refine, and improve strategies . Now that you’ve had 
a chance to test and power up your marketing efforts via 
your international marketing plan, evaluate how it’s work-
ing for you. Do you have more followers and fans, espe-
cially from overseas (refer to  Google Analytics Dashboards: 
A Step-By-Step Guide  v )? Have you converted any of them 
into customers? If not, how could you improve on what 
you are doing? Your return on investment can be calcu-
lated by dividing the excesses in benefits (new custom-
ers) within a year by the costs of the Internet marketing 
investment. In the case of OBC mentioned earlier, the 
fictional company determined that its average customer 
spent $50 a year, so it would take one thousand custom-
ers to bring in sales of $50,000. In other words, to cover 
the additional marketing investment, it would need to 
gain one thousand new customers based on its Internet 
strategy. 
  10.   Get the leadership right . People must be digitally minded, 
highly motivated, and collaborative. Develop appropriate 
performance-based metrics for the business and its lead-
ers to ensure global growth.  
 
■ Tip  Are you noticing that many of the communications you receive online are in a language 
other than your own? Is there an abundance of messages coming from one country? You are on 
to something that should be addressed. Perhaps that’s a market you should consider entering. 
Consider hiring a translator so you can turn those conversations into legitimate export business. 

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
174
  11.   Recommend action . Based on your activities, ask yourself 
what you should continue doing because it is working and 
what you can do differently to generate more revenue 
and profits for your business. Take time to recommend 
a new course of action that will benefit the company, key 
stakeholders, and consumers. Remember, the best mar-
keting is marketing that doesn’t feel like marketing.  
 
■ Tip  Aside from a brief mention of display ads, I am intentionally leaving out advertising here 
because this chapter’s emphasis is on marketing that you can do yourself. However, that is not to 
say you should not consider advertising if your marketing efforts fall short of your desired results. 
Starting online is fast, affordable, and easy to track (refer to Chapter   6  ). Look at Facebook ads, 
LinkedIn ads, Google Adwords, and StumbleUpon ads to further boost your Internet marketing 
initiative. Sometimes the best place to get your company seen online is to pay for it, but you need 
an interesting image, headline and body text. 
 Other Marketing Tactics and Promotional 
Elements 
 In addition to online marketing  tactics  , the following sections describe offline 
measures that also can be an effective way to connect with readers and export 
more stuff. 
 Public Speaking Events  
 A good way for potential clients to find out about you and your company is 
through a seminar series, conference, convention, festival, or any other public 
speaking events that they can attend. These can be done through community 
organizations, professional groups, and trade associations whose events take 
place in overseas markets, provided they have an international membership in 
markets you want to enter. It is a chance for individuals to hear information 
directly from you and oftentimes before formally connecting online. Speaking 
to groups is nothing more than having a big conversation with a lot of people. 
Make sure you leave sufficient time to take questions from the audience at the 
end. Since you are the best spokesperson for your business, holding seminars 
and speaking engagements offers a powerful and efficient marketing tool that 
can quickly establish your credibility and expertise with an audience. Speaking 
to a group is marketing, not selling. With that in mind, always focus on 
providing value. This will bring customers later.  

Exporting
175
 Networking 
 Nothing tops good old-fashioned  networking  , provided you target like-minded 
folks in your sphere of influence. Networking can take place at peer-to-peer 
organizations, professional affiliations, international conferences, industry 
trade shows, and so forth. For example, once I received an invitation from 
the Chicago Council on Global Affairs to hear Eric Schmidt, CEO of Google, 
speak. Although you may not be able to secure new business at the event, you 
can collect important business cards, have critical discussions on international 
business, and envision ways to someday speak at the same event to share 
expertise and sell products and services. Make a list of fifty people you know 
who are at the top of their industry. Ask if you can speak at their next event. 
And don’t forget to add them all as contacts in your social media circles.  
 E-Mail Blasts to Purchased  Lists 
 Some companies allow you to buy an e-mail blast list of targeted 
customers. This is a carryover from sending snail-mail postcards and hard-copy 
letters, and is still practiced by some today (mostly B-to-B). I don’t have any 
experience with this marketing tactic, especially as it relates to prospecting 
internationally. You will have to be careful that your audience, if they have 
never heard from you before, doesn’t consider your e-mail to be spam. 
That said, you might be better off developing your own opt-in means for 
international customer acquisition. Once you connect, you will still have to 
develop a trusting relationship, and that will take time. What you don’t want 
to do is alienate customers who could have become very profitable had you 
taken the time to cultivate a genuine relationship but were turned off by your 
e-mail blast tactic. 
 
■ Tip   Don’t be surprised if at some point Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn all have packages in 
place that allow you to buy global Likes, Fans, and other related connections (referred to as “click 
farms”). It’s only a matter of time.  
 
■ Tip  In 2015, we hosted our first ever Global Small Business Forum (  http://www.
globalsmallbusinessforum.com  ) in Chicago. After the event, we created a list, which included 
names and email addresses of all the attendees. We uploaded it to our MailChimp newsletter 
account. This works so much better than purchasing a list because now we met each of the 
attendees in person and can continue to cultivate the relationship through our newsletter outreach 
campaign. 

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
176
 Opt-In Lists  
 Whether in person or over the phone, cold calling is an icebreaker and can 
be an effective way to snag customers—and not necessarily overseas ones. 
Many people still believe in the old ways of training salespeople and cold 
calling. They figure if someone makes one hundred cold calls, one will develop 
into a sale. However, if you want the biggest bang for your marketing buck, go 
the e-mail route! When you have an opt-in list, people have already given you 
permission to communicate with them. Those hundred calls leading to one 
sale could instead be done as a hundred e-mails leading to twenty sales in a 
shorter period of time and with less human effort. And you can always send 
someone in person to service those twenty customers.  
 Outsourced Telemarketing  
 Some businesses do well by outsourcing telemarketers (refer to Chapter   4 ) 
to help pitch their business capabilities to potential customers. Don’t rule out 
the use of the telephone. It works for businesses that need a personal, local 
touch. Hire individuals whose speech you can clearly understand and who 
know something about the product or service you are selling. If you want to 
open doors in the United Kingdom, for example, hire someone in that market 
who knows the key players you are trying to reach and speaks in a similar 
manner as the people in those regions. Nothing is worse than the sound of a 
robotic voice or a voice that has such a strong accent that it is impossible to 
understand.  
 Advertising/PR  
 This should be one of the last parts of a marketing strategy, not the first. If 
your marketing efforts don’t pan out, that’s when it’s time to turn to advertis-
ing or public relations efforts. But be careful here, because you don’t want to 
overspend. If you do go this route, make sure you have a clear call to action 
where you can track results. If your campaign doesn’t generate new leads or 
business, get rid of it.  
 Personal Selling  
 Sometimes, what is required is to get out there and sell something face to face. 
Or you might hire a whole force of people who sell on your behalf. Or maybe 
it’s just providing information . . . whatever the tactic, the goal is to convince 
customers to purchase a product. It’s more expensive to do it in this fashion, 
but the contacts you will generate make it worth the effort. 

Exporting
177
 Referral Marketing  
 This method involves promoting products or services to new customers 
through referrals, usually word-of-mouth, with an incentive tied to it. It’s 
considered a networking technique and one that, if done well, can bring you 
new business. The silver lining in referral marketing is that typically every 
referral you receive has either an intro or story tied to it by the individual 
making the referral, making your job of selling that much easier.  
 Media Outreach Campaign  
 Media coverage—the amount and quality of attention you get from 
other influential people—can play a huge role in getting consumers and 
businesses alike to visit your Web site or other related online platforms. 
Create a media list and reach out to those on it. Bloggers are well known in the 
industry for getting information out to the masses (my company, for example, 
personally gets pitched daily on the Global Small Business Blog by companies 
who want to reach our audience). Craft several different ways you might 
present your company and its offerings so that it will appeal to a variety of media 
outlets. But you don’t want to appear that you are pitching per se, so focus on 
providing superior and exclusive content instead of pushing to get coverage. 
Plus, you don’t want to give the same pitch twice to the same person—you’ll 
lose that key person forever, so be sure to diversify your audience. Keep 
track of your outreach efforts in an organized fashion, because later you will 
want to measure results. (Side note: I wish more people would adhere to the 
don’t-pitch-twice model! It would make my inbox a lot less cluttered.)   
 Making the Most of Traditional Marketing 
Channels 
 As you wrap your arms around marketing your business through online chan-
nels, you will find there is no single right way to win export customers. It’s 
a combination of many factors that all contribute to success. But remember, 
always focus on your target audience. Here are a couple of other traditional 
marketing  channels  you won’t want to miss. 

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
178
 Exhibiting at Trade Shows:   A Powerful, Hands-on 
Approach 
 Exhibiting at or attending a trade show in your industry is a uniquely 
effective way to contact cross-border customers, especially if you have a 
difficult product to sell or if it is a type that a customer needs to actually see. 
The Department of Commerce’s Foreign Buyer Program certifies a specific 
number of US trade shows each year. As of this writing, the DOC supported 
about eighty international fairs and exhibitions held in markets worldwide. 
 Exhibiting is an especially powerful form of marketing because it allows you 
to get your company name out there and have potential buyers come to 
you. The only  drawbacks  to exhibiting are the cost and future commitment 
involved. It’s expensive, especially for a new exporter. It can cost anywhere 
from $5,000 on up for a ten- by ten-foot booth. Even if the government 
subsidizes your exhibit, it can still cost you at least half of that. And once you 
exhibit, others in your industry will expect to see you there every year as long 
as you’re in business. If you exhibit once and then disappear, they'll think you 
gave up on the market or went out of business. 
 But if you can find a way to manage the cost, the following  advantages  of 
exhibiting should convince you to keep it up:
• 
 It will provide high visibility for your company and products.  
• 
 It will provide instant industry credibility.  
• 
 You can do your own preshow promotion. High booth 
traffic is no accident!  
• 
 It will give you a chance to meet potential buyers face-to-
face. Whether customers visit your booth intentionally 
or discover you accidentally, it’s good prospecting. Even 
if you don’t end up doing business, these visitors can 
give you trouble-saving “insider” recommendations for 
capable and reliable distribution channels.  
• 
 It will allow you to meet important intermediaries, 
such as sales agents, brokers, importing wholesalers, 
trading companies, distributors, independent sales reps, 
and international business consultants.  
• 
 You will be provided a listing in the show directory. 
These directories are given to both participants and 
visitors, who usually then take them back home for a 
more leisurely look. Some copies will be passed on to 
friends and business associates. Your exposure can triple 
by the time the directory has made its  rounds . 

Exporting
179
 Don’t forget that when you’re participating in an international road show, you 
still need to manage your booth as if you were operating out of your office. 
Be prepared. Here are some things to keep  in   mind:
• 
 The staff managing the booth should be polite, 
enthusiastic, and knowledgeable about your company, or 
the company or companies that you are representing, and 
the products on display. At least one person with the 
authority to make final decisions should be present in 
case an opportunity to do business on the spot should 
arise.  
• 
 A person with the potential to interpret other 
languages should be brought in, if possible, to ease potential 
communication problems.  
• 
 The booth itself should be attractive and comfortable. 
Have a table and several comfortable chairs at hand for 
on-the-spot meetings and to accommodate weary guests. 
Also, offer nonalcoholic beverages and snacks to make 
your booth a more inviting place to stop by.  
• 
 Business cards are your passport to trade networks, and 
you should bring an ample supply, written in your own 
language on one side and in the language of the host 
country on the other. Don’t forget to have a personal 
cardholder for when potential customers give you their 
cards.  
• 
 Your sales literature must be attractive and easy to read 
and should be written in a multilingual format to meet 
the needs of local  audiences  .  
• 
 You should have plenty of product samples on hand for 
display, demonstration, and handout purposes.  
• 
 You should have special export-pricing schedules 
prepared. Show free on board (FOB) factory prices and 
cost, insurance and freight (CIF) prices (refer to Chapter 
  19 ), referencing the host country’s international port of 
entry. (See Chapter   19 for other important data that 
should be included on your export price schedule.) If you 
do not have time to prepare special export pricing, you 
can just use your domestic schedules and offer enough of 
a discount (about 25 percent) to serve as an incentive for 
your international customers.  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
180
• 
 You should have an extra camera available at your booth 
in addition to a digital device that has a built-in camera, 
to add an enjoyable personal touch to the proceedings. 
When you return home and write follow-up notes to the 
contacts you made, this will allow you to include photos 
of them standing at your booth. Alternatively, if you are 
in the moment, you can design and send postcards on the 
fly via MyPostcard.com and Touchnote.com.  
• 
 There are a variety of little supplies and amenities 
you need to remember to bring to the show: writing 
utensils, notepads, electrical converter, technology 
adaptors and power devices, a bilingual dictionary, a 
garbage bin, a staple gun, tape, aspirin, and even a small 
sewing kit from your hotel! Look out for useful shops 
like a pharmacy, an office supplier, and a variety or 
convenience store near the exhibition center for 
emergencies. Keep a list of things to remember for next 
 time .  
 
■ Tip  Take a look at the “U.S. Department of Commerce International Buyer Program 2016 
Trade Show Schedule,” which will help you plan accordingly about trade show activity:   http://
www.export.gov/build/groups/public/@eg_main/@ibp/documents/webcontent/
eg_main_088750.pdf  .  vi 
 What Do Local Buyers Expect When Visiting Your Booth? 
 When visitors stop by your booth, they want answers to their questions 
immediately, not months later after you have returned home and sorted through 
your inquiries. If you don’t have an answer to a particular question, promise to get 
one within a day. You can always text, e-mail, or phone your home office for help. 
Don’t forget to ask for your prospect’s business card so you can get back to her. 
Deliver on your promise, and do it  on  time. 
 Cross-border buyers will typically spend several hours right there at your 
booth to discuss all the details of future business. The more you and your 
sales staff know about the prospective customer’s company, the products 
it handles, and its position in the marketplace, the better you look to the 
buyers. Make extraordinary efforts to please. If you fail to convey 
credibility, your chances of success in the international marketplace are slim. 
Don’t think these buyers can’t spot a novice or a lightweight. Most of them 
attend the international shows quite routinely, often because their own national 
economy cannot support the business growth they are trying to achieve. They 
are experienced traders. 

Exporting
181
 Do not expect to write orders during the show. If you do, great, but remem-
ber, this is the time to get long-term associations off to a good start, not to 
rack up sales. Take it easy and allow the customer to drive the transaction. 
His needs come first.  
 Attending a Trade Show 
 Attending a trade show  rather than exhibiting at one allows you to eliminate 
the cost of a booth (keep in mind you’ll still have airfare, lodging, and meals). It 
also gives you a first-hand opportunity to discover:
• 
 who the major local manufacturers (and competitors!) are;  
• 
 what products they make;  
• 
 what products they import from the United States in 
order to expand their product offerings and broaden 
distribution channels; and  
• 
 industry trends and cutting-edge developments and 
breakthroughs.  
 Attending a trade show gives you a panoramic overview of your entire 
industry for minimal expense. But to take full advantage of it, you’ve got to 
work it for all it’s worth. Don’t be shy! Introduce yourself to every likely 
contact, tell them about your business, and offer them a company brochure 
or at least a business card. The show directory alone will give you invaluable 
contact information. Every exhibitor will be listed by name and address with 
an indication of the types of products handled. Some directories also list the 
brands and the other companies that also market them. Also, keep your eyes 
open for a directory of attendees, which can be another important pool of 
contacts. Add whomever will allow you onto your newsletter distribution 
list and online social media platforms, such as LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, and 
Google+. 
 For beginning exporters, attending a show  rather  than exhibiting is also a 
practical strategy for finding cross-border contacts because it allows you to 
move about freely, meet with whomever you choose, and determine if the 
show is worth the investment to exhibit your wares the next time around. 
The only disadvantage is that you don’t make as powerful and professional an 
impression as you would if you were to exhibit because the people you meet 
do not have a tangible sense of an organization that bears your corporate 
name. You might explain to your contacts that you are sounding the market 
to decide whether you should have your own booth next year and ask for 
their input. Local businesspeople will enjoy giving out information about their 
homeland and industry, and they will be flattered that you value their opinion. 
 Whether you’re exhibiting or not, you’ve spent a lot of money to get to the 
show. Use the opportunity wisely.  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
182
 Government Programs,  Trade Missions,  and 
Industry-Sponsored Programs 
 Government- and trade industry-sponsored programs  are designed to match 
you up with the various types of trading intermediaries that are looking to buy 
exactly what you are looking to sell. These programs, in some instances, cost 
money, but the potential returns are great. You will be making contact with 
the people most likely to become long-term business associates or, better yet, 
customers. Here are a few such programs and listings along with the organiza-
tions that sponsor  them  :
 1.  International Partner Search : (  http://export.gov/sale-
sandmarketing/eg_main_018197.asp  ). Run by the 
US Commercial Service, this organization finds qualified 
buyers, partners, or agents without traveling overseas. 
US Commercial Service specialists will deliver detailed 
company information on up to five international compa-
nies that have expressed an interest in your company’s 
products and services.  
 2.   Gold Key Matching Service : (  http://export.gov/sale-
sandmarketing/eg_main_018195.asp  ). Run by the 
US Commercial Service, the Gold Key Matching Service 
is great for a small company with a bigger budget. It is 
one of the most efficient ways for a small business 
operator 
to 
meet 
with 
prescreened 
potential 
cross-border business associates, whether you are 
seeking an agent, a distributor, or a joint-venture 
partner. Individual meetings are arranged in advance, most 
taking place at the US embassy of the host country. Many 
companies testify that this method is a wise investment 
because you pay only for the usual airfare, lodging, and 
entertainment, and have a series of productive meetings 
already arranged. The Gold Key program will also help 
you to participate in trade shows sponsored by state and 
federal agencies.  
 3.   Organized Trade Missions : (  http://export.gov/tra-
demissions/  ). Run by the Department of Commerce, 
these missions are designed to help beginner 
exporters establish sales and set up representation 
abroad at a low cost. The organizer of the mission 
typically sets up the agenda (itinerary), which covers 

Exporting
183
travel arrangements, accommodations, appointments 
with prospective customers, and opportunities to sound 
out the market to learn about other appropriate  trade 
intermediaries  for your products.  
 4.   Featured US Exporters Service : (  https://emenuapps.ita.
doc.gov/ePublic/finance/participation-agree-
ments/edit-fuse-reg.do  ). FUSE is a directory of US 
products featured on the Web sites of the US Commercial 
Services around the world. Being listed on this directory 
gives your company an opportunity to target specific 
markets in the local language of business. Listings are 
available to qualified  US exporters  seeking trade leads 
or representation in more than fifty markets worldwide.  
 5.  Various programs through the Department of Commerce : 
(  http://www.commerce.gov/about-commerce/grants-
contracting-trade-opportunities  ). 
Your 
local 
department of commerce ( DOC ) , which houses the 
US Export Assistance Center, the International Trade 
Administration (ITA), and the US Commercial Service, 
runs a number of programs to put exporters and their 
customers in touch. Some are free and others require a 
fee. Check in advance.  
 6.   Various 
matchmaking 
services : 
(  http://www.trade.
gov/cs/services.asp  ). Both the International Trade 
Administration and the DOC offer  matchmaking services  
that introduce beginner export companies to agents, dis-
tributors, or large retailers with specific interest in the 
exporters’ products.  
 7.  Export USA : ( http://www.thinkglobal.us/ ). Being 
listed in this product catalog will promote your products 
and services to more than a quarter of a million read-
ers in 178 countries. It is distributed by  US embassies  
and consulates worldwide and has a track record of high 
response rates and solid sales results.  
 8.  Search engine for trade events : (  http://export.gov/eac/
trade_events.asp  ). This  search engine  , run by export.
gov, offers participants one-time-only company promo-
tions, seminars, webinars, trade shows, and missions.  

Chapter 10 | Marketing Your Business Worldwide
184
 9.  Catalog 
exhibitions : 
(  http://export.gov/salesand-
marketing/eg_main_018199.asp  ). Run by the US 
Commercial Service, the organization offers US compa-
nies trade specialists who will display your sales litera-
ture at US embassies throughout the world as well as at 
appropriate trade shows. There are three types of exhi-
bitions offered: Multi-state Catalog, American Product 
Literature, and U.S. Embassy/Consulate-sponsored exhib-
its. Your marketing material will be seen by prospective 
distributors, agents, and other interested buyers.  
  10.  Various  contact-list services : (for Singapore:   http://export.
gov/singapore/servicesforu.s.companies/con-
tactlist/index.asp  ). Managed by the U.S. Department 
of Commerce’s International Trade Administration, these 
are services that generate a mailing list of potential 
importers for your product from the organization’s auto-
mated global network of overseas firms. The list includes 
company names, addresses, fax numbers, key contacts, 
Web sites, e-mail addresses, and specific products or ser-
vice interests.  
  11.   Trade Leads  Database : (  http://export.gov/trade-
leads/index.asp  ). Run by the US government, the  TLD  
contains prescreened, time-sensitive leads and govern-
ment tenders gathered through US Commercial Service 
offices around the world. You can search leads and 
receive notification when new leads are posted.  
  12.  World Trade Centers  Association : (  https://www.wtca.
org  ).  WTCs are maintained by some cities to house 
all the services associated with promoting and facilitat-
ing international trade under one roof. These services 
include trade information and communication services; 
trade education programs; and exhibition, conference, 
and office facilities. These agencies will permit you to 
advertise your product or service on an electronic bulle-
tin board that is transmitted worldwide. Each local world 
trade center property (refer to the centers,   https://
www.wtca.org/locations  ) is supported by 15,000 
WTC professionals located in more than ninety coun-
tries, so contacting any one of them provides a valuable 
link to global opportunities.  

Exporting
185
 Summary 
 Unless you aspire to be a one-trick pony, using only one marketing tactic will 
hardly lead you to success with your export business. You should instead 
become that export rebel with a cause and implement a variety of marketing 
tactics in a consistent manner over a long period of time, and place a strong 
emphasis on search engine marketing. This will help the world find you a lot 
faster and put Internet connections to profitable use. Internet marketing is the 
prelude to successful exporting. See your marketing ideas to completion until 
you have placed the world at your online door. 
 Now, you’re ready to export. What will that process involve? Let’s find out.  
 Notes 
  i.   “Leadership Speaker,” David Meerman Scott: Marketing 
and Leadership Strategist, accessed October 23, 2013, 
  http://www.davidmeermanscott.com/leadership-
speaker/  .  
  ii.  “Jonah Berger Quotes,” Goodreads, accessed March 20, 
2016,   https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/
1170746.Jonah_Berger  .  
 iii.   “The 3 Top Reasons Your LinkedIn Profile Isn’t Generating 
Positive Results,” Kathy Caprino, accessed March 20, 2016, 
  https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/3-top-reasons-
your-linkedin-profile-isnt-generating-positive-
caprino  .  
 iv.   Charles L. Gamble,  Winning with the P&G 99: 99 Principles 
and Practices of Procter & Gamble’s Success (New York: 
Pocket Books, 1999).  
  v.   “Google Analytics Dashboards: A Step-By-Step Guide,” 
Daniel Waiseberg, accessed March 20, 2016,   http://
online-behavior.com/analytics/dashboards  . 
 vi.   “2016 Trade Show Schedule,” U.S. Department of 
Commerce International Buyer Program, accessed March 20, 
2016,   http://www.export.gov/build/groups/public/
@eg_main/@ibp/documents/webcontent/eg_
main_088750.pdf  .  

P A R T
 Mapping Out 
Your Export 
Journey 
 
III

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_11
 C H A P T E R 
 Choosing a 
Product to 
Export 
 Exporting is a win-win for America’s economy. Export sales contribute 
to a strong middle class by fueling economic opportunity and jobs in 
communities across the United States, while the countries buying our 
products gain access to some of the highest-quality products and services 
in the world. 
 —Karen Mills, former administrator for the US Small Business 
Administration  i 
 … the global economy is being transformed by a new Millennial creative 
class and novel new uses of technology. Governments have a special role 
to play in helping entrepreneurs navigate a borderless marketplace. We’ve 
all seen how advances in technology have created new possibilities for our 
entrepreneurs in the globalization era. The moment an SME goes live with 
a company website, they are effectively an international business with 
the potential for communication and commerce with consumers across 
11

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
190
the world. Given this reality, all of us must be advocates inside of our 
governments for trade agreements that reduce tariffs and trade barriers 
that make it harder for SMEs to gain market access 
 — Maria Contreras-Sweet, administrator for the US Small Business 
Administration  ii 
 Forgive the directness in the following questions, but we’ve come this far 
together and now I must test your resolve. Do you know what you will be 
exporting? If not, how will you decide? Will it be a product your firm already 
manufactures and sells or will it be someone else’s product for which you 
serve as a middleman? Or what if you discover a product made by someone 
else that you think has export potential? How will you approach that firm? 
What do you do if something goes wrong? Will you need a legal contract to 
get started? 
 This chapter explores all those questions, offers an array of solutions, and pro-
vides a real-life example of a company slowly making its way into international 
territory. From  there , it will be up to you to take action to get your export 
business underway. 
 Whether you manufacture products and have decided to export them or 
want to export the products someone else makes, you still must select some-
thing to export to get going. It’s not always the case that you will be selling 
whatever you are selling at home. Let’s take a look at how you go about mak-
ing that choice. 
 For the Manufacturer: Finding the Best 
Product to Export 
 If you currently run a robust  manufacturing company  , you most likely have 
products in mind that you would like to export. If not, you might have to do 
a little research to determine what types of products are the most export-
able. Either way, not knowing what to export is not a bad thing. If it were, you 
would not be reading this book right now. 
 Priority number one is to select a product you make that is successful in its 
present domestic operation and has the look and feel of export potential 
(meaning everyone—everywhere—already loves it and is likely to continue 
doing so). Priority number two is to go to market with what you are familiar 
with. Priority number three is to view the potential of the product in front 
of you through the eyes of consumers in your export market of choice. That 
said, let’s say you manufacture more than twelve different chemical cleaning 
products. Which one should you export? Easy. The one that sells like hotcakes 
in your local market. The one you love the best. The one you know that cus-
tomers in XYZ market will love the best. Try to choose one item that you can 

Exporting
191
come close to providing an affirmative response for in regard to all of those 
statements! 
 You might have to modify your best-selling cleaning product for exportability 
(we’ll cover that in Chapter   13 ) because making cultural and product changes 
as well as packing and labeling changes are a necessary part of preparing your 
business for exporting. Once you get to the point of selecting a country to 
export to, you need to examine it thoroughly, or you risk marketing poorly 
conceived products in incorrectly defined markets with an inappropriate mar-
keting effort. Many products must be adapted to some degree, while others 
can be sold as is but their acceptance is greatly enhanced when tailored spe-
cifically to market needs. 
 
■ Tip  You can export a service, too (we will discuss that in Chapter   14  ). The United States is 
already the largest exporter of services in the world, both in overall commercial services and in 
most major services categories,  iii and plays a crucial role in employment and productivity growth. 
Trade in goods is only part of the big international trade picture. Due to the Internet (technology), 
watch for stratospheric growth in service exports.  It will come! 
 Choose a Product You Like—And Others Will 
Like It, Too 
 You might also start with a product you really like and know something about. 
How about a  product   you currently make that is selling like hotcakes? This 
will probably prove much easier than deciding where you want to sell it. For 
example, let’s say you make amazing specialty soaps. You might ask yourself, 
“What if I could take some of these soaps and get them to consumers in 
other parts of the world who might enjoy them?” That’s how you plant the 
seed, so to speak. Then it occurs to you that a great box of soaps won’t be 
enough. You might start off by offering your customers something simple but 
later broaden your product offerings, continuing to use your own enthusiasm 
for soaps as a guide to what others might find useful and enjoyable. By market-
ing your product’s advantages and continuing to expand on the features that 
people are most responsive to, you will allow it to obtain a competitive niche 
in foreign markets. Not only will you also ward off your own potential bore-
dom this way, but you will keep customer interest alive all the way down the 
line. Your export customer will need your product innovation to support her 
sales, too, because her customers, in turn, will look to her for line expansions 
and novelties. People want to position themselves on the cutting edge in their 
fields! Now you have a vision of building an export business in specialty soaps. 
Start with a single product—say, your best-selling box of soaps—and look for 
someplace to take it. 

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
192
 
■ Tip  More often than not, product packaging must be adapted (we’ll get to that in Chapter   13  ) 
to suit the needs of the intended overseas market. Other factors might need to be modified as well, 
such as the name of your brand, the electrical power systems your product works with, its weight and 
measurements, the ingredients in it, the physical environment it is suitable for, and so forth. Selling a 
product abroad in the same manner as it was produced for the domestic market increasingly proves 
to be less effective. Keep that in mind as you think through which product to select for export.  
 Case Example:    Vosges Haut-Chocolat  
 Consider high-end Chicago-based chocolatier  Vosges Haut-Chocolat  , which 
was started in 1998 by Katrina Markoff. The story goes like this: Three days 
after her graduation from Vanderbilt University, Katrina moved to Paris to 
study at Le Cordon Bleu. She would continue to travel east through Southeast 
Asia and Australia and would later return to Spain to apprentice.  iv Markoff’s 
global adventures inspired the birth of her business, which began out of her 
kitchen when she sold truffles to specialty food stores in 1998. She opened the 
first Vosges Haut-Chocolat stores in the Bucktown neighborhood of Chicago 
in 1999. There are now eight boutiques, including two locations at O’Hare 
International Airport. 
 Vosges Haut-Chocolat’s chocolates are made to “create a sensory experience 
that nurtures awareness of and appreciation for the world’s diverse cultures,” 
according to the company’s Web site. In fact, one of the company’s big draws 
is its mission to “invite you to travel the world through chocolate.” How 
could anyone resist? When you visit Vosges’s Web site, you don’t want to leave, 
because there is so much enriching information offered, from how the com-
pany’s chocolate is made to what social/environmental causes it belongs to—
and all this occurs well before you get to the part about actually ordering the 
chocolate! And by then, you can’t help yourself from ordering more than your 
budget calls for because the exquisite detailing compels you to try everything.  
 Markoff and her team constructed a forty-three-thousand-square-foot facility 
she’s calling the “Chocolate Temple” to serve as an exhibition of her brands 
for local Chicagoans and tourists (for example, to learn about cocoa, create 
one’s own truffles, and participate in guided chocolate meditations) and a 
point of differentiation from other retailers. Sales are expected to increase 15 
percent in 2015, up from a projected total of $30 million in 2014. Despite the 
high cost of shipping, Vosges exports all over the world at a premium price! 
 Markoff has gone on to receive numerous accolades, including the  Bon Appétit 
Food Artisan of the Year Award, a mention as “the innovator in chocolate to 
lead the US through the next 30 years” by  Food & Wine Magazine (September 
2008), the 2008 Woman Entrepreneur of the Year honor by OPEN American 
Express and  Entrepreneur magazine, one of The Top 100 Most Creative People 

Exporting
193
in Business by Fast Company (2015), and recognition as one of the ten best 
chocolatiers in the world by  National Geographic .  v 
 The key point of this example? Do exemplary work and customers will buy 
your products from all over the world—regardless of price. Once Vosges 
accomplishes everything it needs and wants to do domestically, watch for a 
big growth push on retail store locations internationally. 
 As discussed early on, picking the first overseas market you want to enter 
should be a logical-next-step growth move for a business, not an act of crazi-
ness or desperation. The target market you select should speak your language, 
have plenty of consumers who are willing to buy your product, and offer 
business-friendly regulations. Given Markoff’s love of Europe, it is likely that 
the United Kingdom will be her first foray abroad for a physical store. Watch 
for it. Meanwhile, e-commerce in select overseas markets might be a tempo-
rary option for Vosges, as in the case of doing business in Japan:   http://www.
vosgeschocolate.jp  . 
 What if You Don’t Manufacture Gourmet 
Chocolates? Try Exporting Someone Else’s 
Product! 
 So you don’t currently manufacture gourmet chocolates but love the idea of 
exporting someone else’s? Once you have a likely export product in mind—if 
you don’t, you will get more ideas of how to do so by reading on—learn 
everything there is to know about it. If you were its creator, how would you 
improve it? Go to a domestic manufacturer, offer your export services as a 
middleman, and casually suggest product improvements that you know could 
turn a mediocre product into something ahead of its time. Then your job will 
be to sell the product. 
 Finding a Product to Export 
 If you don’t have products you make in-house, you’ve got to figure out what 
you want to export. Ask yourself these questions to help you determine what 
product to export: What gives me the most pleasure as a businessperson? Is 
it the challenge of spotting a trend, taking advantage of it, and striking it rich? 
Or is it the chance to spend my time dealing with a commodity I love? Does 
it create satisfaction for me to meet consumer demands? You have two viable 
reasons for choosing a product to export—because you know it will sell or 
because you like it. Let’s consider both alternatives.  

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
194
 Choosing a Product that  Sells  
 Start with a product that you know will sell—if not everywhere, at least 
somewhere. And when you find a product for exporting, show it to anyone 
who will listen to your pitch. If every person responds positively, you are on 
to something big. If, on the other hand, you receive a lukewarm response from 
most listeners, you need to find another product. And remember, once you 
find the right product, you have to find the right market. 
 Also, you will improve your odds of picking a winner if you cultivate a knack 
for tracking trends, spotting potential trends, or even creating game-changing 
trends (as in the case of Vosges). Getting in on the ground floor and exporting 
a product before it becomes a super seller in its country of origin could be the 
business breakthrough of a lifetime! Remember the popular line of stuffed ani-
mals called Beanie Babies, or the Cabbage Patch dolls? Had you realized those 
products’ export potential early on before they became best-selling products, 
you would have made yourself a millionaire four times over in a very short 
period of time (assuming you could arrange distribution or licensing deals). 
That’s the kind of foresight needed to pick export winners. 
 
■ Tip  In addition to choosing a product that sells, there must be a competitive global advantage. 
Are you the only expert on earth who knows how to make safe and reliable o-rings (mechanical 
gaskets), produce an e-paper watch for the iPhone and Android platforms, or use light-emitting diodes 
(LEDs) and computer-driven imagery? If so, you have a core competency and can gain a competitive 
advantage in the global marketplace—most likely achieving more with less—by bringing a unique 
good or service to market that your competitors can’t easily replicate. Consider it a strategic business 
function. If you don’t have a competitive advantage right away, get it: research a product, study 
cultures, find people who know something unique, and innovate—push the envelope yourself.  
 What to Look for in Your Relationship with 
the Manufacturer 
 To ensure a good fit between you, in your capacity as exporter, and a  domestic 
manufacturer  with a product you want to sell globally, here are some things 
you should watch for:
• 
 Good chemistry between you and your key contact (you 
can usually tell right away), and preferably with all of the 
top management as well. This helps ensure a company-
wide commitment to the export program  
• 
 Trust is vital for creating and maintaining loyal customers, 
employees and suppliers and is the most valuable asset in 
a relationship  

Exporting
195
• 
 Detailed product information  
• 
 Impressive packaging, quality, convenience and price  
• 
 A company environment that is friendly, creative, and well 
organized at both operational and administrative levels  
• 
 A company positioned to achieve a world-class reputa-
tion in the industry  
• 
 Responsiveness on two different levels: speed of service 
and sensitivity to your needs  
• 
 Prominent online social status (having a Facebook page 
and Twitter, LinkedIn, and Google+ business accounts)  
 These traits are positive indications that you will achieve success in your 
export sales efforts. Look for them on every level as you search for a manu-
facturer to supply a product for export. 
 Can the Manufacturer Keep Up with Demand? 
 After you have found companies that manufacture the product you wish to 
export, you must make sure they can keep up with  customer demand  . Here 
are some ways you can check:
• 
 Look for information about them on ThomasNet.com . When 
you’re narrowing your list to the most likely prospects, 
refer to ThomasNet.com ( http://www.thomasnet.com  ) 
for information on company size, sales volume, number of 
employees, and so forth.  
• 
 Order an International Company Profile . The profile details 
a company’s key officers and senior management, bank-
ing and other financial information, and market informa-
tion, including sales and profit figures, as well as potential 
liabilities (refer to:   http://www.export.gov/salesand-
marketing/eg_main_018198.asp  ). 
• 
 Survey retail stores to check product availability . If you spot 
the product you are interested in exporting in a major 
mass-merchandising outlet, there’s a good chance the 
manufacturer can keep up with demand. E-mail some 
out-of-state friends or family and see if they know about 
or have purchased the product. The wider the manufac-
turer’s distribution, the greater the likelihood that the 
manufacturer will be able to meet the demands of your 
overseas customer.  

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
196
• 
 Look for marketing/advertising by the company on billboards, 
print ads, and radio; coupons in newspaper inserts; and exten-
sive use of social media . All these forms of company expo-
sure cost money and, usually, the more a company spends 
on marketing/advertising, the greater the chance that it 
can keep up with consumer demand.  
• 
 Ask directly whether your prospective supplier can fulfill demand.  
When you meet with the representative at your prospective 
supplier, ask him directly, “Will you be able to keep up with 
demand—potentially a thousand-case order every week?”  
 Can You Keep Up with the Work? 
 Once you’ve found a likely domestic manufacturer, you must understand what 
will be required of both of you and make up your mind that you will be able 
to do what it takes to carry out the proposal you’re about to make. When you 
speak, you’ll need to be prepared to inspire confidence. You’ll have to have a 
passion for the product that equals or exceeds the manufacturer’s own. You’ll 
need to trust your own ability to export the product before manufacturers 
will put their trust in you. It’s that simple. If you come across as having doubts 
about your abilities, they will have doubts, too. 
 So let’s visualize the exporter’s  working life  . No two days will be alike. After 
six months, orders may begin to come in. They might be few in number but 
intimidatingly large in size. The details that need your attention may seem 
overwhelming. You may feel that you are in over your head. Take a deep breath, 
look in the mirror, and announce, “I am becoming an exporter,” because that’s 
exactly what’s happening. You won’t have time to worry—you’ll need to act 
and act fast. You’ll keep your chin up and work until the transaction is done. 
Then you’ll check to be sure you’re really done by making sure your clients 
and customers are satisfied. You and the manufacturer will have to get used 
to the idea that you’ll have to do the seemingly impossible on a regular basis. 
Convince yourself, and you will convince the manufacturer.  
 Scripting Your Call to the  Manufacturer  
 Before you make that first call (on the telephone or over Skype) to feel out 
your prospective manufacturer and hopefully set up a meeting, I suggest that 
you create a phone  script  . No matter how tedious it is to prepare, it can be 
a powerful sales tool. You might compose something along these lines. The 
exporter, in this example, is based in Chicago (my hometown):
 Exporter: “May I speak with your export manager?” 
 Receptionist: “What does that refer to?” (Her not knowing is a good 
sign—it means an opportunity for you!) 

Exporting
197
 Exporter: “The person who is responsible for selling your products 
overseas.” 
 Receptionist: “Hmm, I don’t know who that would be. I’ll have to 
check. Would you hold on a moment, please?” 
 Receptionist: “Thank you for waiting. Sam Smith handles such things. 
He’s the person you need to talk with. I’ll put you through.” 
 Manufacturer: “Sam Smith speaking.” 
 Exporter: “Hello Mr. Smith, I’m Julie Jones, the founder of Jewelry 
Exporting Co., an exporter of high-quality, affordable costume jewelry. 
I understand your company manufactures this type of product. We 
are seeking new sources of supply for our overseas customers. Are 
you interested in exploring new markets and increasing sales? Our 
jewelry exporting firm can give you instant access to  customers 
worldwide . . . .” 
 In order to set up a meeting, the call might continue like this:  
 Manufacturer: “Absolutely. I’d be happy to explore the opportunity. 
When would you like to meet?” 
 Exporter: “How does next Monday morning, 10 a.m., at your office 
sound?” 
 Manufacturer: “Perfect, I’ll see you then. Is there anything I should 
have available for our meeting?” 
 Exporter: “Yes, a company brochure, your current wholesale price 
schedule, product samples, and any other important information 
that you think is important to our discussion. If we have a good fit, I’ll 
need more brochures, say, twenty, that I can use for my customers.” 
 Manufacturer: “No problem. I’ll see that we have them available.” 
 Exporter: “One more thing. I don’t think it’s critical for this initial 
meeting, but if things go smoothly when we meet next week and 
you decide to use our services, you might want to ask your top 
management to be a part of our subsequent session to make sure 
we have their commitment to our export program.” 
 Manufacturer: “I’ll see if they are available when I hang up. If so, we 
can have them attend next time.” 
 Exporter: “Great! I look forward to meeting you on Monday. And 
incidentally, Mr. Smith, if you choose us to represent you in your 
export transactions, our profits are earned directly out of the sales we 
generate for you. You cannot get any more cost-efficient than that!”  

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
198
 Sometimes you are too far away from being in the position to propose such 
a meeting. Instead, you want to elicit interest but also get some additional 
information and sales materials. In response to your question “Are you inter-
ested in exploring new markets and increasing sales?” your call might continue 
something like this:
 Manufacturer: “Absolutely. I’d be happy to discuss the opportunity.” 
 Exporter: “Would you be kind enough to send me your company 
brochure?” 
 Manufacturer: “Sure. I’ll get one out by e-mail today.” 
 Exporter: “Thank you. In the meantime, I’ll also send an e-mail to 
you, furnishing you with my company background.” 
 Manufacturer: “That would be great. I look forward to receiving it.” 
 Exporter: “Good. If we have a good fit, the next step is to set up a 
meeting. What would be more convenient, your office or mine?” 
 Manufacturer: “I generally get to Chicago once a month. Perhaps on 
my next trip we can arrange a meeting at your office.” 
 Exporter: “That would be fine. I’ll phone you in a week or two.”  
 
■ Tip  I urge you to also script out a list of potential objections that a manufacturer might have 
as to whether your company will be able to get a foot in the door (pricing, not understanding the 
process, no need for your service, and credibility, for example) that you can prepare to overcome 
well in advance of your communications. The more you know about your decision maker and the 
key people who influence his decisions (the latter can prove far more important than you realize), 
the greater your chance of achieving successful results in your outreach effort. When you’re done, 
determine what worked, what didn’t, and what your next steps are. 
 Setting up the script helps to keep you focused and effective on the phone. It 
will also help you accomplish what you set out to achieve: an appointment to 
sell your export service or a request for information to review. The script is 
there to lend structure, not to constrain you, so tailor it to fit your style—in 
it, you can be knowledgeable, be friendly, and be yourself. Rehearse your pitch 
to your friends. If it inspires a small amount of ridicule, you’re on your way to 
developing a winning script, because you have their attention. Find out why 
they’re poking fun and improve your script. 
 It’s a given that there will be rejections, put-offs, and “Call-me-again-in-six 
months” responses, but that doesn’t mean that you are ineffective in your 
approach. It means that the party you are calling is not interested—or is 

Exporting
199
busy—at the time. Accept that and move on. Don’t dwell on it or belabor the 
issue. But when a contact seems interested, sell yourself and your service for 
all you’re worth and zero in on the appointment date or the request for infor-
mation. After a few calls to prospective manufacturers, you will feel confident 
without the script. Once you reach that point, don’t throw it out—pass it on 
to the next aspiring exporter! 
 From there, the next step is to make sure you are thoroughly prepared for 
your next contact with the manufacturer.  
 Meeting with the Manufacturer 
 Once you have gathered information on your prospective supplier’s product 
and reviewed the product for export readiness, you must convince the manu-
facturer that you are capable of exporting the company’s widget to a remote 
part of the world. How do you go about it? 
 It goes like this:  focus, explain, emphasize, and stroke  .
• 
 Focus on the target market. Give the manufacturer an 
introduction to the market conditions in an unknown 
country. This will intrigue him.  
• 
 Explain how you do all the work and incur all the risks.  
• 
 Emphasize that he will make most of the money from the 
transaction. 
• 
 Stroke him by enumerating the benefits you can bring to 
his business by exploring export markets on his behalf.  
 Your goal is to get the manufacturer excited about the possibilities and to 
convince him that you’ve got the expertise to pull it off. It’s best to be pre-
pared for a range of possible responses. Your follow-up exchange might go 
like this:
 Exporter: “Do you sell to Stockholm, Sweden?” 
 Manufacturer: “Never heard of the place.” 
 Exporter: “Well, I think you’re going to like it! I’m in touch with 
several agents and distributors over there who are looking for your 
type of product, and that means fast, hassle-free additional business 
for you!” 
 Manufacturer:  “Sounds great! How do we get started?” 
 In this instance, you’re breaking totally new ground for him, so you can offer 
him your strategy as to how to get started. But you might find yourself dealing 
with a manufacturer who already has some international operations in place. 

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
200
If you want to get in on that action, you must convince the person you’re deal-
ing with that you are flexible, cooperative, and interested primarily in generat-
ing additional business for him. Here’s how you might work such a situation 
to your advantage:
 Exporter: “I have contacts in Stockholm, Sweden. May I offer your 
products there? 
 Manufacturer: “We already do business there.” 
 Exporter: “On an exclusive basis?” 
 Manufacturer: “No, but we are open to expanding our business there.” 
 Exporter: “I sell through importing distributors who service the 
mail-order gift business over there. Does that differ from your 
present customer base?” 
 Manufacturer: “Yes. Right now we sell only to small mom-and-pop 
retail outlets that are serviced by a local trading company.” 
 Exporter: “If I generate reasonable business within a few months, 
will you allow me exclusivity in Stockholm on all mail-order gift 
business?” 
 Manufacturer: “If I see you generate the sales, I’ll have no problem 
giving you exclusivity.” 
 Exporter: “Fair enough! I am confident that I can generate the sales 
you’ll want to see in six months. At that point, if it is acceptable 
to you, I would like to meet with you to work up an agreement 
protecting my efforts.” 
 Manufactu rer: “Fine. In the meantime, let’s get some idea of what you 
need to get started.” 
 It’s a good idea to come prepared with a market analysis so you can convince 
the manufacturer that you have enough insight into the marketplace and com-
petition to generate the amount of sales for his widget that you proposed. 
Your dialogue might go like this:
 Exporter: “I’m interested in exporting your widget to Stockholm. 
Are you interested in having me represent you on an export basis?” 
 Manufacturer: “What makes you think you can export our widget 
to Stockholm?” 

Exporting
201
 Exporter: “I have researched the market and found that there’s a 
shortage of quality machine parts of this particular class. They will 
be lining up to buy your widget! I’ve got contacts lined up who’d 
jump at the chance to purchase it for distribution. I know for a fact 
that your competitors aren’t there—you’ll really be getting a jump 
on them!” 
 Manufacturer: “So what do you need from me?” 
 Exporter: “Color catalog sheets, your lowest possible price list, and 
eventually product samples for customer review.” 
 Manufacturer: “That’s it?” 
 Exporter: “Well, I’ll also be coming up with all kinds of questions 
along the way, and so will my customers. If I’m going to serve them 
properly, I’ll need you to line up someone from your firm who knows 
your business and products inside and out to be my key contact.” 
 Manufacturer: “No problem. I’ll assign Joe Helpful. He’s been with 
the firm for more than twenty years and has always wanted to sell 
our products worldwide.” 
 Exporter: “Sounds like an ideal export front man! I should meet him 
as soon as possible.” 
 Manufacturer: “How about tomorrow?” 
 Exporter: “Great. At that time, we can nail down the next round 
of details.” 
 In an exchange like this, you win over the manufacturer by showing him that 
you have a well-thought-out and workable plan. Being able to provide detailed, 
specific information about potential product success and the resources you’ll 
need to launch the export effort will help you to convince the manufacturer 
that you have the knowledge and skills to take the company global. 
 Now that you have gone to the trouble of finding a product to export and 
proving to a manufacturer you  can export it, it’s time to consider whether you 
need a written agreement as to how you will do business with the company.  
 Export Sales Agreements  
 I’ve been asked by many an exporter whether to get a contractual agree-
ment drawing up export sales terms and conditions between itself and the 
manufacturer. The answer is yes. Most international lawyers feel the export 
sales agreement is by far the most important single document in an export 
sales transaction. Yet oftentimes, I feel that the person asking the question is 
in danger of making what they are about to do more complicated than it has 

Chapter 11 | Choosing a Product to Export
202
to be. You don’t need to overanalyze the relationship or try to hedge yourself 
against every conceivable risk. It’s lack of confidence that causes most people 
to lock up and avoid doing business outside of their comfort zone. Granted, 
you should inform yourself about all options available to you, but when you 
know what you want to do and can do it reasonably well, get on with it. The 
rest will fall into place. 
 However, if you do not trust the manufacturer, you should not enter into any 
kind of business relationship with that company! Sometimes, though, a cus-
tomer will ask you to source a certain product, so you will find yourself doing 
business with people you would have preferred to avoid. If that is the case, and 
you are picking up bad vibes from your supplier, then absolutely, positively, get 
everything in writing. 
 Draft something simple that meets your needs and those of the manufacturer, 
including a complete specification of pricing, quantity of goods to be sold, 
commission (if applicable), geographic jurisdiction, exclusivity or nonexclusiv-
ity, duration of contract, and so forth. The more specific and clear the agree-
ment is, the more useful it will be for enforcing everything you expect done. 
Before you proceed with securing the manufacturer’s signature, consult with 
an international attorney to minimize potential risks, including but not limited 
to protecting a manufacturer’s intellectual property rights. One last critical 
thing that everyone tends to overlook: you need to establish a clear under-
standing of how to get out of the contract should it not work. 
 
■ Tip  For general requirements for an export contract, go to   http://www.tradeforum.
org/Export-Contracts/  . The International Trade Centre has produced guidelines to get you 
started. But remember—the best export sales agreement in the world will not protect you against 
a company that is a royal pain in the #@* and produces zero results. 
 In most cases, though, if you have a healthy exporter-supplier relationship, 
you will sense mutual trust. There will be no need for a contract because you 
will both see the relationship as a win-win situation. If you generate business 
overseas, your supplier will be loyal. If you do not, it will look elsewhere to find 
opportunities to grow the business internationally. So beware—be absolutely 
sure you can deliver results or else bargain for a contract that will protect you.  

Exporting
203
 Summary 
 Select a product you make, or represent a company who makes a product 
that is exportable, that is successful in its present domestic operation, and 
that has the look and feel of export potential (meaning everybody—every-
where—absolutely loves it). Go to market with what you are familiar with. 
View whatever the potential in front of you is through the eyes of consum-
ers in the export market of choice. When it comes to picking a product for 
export, that’s a winning formula for export success. 
 Even if a manufacturer, as well as your own operation and top brass, gives you 
the go-ahead with very little discussion or needs convincing with hardcore 
facts and figures, at some point you’ll have to face the task of finding promising 
markets for your chosen export product—and it’s not an easy one. Luckily, 
there’s a world of online resource help out there! In the next chapter, I’ll guide 
you through the complicated and time-consuming job of market research and 
introduce you to a wide array of government-sponsored and private sources 
of assistance for all the phases of your export project.  
 Notes 
  i.   “It’s a Small (Business) World: The Benefits of Exporting,” 
Karen Mills,  Huffington Post , March 6, 2013,   http://www.
huffingtonpost.com/karen-mills/small-busi-
ness-exporting_b_2814446.html  . 
  ii.   “2 nd Global SME Ministerial,” Maria Contreras-Sweet, 
March 15, 2016,   https://www.sba.gov/content/2nd-
global-sme-ministerial  .  
 iii.    http://trade.gov/press/press-releases/2014/
export-factsheet-december2014-120514.pdf  . 
 iv.   Vosges Haut-Chocolat “The Story,” accessed March 24, 
2016,   http://www.vosgeschocolate.com/story/ .  
  v.   Vosges Haut-Chocolat, “The Story,” accessed March 24, 2016,  
  http://www.vosgeschocolate.com/story/. 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_12
 C H A P T E R 
  Exploring Your 
Territory 
 How to Research and Pick the Best 
Foreign Market  
 “But what I want to  emphasize  is that exporting is worth it,”  Barber 
continued. “That trade is good for your business and for the U.S. And that 
exporting success is well within your reach.” 
 —President of UPS International Jim Barber  i 
 “How in the world do you figure out what the next big thing is?” he 
[Steve Jobs] asked. I [Noland Bushnell] replied, “You have to be aware of 
everything that’s going on, and be open to adapting to it.” 
 —“Finding the Next Steve Jobs: How to Find, Keep, and Nurture 
Talent,” Noland Bushnell, Gene Stone  ii 
 Once you’ve decided on a product to export, you’ve got to  find an export 
market  where you can sell it profitably. At this point, I am assuming you know 
what you need to do to get export ready based on the results of the export 
readiness questionnaire you took in Chapter   1 . As for market research, it can 
be a slow, painstaking, and tedious chore, but as you add to your knowledge, 
12

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
206
by tracking the movement of goods and tapping into the world’s networks of 
purchasing and distribution, you will create your own living and changing map 
of international trade that will serve you throughout your export business. 
 There are a variety of methods by which a company can locate the best—
meaning the right—potential foreign markets for its product or service. This 
chapter outlines a range of efficient methods for researching export markets, 
focusing on where to get export-market data and intelligence, and how to 
use it. 
 Since you will be consulting a variety of resources, you will want to take some 
time to plan your approach. In this chapter, I offer you ways to nail down spe-
cifics about your product, your consumer, and the market conditions neces-
sary to support healthy sales of your product—all of which will help you to 
identify a hot target market when you move on to your research. 
 You will be assembling information about two kinds of  customers  : the every-
day citizen who buys goods for personal use (B-to-C) and the various high-
volume traders who buy goods from you to sell to other businesses (B-to-B; 
refer to Chapter   8 for more on both kinds of transactions). I will provide you 
with numerous ways to find out about both kinds of customers, so that you 
can determine what modifications, if any, will be needed to prepare the prod-
uct for your target markets. You’ll find that there are dense networks of infor-
mation and support, largely government sponsored, for every aspect of the 
development of your export business. Most of these sources of assistance are 
easily accessible online and within the reach of even a modest operating bud-
get. Once you have a good idea of where and how to direct your marketing 
efforts, you can create an action plan to get your export program underway. 
 
■ Caution   In the words of the late Steve Jobs: “Some people say, ‘Give the customers what 
they want.’ But that’s not my approach. Our job is to figure out what they’re going to want before 
they do. I think Henry Ford once said, ‘If I’d asked customers what they wanted, they would have 
told me, ‘A faster horse!” People don’t know what they want until you show it to them. That’s why 
I never rely on market research. Our task is to read things that are not yet on the page.”  iii Keep 
Jobs’s remark in mind as you conduct your market research, and use gut instinct, humanity, and 
commonsense as you research data. But don’t get analysis paralysis where you keep researching 
but never take action. That’s the worst outcome. And never forget the end user—the customer—
for that is who buys the products and services. 

Exporting
207
 Market Research—a Dreaded Chore, a 
Powerful Tool 
 One of the tasks I dreaded while getting my business underway was conduct-
ing  market research  . I hated it because it cost both time and money. When I 
promised a potential supplier that I would study a foreign market to determine 
whether it would be receptive to the product, I would rack my brain about (a) 
how I would go about it and (b) how I would go about it inexpensively! 
 Sometimes you’ll get lucky and an inquiry will land in your e-mail inbox point-
ing you right to an ideal market for a product. For example, you might have 
a friend who runs a company in Botswana and loves a certain type of sandal 
but can’t find it there. He contacts you and asks you to source a supplier of 
the shoe or an equivalent product. You now have a country (Botswana) to 
export to, a potential buyer (your friend’s company) to sell to, and a product 
(a sandal not available in Botswana) to offer. Furthermore, now that you know 
that these sandals or anything like them are not sold in Botswana, you’ve been 
alerted to an untapped market that you can develop on a larger scale. But 
don’t take these windfalls for granted. If you want to keep the orders coming 
in, you’re going to have to ramp up your social media conversations and go 
out and approach customers. Market research tells you where customers can 
be found. 
 Your first market research project is usually the toughest because it’s all unfa-
miliar terrain. But once you have searched out the data you need in order to 
predict how a specific type of product will sell in a specific geographic location, 
you can use the information over and over again as a guideline for exports of 
similar products in the future. As you build your personal information data-
base on global markets and learn to keep yourself up to date on developments 
in international trade, it will become less and less of a chore to determine 
where to take your product. You will find that market research is a powerful 
tool for exploring and taking control of your export territory.  
 Get Yourself Organized 
 There is no getting around the fact that market research is  not a tidy, linear 
process! It involves several closely related objectives: to put together a work-
ing profile of your actual consumer or end user; to determine if the country’s 
market conditions (its economy, demographics, level of political stability, trade 
barriers, distribution system, competition, transportation, and storage, etc.) 
will favor or hinder your product’s success; and to identify the people who will 
buy your product from you (consumers, wholesalers, importers, etc.). Before 
you consult your resources, I recommend that you sit down with pen and 
paper or PC (it can be a tablet if you prefer), and try the following procedures 

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
208
to help you structure the task. The idea here is to establish a few attractive or 
promising directions for your investigations and to clarify exactly what kinds 
of information you’ll be looking for.  
 Choosing Your Market  —Pleasure, Profit, 
Competitive Advantage, or  Challenge  ? 
 In Chapter   2 , I talked about the various motivations that might guide your 
choice of a product to export. When deciding where to concentrate your 
sales efforts, the same range of motivations comes into play. You should 
choose a market that intrigues you, is easy to reach, presents a competitive 
advantage, or offers a challenge and then consider products that you might 
want to sell there. You will be visiting this market frequently and getting to 
know its people intimately, so, just as you should pick a product that will 
delight you for years to come, you should plan on exporting to a country that 
delights and fascinates you. If you are enthralled with French culture and you 
are excited at the prospect of cracking that market, then you want to sell to 
France. If you have dolls to sell, you should sell them to France. It’s a place to 
start! But use common sense: Don’t ignore other countries that offer good 
prospects for your dolls, and don’t expend too much time and energy on your 
first-choice market if it turns out to be a poor prospect. The trick is to find 
the right market. 
 
■ Tip  Even though in Chapter   2  I talked about selecting a product that is wildly successful on 
the domestic front to export, don’t overlook the possibility and opportunity of selling products that 
are less successful in the United States, as they could be in high demand elsewhere. Say you 
manufacture two different types of dolls—one that uses high-end materials and is very expensive 
and the other low-end and quite inexpensive. The glamorous high-end doll sells magnificently in 
your local market, but the moderately priced doll is more appealing and affordable overseas. The 
only way to discover this is through extensive research of foreign countries. 
 If you start your market research and find out that there’s no demand for dolls 
in France, you can always move on and pick another market. But stick to dolls, 
because that’s what you manufacture and are comfortable with and knowl-
edgeable about. Unless you’ve exhausted all of the options on your product of 
choice, it’s best to stay as close to your original plan as possible—entertaining 
too many possibilities can put you off track and cause you to lose your confi-
dence and enthusiasm. 

Exporting
209
 If easy profits with minimal effort and exercise of business ingenuity are your 
priorities, you can just use your domestic market as a model. If you take a 
careful look at where, to whom, and why a product is selling well in your 
country and then locate markets abroad with similar demographics, chances 
are that the demand will be similar. A bonus: minimal product modification, if 
any, will be required.  
 Segmenting Your Product  and Market 
 Another important aspect that will help you focus your research is categoriz-
ing or  segmenting  your product and target market by making lists of the rel-
evant factors. Take the dolls, for example. What type of dolls are you going to 
export? Baby dolls? Antique? For boys? For girls? Talking? Educational? Under 
each product segment, list the categories of likely customers until you reach 
the end user for your product. Once you determine who your customer is, 
what she buys, when she buys, how often she buys, and why she buys, you’ve 
got a customer profile. For example, your customers for girls’ dolls might 
include manufacturers, wholesalers, independent doll shops, big box stores, 
and e-commerce platforms, as well as private citizens. Push your lists as far as 
you can—it might take anywhere from one to ten categorizations before you 
can reach optimum segmentation. 
 Use a format like this for your list:
 1.   I’m going to export: _____________ (product)  
 2.  Specifically these types: _____________ (type of 
product), _____________ (type of target customer), 
_____________ (type of buyer).  
 3.  I’m going to export to: _____________ (country)  
 Your completed list might look like this:
 1.  I’m going to export  “dolls”  (product). 
 2.  Specifically these types: “ educational dolls”  (type of prod-
uct), “ for girls ages seven to ten”  (type of target cus-
tomer), “ to importing wholesalers of educational toys 
and direct via e-commerce”  (type of buyer).  
 3.  I’m going to export to “ France”  (country).  
 Through this exercise, you will sufficiently narrow down search categories so 
that you are ready to conduct a search via Google, Bing, or Yahoo!. You will 
also be ready to send an e-mail to a trade officer to ask a specific question or 
set up an appointment with the Small Business Administration or US Export 
Assistance Center for help. Refer to your list and refer to it frequently to keep 
you on track.  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
210
 Will Your Product Succeed in Your Market of 
Choice? 
 Once you have a good idea of what you want to export and where to, you can 
fill out your picture of  market conditions  by answering questions like these:
 1.  Who will buy your product and why?  
 2.   What is the size of the market?  
 3.   Who is your competition?  
 4.   How competitive can you be?  
 5.  How new is the product to the market you have selected?  
 6.  Are there growth opportunities in the market?  
 7.  What do the country’s demographic profile, economy, 
and mass culture look like right now? (Its macroeco-
nomic indicators such as GDP growth, employment, and 
birth rates will give you an overview of the state of the 
economy and population.) 
 8.  Are there demographic, economic, or cultural trends that 
will shape the market in the future?  
 9.  Does the country’s government help or hinder the sale of 
imported goods? For example, are there any barriers to 
entry or to sales within the market?  
  10.   Will the country’s climate or geography present logistical 
problems for sales of your product of choice? For exam-
ple, selling chocolates to countries with warm climates 
such as in Brazil.  
  11.   Does the product have to be adapted to your target mar-
ket by way of a physical reconstruction, a new package, or 
a change in servicing practices? (See Chapter   13 for more 
details on preparing your product for export.)  
  12.  Will we need to translate or localize product labeling, 
packaging, collateral material and website immediately?  
  13.  Does the product have the same use in the international 
market as in the home market?  

Exporting
211
  14.  Does the product require personal after-sales service 
and, if so, can you provide it in the prospective market?  
  15.  Does the country’s government have a trade agreement 
in place with your own country? For example, the United 
States currently has trade agreements in place with 20 
countries and some still pending. 
 
■ Tip  Many new exporters look at where their competitors are exporting to and then investigate 
country and industry reports to identify the export trends and growing markets for their product 
or within their industry. Trade associations, US government online portals, and reports from other 
global organizations are an excellent source for this type of information. Because Canada and New 
Mexico border the United States and are a part of NAFTA, they are a good starting point for new 
exporters. 
 Use your own business sense and add to the list. Once you actually start your 
research, more questions will arise. This is all part of the process of turning 
your vague ambitions into a concrete strategy based on market realities, so 
the more smart questions you ask and answer, the better your chances of 
success. 
 Once you have narrowed down your options and answered all the questions, 
take the following steps, focusing on nine key areas (many of which—numbers 
4 through 6—can be accomplished through the helpful guidance of a good 
logistics specialist):
 1.  Conduct a country assessment that examines the coun-
try’s geographic, demographic, economic, cultural, politi-
cal, and legal systems and infrastructure.  
 2.  Perform a market assessment that examines the size, 
characteristics, and projected growth of the target 
market.  
 3.  Examine your competitors’ products, prices, marketing 
methods, and distribution channels.  
 4.   Find out if there are any licenses or certifications needed 
to export to the country (refer to Chapter   22 ). 
 5.  Learn about any tariffs and import regulations that will 
affect you (see Chapter   18 ).  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
212
 6.  Classify your product using one of the following com-
modity classification codes: Harmonized Tariff Schedule 
(HTS), Schedule B number (refer to Chapter   18 ), North 
American Industry Classification System (NAICS), or 
Standard International Trade Classification (SITC). Each 
of these classification systems allows you to assign a six-
to-ten-digit code to commodities so that trade data can 
be collected and analyzed in a consistent manner. For 
help with any of the terms or concepts, visit export.gov’s 
“Trade Data & Analysis” (  http://export.gov/trade-
data/index.asp  ).  
 7.   Determine how you will distribute your product or ser-
vice (using an agent, distributor, wholesaler, or e-com-
merce fulfillment—more in Chapter   17  ). 
 8.   Figure out your global competitive advantage. What are 
you bringing to the marketplace that no one else has or 
can offer?  
 9.   Test demand. Do a trial shipment to an interested cus-
tomer, exhibit at a trade show, participate in a catalog-
only show, or utilize a foreign-partner matching service. 
All of these methods allow you to sample test the mar-
ket, determine interest, and find out whether people will 
buy your product.  
 
■ Tip  Don’t rely entirely on the number of visitors to your online platform as a predictor of the 
e-commerce market demand for your product or service offering. Google’s Adwords program can 
give you an idea of how many monthly searches there are for specific keywords, say “tablet cases,” 
or phrases that relate to your product. A high volume of searches for one specific term does not 
necessarily ensure high market demand for your product, but it does provide a good starting point. 
Once you understand the market demand for products similar to yours, you can tailor your own Web 
site to meet the demands of consumers who may have an interest in your product. But again, this 
is all tied more to e-commerce and doesn’t necessarily indicate the demand of those who don’t use 
digital for purchases.  
 Keep Your Search on Track 
 Now you’re ready to take advantage of export-information resources. A word 
of caution: Any time you dig into a complex subject, especially an unfamiliar 
one, you are at risk of being sidetracked no matter how intelligent and orga-
nized you normally are! Keep your search efficient and focused so you waste 
as little time as possible. 

Exporting
213
 Remember that this  search  will be a messy and complicated one. You have 
seen that your search objectives are closely interrelated. To complicate mat-
ters even further, most of the resources I am about to list will have something 
to contribute to all three objectives: consumer demographics, market condi-
tions, and customer lists. You might find it useful to set up an information form 
for each potential market with a blank line for the name of the country at the 
top, a list of all your questions (leaving room for the answers), and spaces for 
customer names and addresses. If need be, break all the questions on your 
list into subcategory questions so you can see how the details you’re asking 
questions about belong to the larger picture you’re trying to put together. It’s 
a good idea to create this form on your computer or tablet. For one thing, it 
will allow you to print out blank copies as needed and bring spares with you 
(if you are doing an in-person meeting with an expert). For another, it will 
allow you to modify your question list easily and take all the room you need 
for filling in information. You might want to use the blank printed copies of 
your forms to make working notes and then type in your day’s findings on 
your master file on your tablet. If you want, you can print out your complete 
listings for each country you research and tape them up to your wall to make 
a “map” of likely markets. 
 You might also find it useful to bring your tablet to your research location 
or laptop using Evernote, for example—see chapter   9 —to keep you focused 
on one question at a time. If you are looking to find out whether your prod-
uct is marketable in Istanbul, offensive to Russians, or competitive to leading 
brands of similar products in Indonesia, write the question down in Evernote 
and put it right in front of your face. It will come in handy later when you are 
immersed in details with no end in sight. You will be able to just look at the 
note—you might have answered your question hours earlier! 
 And save yourself unnecessary fatigue and frustration by making sure you 
go to the right organization for the information you want, whether on the 
Internet or in person. Fruitless trips are discouraging. Call ahead and ask your 
major questions first—it will save you a trip if experts at one of the places we 
will discuss don’t have what you are looking for. 
 Now you’re ready to begin exploring your export territory. In the next sec-
tion we’ll look at a variety of information resources on international trade, 
many of which can be accessed online.  
 Export Market  Data : Where to Get It and 
How to Use It 
 The following resources offer a wealth of information on international trade. 
This list is not in any particular order; I recommend that you begin with 
whichever of your chosen resources is easiest to access. Once you’ve begun 

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
214
acquiring a body of knowledge, you’ll have a better idea of where to direct 
your search. There are both  physical locations  and Web sites that offer infor-
mation on international trade. 
 Physical Locations 
 We’ll start with the physical locations where you can go to obtain information 
on international trade. Most of them are run by federal government organiza-
tions and have multiple branches in all of the states. 
 Small Business Administration 
 One of the most important places you should go, and many people’s first stop, 
in order to seek high-powered export advice is your local Small Business 
Administration ( SBA  ) office or the equivalent government-sponsored small 
business support group in your country. When you hit the bookshelves there 
(many directories are available online, but in person you have the benefit of 
the assistance of real people), you’ll see directory after directory with intimi-
dating titles like  Report FT 410 (the census),  HS Code Directory ,  Trade Profiles 
(WTO Statistics Database), and so on. Luckily, the staff can help you navigate 
through them. Many of the people working at these organizations are retired 
from high-ranking positions in the corporate world and enjoy offering their 
years of experience to help others get a start. It’s best to come armed with 
concrete questions to help them help you. Write down exactly what you 
want to know and what you want to use it for. Don’t just throw up your hands 
and ask, “I want to export a product somewhere, can you assist 
 The export assistance available from the SBA includes training seminars and 
legal advice as well as answers to your questions. All export programs admin-
istered through the SBA are available through local branches. The SBA also 
serves as an administrative center for small business development centers; 
loan programs (funded by private lenders and backed by the government); and 
services for businesses owned by minorities, veterans, and women. Be sure to 
ask if you are eligible for these forms of assistance. In addition, each branch 
typically houses a business library, a computer center for business owners 
who don’t own their own equipment, and an office of the  Service Corps of 
Retired Executives (SCORE)  . The staff of SCORE, who work under the SBA’s 
umbrella, can match up small businesses with mentors who have experience 
in foreign trade and help new or experienced exporters develop an export 
strategy. 

Exporting
215
 Department of Commerce 
 Another stop should be your local branch of the  Department of Commerce 
(DOC)    , which houses twenty-one different Export Assistance Centers 
( EACs ; find one by going to   https://www.sba.gov/managing-business/
exporting/us-export-assistance-centers  ) in the United States that 
link to one hundred US cities and more than eighty countries worldwide 
by providing a comprehensive global network. The mission of the EAC net-
work is to deliver a comprehensive array of counseling and international trade 
services to US firms, particularly small- and medium-sized ones. The EAC 
offices have the appearance and feel of a private-sector export consulting 
firm, yet it is a federal agency that partners well with state resources and 
organizations that promote exports. Addresses and phone numbers for all 
district offices are yours for the asking. The centers give you access to the 
services of the US  DOC  , the International Trade Administration (ITA), the 
US Commercial Service, the Export-Import Bank of the United States, and 
the US Small Business Administration. Although the programs the organiza-
tion offers are geared mostly toward experienced, export-ready companies 
looking to enter new markets, it also offers a boatload of trade and finance 
assistance to established small- and mid-sized businesses. One-on-one coun-
seling is available. One of the simplest and handiest resources is the pamphlet 
 A Basic Guide to Exporting issued by the US Government Printing Office (it can 
be purchased from   http://export.gov/basicguide/ ). Although the guide 
focuses on exports from the United States, it also offers global advice on what 
is required to export from any point in the world. If the guide is not specific 
enough for you, check with the government programs that facilitate trade in 
your own country.  
 In addition to previously mentioned services, the DOC offers expert advice 
on export administration, trade adjustment assistance, travel and tourism, and 
minority businesses, to name just a few. Be sure to ask somebody about your 
specific situation, even if you don’t see it covered here. More likely than not, 
there’s someone who can help you. If not, you will be directed to other gov-
ernment service offices that can. 
 The following list is a sampling of information and services the DOC offers:
• 
 Exporting seminars, webinars, podcasts, conferences, 
trade missions, and exhibitions  
• 
 Offering financial aid to exporters  
• 
 Providing information on emerging international-trade 
opportunities  
• 
 Furnishing information on export documentation requirements  
• 
 Exporting statistics  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
216
• 
 Supplying readings on international trade  
• 
 Distributing information on licensing, patent, trademark, 
and protectionist practices abroad  
• 
 Providing counseling on general export marketing  issues  
• 
 Offering services to help you make cross-border con-
tacts and find agents and distributors (see Chapter   16 ) 
 US Commercial  Service  —An Exporter’s Gold Mine 
 Ever wonder who gathers all that information on trends and actual trade 
leads? It’s the US Commercial Service (USCS;   http://export.gov/world-
wide_us/index.asp  ). This wonderful resource is an exporter’s gold mine. 
 There are more than 1,400 trade professionals, all eager and waiting to help 
you go global, who are working in USCS’s 128 commercial offices, located in 
US embassies and consulates in more than seventy-five countries. Most of 
them have international experience, so they know what it takes to do business 
in the country in which they’re stationed. They put their invaluable under-
standing of local culture and prospective customer contacts at the service of 
the small business owner interested in entering overseas markets. 
 I used this resource within the first couple of weeks of starting my business. 
It proved extremely effective. I contacted the American embassy with a spe-
cific question: I was seeking a list of reputable food-importing wholesalers 
that specialized in high-volume product movement throughout Japan. Within 
twenty-four hours I received a reply from an agriculture trade officer indicat-
ing that a list was being forwarded by airmail (well before the days of e-mail). 
When I received it, I was excited about its potential and began contacting the 
companies right away. It was an ideal way to get started. 
 Here are just a few of the services the USCS overseas staff will provide at 
no charge:
• 
 Customer lists  
• 
 Sales representative and other agency-finding services  
• 
 Background checks on companies overseas  
• 
 Business counseling  
 Keep in mind that most state governments offer overseas business resource 
centers to help the small business executive tap into new markets. Check into 
these as well as the USCS—they usually work in tandem.  

Exporting
217
 Web Sites Brimming with Trade Statistics 
 There are also many Web sites that offer a wealth of trade information. 
 TradeStats Express  
 TradeStats  ( http://tse.export.gov/TSE/TSEhome.aspx ) provides the lat-
est annual and quarterly trade data, including national trade data and state 
export data.  
 USA Trade Online 
 The Foreign Trade Division of the US Census Bureau hosts  USA Trade Online  
(  https://usatrade.census.gov/ ), which allows you to access current and 
cumulative US export and import data for more than nine thousand export 
commodities and seventeen thousand import commodities.  
 Market Research Index 
 Hosted by export.gov,  Market Research Index  (  http://export.gov/mrk-
tresearch/  ) provides a step-by-step guide on how to get started in market 
research. In addition, you can access the Country Commercial Guides written 
by US Commercial Service trade experts worldwide (  http://www.export.
gov/ccg/  ). 
 BusinessUSA  
 BusinessUSA (  http://business.usa.gov/ ) is a centralized, one-stop plat-
form designed to make it easy for businesses to access services to help them 
grow (through exporting) and hire, regardless of where the information is 
located or which agency’s Web site, call center, or office they go to for help.  
 American National Standards Institute 
 The American National Standards Institute ( ANSI ;   http://www.standard-
sportal.org  ) provides answers to the critical standards, conformance, mar-
ket access, and trade-related questions that companies require to succeed in 
the U.S. and internationally.  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
218
 National District Export Council 
 The National District Export Council ( DEC ;   http://districtexport-
council.org/  ) consists of 16 DEC members who have been elected to the 
National DEC by DEC members from each of the eight U.S. Commercial 
Service Networks. The mission of DEC is to encourage and support exports 
of goods and services that strengthen individual companies, stimulate U.S. 
economic growth and create jobs.  
 United States International Trade Commission 
 The Web site of the  United States International Trade Commission  (  http://
www.usitc.gov  ) aims to administer US trade-remedy laws; provide the presi-
dent, the United States trade representative (USTR), and Congress with inde-
pendent quality analysis, information, and support on matters relating to tariffs 
and international trade and competitiveness; and maintain the Harmonized 
Tariff Schedule of the United States. Its goal is to contribute to the develop-
ment of a realistic US trade policy.  
 USEmbassy.gov  
 Run by the US Department of State, USEmbassy.gov: Websites of US Embassies, 
Consulates and Missions (  http://www.usembassy.gov/ ) provides links to 
the Web sites of the diplomatic organizations in many countries and features 
business information specific to those countries.  
 World Trade Organization 
 The World Trade Organization ( WTO  ;   http://www.wto.org/ ) is an organiza-
tion that focuses on opening up trade and sorting out trade problems as they 
arise. It is a forum for governments to negotiate trade agreements and a safe 
haven for them to settle trade disputes. It operates a system of trade rules.  
 Other Federal-Export Assistance Resources 
 There are also a handful of other organizations designed to assist you with 
federal exports. 
 Export-Import Bank of the United States 
 The Export-Import  Bank of the United States (Ex-Im Bank;   http://www.
exim.gov/  ) is a government agency that is responsible for assisting the export 
financing of US goods and services through a variety of loan guarantees and 
insurance programs (see Chapter   20 ).  

Exporting
219
 Foreign Agricultural Service 
 The Foreign Agricultural Service ( FAS  ) of the US Department of Agriculture 
(  http://www.fas.usda.gov/ ) provides a network of counselors, attachés, 
trade officers, commodity analysts, and marketing specialists to assist in mak-
ing contacts overseas. Check with your state or regional department.  
 Additional Resources  
 There are also various other agencies that may come in handy during your 
search for federal-research assistance. Although you probably will not need 
to contact these agencies at the outset of your operations, you should know 
about them. They are: The Overseas Private Investment Corporation ( OPIC  ; 
  http://www.opic.gov/ ), the  US Department of the Treasury  (  http://
www.treasury.gov/Pages/default.aspx  ),  USAID (the US Agency for 
International Development;   http://www.usaid.gov/  ), Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ;   http://www.oecd.
org  ), and the  Office of the US Trade Representative  (  http://www.ustr.
gov/about-us/trade-toolbox/us-government-trade-agencies  ). 
Most 
of these resources are available through the office of your local chamber of 
commerce or Small Business Administration. Check the Web sites for further 
information. 
 Local Colleges and Universities 
 Another important resource is the  colleges and universities  in your state. 
Contact them to see what type of international assistance they offer to small 
businesses interested in expanding overseas. You’ll find that nearly every 
major university offers what is referred to as a university outreach or part-
nership program, which extends university resources to individuals, groups, 
and communities. During the past few years, most campuses have focused 
on international development opportunities, offering services such as trade 
assistance, promotion of state exports, and trade research.  Southern Illinois 
University Edwardsville  (  http://www.siue.edu/business/itc/ ),  Michigan 
State University  (  http://globaledge.msu.edu/ ), and  Bradley University  
(  http://www.bradley.edu/academic/colleges/fcba/centers/turner/
sbdc/  ), for example, all have programs in place.  Michigan State University  
also offers a great resource called MPI (Market Potential Index:   http://
globaledge.msu.edu/knowledge-tools/mpi  ) to evaluate the potential of 
emerging markets as well as DIBS (GlobalEDGE Database of International 
Business Statistics:   http://globaledge.msu.edu/knowledge-tools/dibs ) 
that allows you to choose from thousands of variables in order to generate 
reports that synthesize and evaluate data from reliable sources. 

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
220
 In addition, many state and private educational institutions offer courses in 
exporting or going global. They may even cosponsor international trade semi-
nars with federal agencies or private-sector organizations. If you cannot find 
a school in your area that offers this type of service, be sure to search the 
Internet.  
 Local Library—Yes, They Still Exist, and for a Reason 
 Today, even a  small municipal-branch library  has state-of-the-art computer 
terminals with a connection to the Internet, allowing you to access all kinds 
of information that will help you strengthen your position in the international 
marketplace. Reservations for a computer can be made at any library location 
or remotely for the library you intend to visit. Check with the head librarian 
on how best to approach your search—and plan on using the library’s com-
puter-cataloguing facilities to shorten your search time and get your hands 
on the right materials faster. The days of the painstaking, tedious card-catalog 
search with pencil in hand are gone! The typical public-access search termi-
nal will enable you to type in one or more keywords and give you a listing 
of articles on those subjects. The entry for each article will include the title, 
author, name, and date of the periodical, and sometimes even an abstract of 
the article’s contents so you can tell immediately if it will serve your needs 
or not. Better yet, more and more libraries have installed printers beside 
their search terminals so you can print out your list and take it with you. This 
makes a huge difference in convenience and efficiency.  
 Business Intelligence Companies  
 For those who find visiting agencies in person too intimidating, time consum-
ing, or just plain old-fashioned, the following business intelligence companies 
arm you with critical and competitive information on US waterborne trade 
activity through an online searchable trade database, covering international 
trade activities throughout the world, for a fee:  PIERS  (  http://www.piers.
com  ),  Datamyne  (  http://www.datamyne.com ), and  ImportGenius  (  http://
www.importgenius.com  ). 
 
■ Tip  A little-known publication that is a huge source of trade data is the  Journal of  Commerce 
(JOC;   http://www.joc.com ). The magazine offers everything from a listing of the top hundred 
US exporters (including the top ten states exporting to China) to import/export trade leads and 
international trade news. What can you quickly glean from the data? Let’s say you see a lot of 
container shipments being exported to Brazil. Why is this happening? What is the commodity? 
What should you be looking at or doing relative to that kind of movement?  

Exporting
221
 Other Places to Look for Market Research Help 
 The following resources and tools offered by organizations provide advice and 
insight as well as statistics on international exporting: 
 Foreign Trade  
 Produced by the  US Census Bureau  , Foreign Trade (  http://www.census.
gov/foreign-trade/  ) is responsible for issuing regulations governing the 
reporting of all export shipments from the United States. It is the official 
source for US export and import statistics. If you’re searching for import or 
export statistics, information on export regulations, commodity classifications, 
or a host of other trade-related topics, this is the place to get the information 
you need.  
 The Export Practitioner 
 The   Export Practitioner (  http://www.exportprac.com/ ) is a monthly magazine 
devoted to providing news and analysis about the export-licensing require-
ments and law-enforcement activities of the commerce, state, and treasury 
departments. The information provided in the advance reports will help you 
better understand an issue and, at the same time, avoid costly legal troubles.  
 The Global Trade Magazine 
 Global Trade Magazine  (  http://www.globaltrademag.com/  ) educates read-
ers on ways to utilize the global marketplace to increase market share and 
corporate profits. They cover such industry segments as cargo transporta-
tion, banking, joint ventures, outsourcing, and expansion opportunities.  
 Ease of Doing Business Rankings 
 The  Doing Business site  , run by the International Finance Corporation and 
the World Bank, ranks economies on their ease of doing business, on a scale 
from 1 to 185 (  http://www.doingbusiness.org/rankings  ). A high rank-
ing on the Ease of Doing Business Index means the regulatory environment is 
more conducive to the starting and operation of a local firm. The index pro-
vides a bird’s-eye view on the potential of exporting to a given economy, too.  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
222
 The World Factbook 
 The  World Factbook  (  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/  ) is a reference guide produced by the Central 
Intelligence Agency that provides detailed information on history, people, gov-
ernment, economy, geography, communications, transportation, military, and 
transnational issues for 267 world entities.  
 US and World Population Clock  
 Produced by the United States Census Bureau of the US Department of 
Commerce, the US and World Population Clock (  http://www.census.gov/
popclock/  ) is a continuously updated population estimate based on earlier 
census figures, and serves as the leading source of quality data about the 
nation’s people and economy.  
 World Bank Atlas Method 
 The  World Bank Atlas Method  (  http://data.worldbank.org/about/
country-classifications/world-bank-atlas-method  ) uses the Atlas 
conversion factor to minimize exchange-rate fluctuations in the cross-coun-
try comparison of national incomes.  
 Euromonitor International 
 Euromonitor International  (  http://www.euromonitor.com/usa ) provides 
market research, business intelligence reports, and data and analysis on indus-
tries, economies, countries and consumers.  
 eAtlas of Global Development 
 The  eAtlas of Global Development (  http://www.app.collinsindicate.com/
worldbankatlas-global/en-us  ), produced by the World Bank, is a sophisti-
cated online interactive tool that maps and graphs more than 175 indicators 
from the World Bank’s development database. It allows users to easily and 
quickly transform data into customized visual comparisons across time, coun-
tries, and regions. 
 International Trade Statistics Yearbook 
 The  International Trade Statistics Yearbook (  http://comtrade.un.org/pb/ ) is 
a multivolume publication produced by the United Nations Statistics Division 
and the Department of Economic and Social Affairs that is featured on the 

Exporting
223
International Merchandise Trade Statistics Web site. The yearbook provides 
information on the world trade of individual commodities in 2014 and fea-
tures world-trade tables covering trade values and indices.  
 Bureau of Economic Analysis 
 A US Department of Commerce affiliate, the Bureau of Economic  Analysis  
(BEA;   http://www.bea.gov ) promotes a better understanding of the US 
economy by providing timely, relevant, and accurate economic accounts data 
in an objective and cost-effective manner. The bureau’s goal is to be the 
world’s most respected producer of economic accounts.  
 Binational Societies, Councils, and Trade Associations  
 There are also binational groups that will put you in touch with citizens of 
a country where you’d like to do business. You can search the Internet for 
the local branches. NAJAS (National Association of Japan-American  Societies  ; 
  http://www.us-japan.org/   ), the  US-China Business Council  (  https://www.
uschina.org/  ),  U.S.-Cuba Business Council  (  https://www.uschamber.com/
press-release/us-cuba-business-council-elects-gutierrez-chair  ), 
and the  US-India Business Council  (  http://www.usibc.com/  ), for example, 
all promote bilateral trade between the United States and the respective 
countries and also provide a stimulating social forum for people with com-
mon interests. 
 Check with your state to see if it has a foreign-relations or export council. 
Organizations like these usually assemble at least once a month, offering a 
forum for discussion about how to facilitate better international relations and 
expand trade. 
 Contacts made through business colleagues and associations can often also 
prove invaluable to exporters. Many states have associations that focus strictly 
on promoting world trade. Check with your local chamber of commerce to 
see which of these associations have chapters in your area and sit in on a 
meeting—and then sign up.  
 Additional Instant Resources  
 There are a number of additional online services that specialize in information 
about particular foreign markets, especially news about fast-breaking mar-
ket opportunities in fast-changing parts of the world. When you use these 
services, don’t forget to keep your segmentation schedule and your market-
issues list close at hand.

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
224
• 
 In addition to the previously mentioned ease of doing 
business rankings, the Doing Business site (  http://www.
doingbusiness.org/  ), run by the  World Bank Group a  nd 
the  International Finance Corporation,  provides objective 
measures of business regulations for local firms in 185 
economies and selected cities at the sub-national level.  
• 
 When all else fails, you can go back to the days of picking 
up the phone and call the US Department of Commerce 
Trade Information Center at 1-800-USA-TRAD[E] 
(1-800-872-8723).  
 Creating an  Action Plan  
 Once you’ve spent some time getting a picture of the international market for 
your product, you’ll want to make a plan for how you’re going to put your new 
knowledge to work. It’s best to tailor your plan to your day-to-day operating 
style or that of your organization. If you are action oriented and like immedi-
ate and tangible results, then structure your export plan so that you’ll see 
regular results or responses. If you are more methodical and conservative in 
your business habits, then structure your export plan to produce degrees of 
progress over a longer period of time. 
 Setting goals that will allow you to operate comfortably will generate regular 
signs of progress. For example, let’s say you have no export business at pres-
ent. Your goal might be to generate US$12,000 in international sales during 
one year. That’s US$1,000 a month, or US$250 a week. When you break this 
annual goal down into regular increments, it begins to look reachable. There 
is no point in setting overambitious goals. 
 
■ Tip  Are you already exporting? Where to? Expanding into new markets is the next logical step. 
If you’re currently exporting to Ireland, for example, then the United Kingdom might be a good 
complementary market to enter. Are you conducting business in Canada? Then try Mexico (due to 
NAFTA) since it’s close in proximity to the United States. It’s likely that similar conditions exist in 
other nearby markets too, indicating that your product or service could also be successful there. 
 Above all, your plan must be manageable for the person or persons who actu-
ally have to implement it. If you are beginning your export program as part 
of an existing company, it is particularly important to get and keep a top-to-
bottom companywide commitment to the export project.  
 Once you determine the style in which you want to conduct your export 
activities, the sales goals you hope to attain, and how fast you want to achieve 

Exporting
225
results, then draft your plan. Start with a short, specific statement that gives 
a comprehensive view of your program—you can break this down into more 
specific steps later. A simple plan might look like this:
• 
 All Alone Becky New to Exporting, Inc. 
 “I am going to e-mail product offerings to all the customers on the lists I’ve 
compiled. At the same time, I am going to ramp up marketing efforts via all 
social networks. I hope to receive a dozen inquiries within two weeks and 
at least one order within a month. If my results are not achieved within this 
time frame, then I will contact the appropriate government agencies and begin 
plans to participate in a trade show.”  
 If your company has a larger budget and more staff resources, your statement 
might look more like this:
• 
 ABC Conglomerate Exporting, Inc. 
 “We are going to allocate 10 percent of our company’s net profits to develop-
ing foreign markets. An export team will be appointed within three months. 
Informational and promotional brochures as well as pricing schedules suitable 
for exporting purposes will be developed during the following three months. 
Advertising and trade show activities will be implemented thereafter. Once 
market demand is identified, we expect to launch an e-commerce platform to 
sell to that specific overseas market.”  
 Summary 
 As you can see, preparing market research doesn’t have to be elaborate. It 
just has to be broken down into a series of manageable courses of action to 
be carried out during an estimated period of time. As you implement your 
plan, monitor it closely and expect to adjust it along the way to meet your 
objectives. And remember: the most important element of the plan of all is 
to keep trying! 
 So far, you’ve begun to learn about international markets for your product, to 
tap into the enormous network of export assistance that’s available to you, and 
to plan how you’re going to put these resources to work. Now you’re ready to 
take more ambitious measures to get in touch with serious players looking 
to buy what you’ve got to sell. If you want to catch their interest, though, you 
must first make sure that the product you have selected for export meets the 
target market’s local conditions. The following chapter gives a rundown on 
all the details you need to consider as you prepare your product for export.  

Chapter 12 | Exploring Your Territory
226
 Notes 
  i.   “Jim Barber, President of UPS International, Talks Global 
Trade at the Discover Global Markets Conference,” Bill 
Bryant,  Upside: The UPS Blog , accessed March 28, 2016, 
  http://blog.ups.com/2014/06/09/jim-barber-
president-of-ups-international-talks-global-
trade-at-the-discover-global-markets-confer-
ence/  .  
  ii.   Nolan Bushnell, Gene Stone,  Finding the Next Steve Jobs: 
How to Find, Keep, and Nurture Talent (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, reprint 2014), XV.  
 iii.   Walter Isaacson,  Steve Jobs (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2011), 567. 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_13
 C H A P T E R 
 Preparing 
and Adapting 
Your Product 
for the Export 
Marketplace 
 You may have heard the story that Coca-Cola translated into Chinese 
meant “bite the wax tadpole.” (Some think it’s an urban legend.) In fact, 
it’s true,   but the translation didn’t happen in the way you might think.”  
 —Phil Mooney, Coca-Cola Conversations  i 
 How about when Braniff International translated a slogan touting its finely 
upholstered seats “Fly in Leather” into Spanish as “Fly Naked.”  
 —“20 Epic Fails in Global Branding,” Inc.com  ii 
13

Chapter 13 |  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for 
   the Export Marketplace
228
 Many business owners believe it is only packaging that has to be adapted in 
the  overseas marketplace  . That’s a mistake. Adapting your  product  to meet 
the needs of an overseas market is a considerable undertaking and will likely 
require a substantial investment of time and money. 
 In the following pages, I talk about how packaging, labeling, and other product 
characteristics play a vital role in enabling international sales and what factors 
to consider when preparing your own product for export. I also include case 
study examples to better understand the process that goes along with modi-
fying a product to succeed in the export marketplace. 
 This phase of business is very important because there are differences in both 
the cultural and physical environments across countries. You should expect 
that to some degree you will have to dive deep into your customers’ cul-
ture to achieve your business goal and adapt your product to sell it outside 
domestic markets before you make your first sale. You’ll be well situated to 
tackle this phase after you have availed yourself of the market information 
resources outlined in the previous chapter, consulted with local government 
market experts, and communicated with various sources overseas: prospec-
tive customers, wholesalers, agents, embassies, and so on. 
 
■ Tip  To help you get a better idea of your cultural preferences and style and how they 
differ from those of other cultures, take an online assessment:   https://hbr.org/web/
assessment/2014/08/whats-your-cultural-profile  . Any big breaks that you spot 
between your style and others indicate the likelihood of misunderstandings and the need for you 
to be aware and adapt accordingly.  
 Studying competing products in the country where you wish to do business is 
a great way to target what works in that market. If you cannot visit the coun-
try and scan store shelves yourself, get in touch with the American Embassy 
and see if it can apprise you of what products are comparable to yours. 
 When it is not possible to sell the  standardized products and services  , a small 
business must adapt its product if it wants a global business. And although the 
changes might involve satisfying foreign countries’ regulatory requirements, 
the biggest test is always with the end user—the customer—because that’s 
who ultimately buys your product or service. If customers turn their noses 
up at your offering, even if you get regulatory approval, there will be no sales. 
Always keep the customer at the top of your mind and have empathy for oth-
ers’ point of view; it will lead to ideas for meeting cultural differences. 

Exporting
229
 Case Study: Hershey’s Yo-Man Satisfies the 
Sweet Tooth of Chinese Consumers 
 In 2013,  Hershey  introduced a candy to China. Known in English as the 
Lancaster and in Chinese as Yo-Man, it is a condensed-milk candy that Hershey 
expects will gain it a healthy share of an estimated ¥7.5 billion (in Chinese 
currency, which is equivalent to $1.2 billion) Chinese market. Premium-milk 
candy is considered the fastest-growing segment in  China’s  candy market. 
 This is Hershey’s first launch for a new brand beyond the US market. Hershey’s 
goal is to expand its overall international sales to 25 percent of its global sales by 
2017, up from its current 10 percent, which includes brand extensions and acquisi-
tions. The candy company had sales of $6.6 billion (2012), aims to reach $10 billion 
annually by 2017  iii and wants China to be its second-biggest market within five years. 
 Yo-Man will be manufactured in China by a local confectionary company in 
Hunan Province. Milk for the candy will be imported. Creating a new brand, 
and one that is specifically tailored for the Chinese market, is a good bet for 
Hershey. The company could have just as easily sold its Hershey Kisses and 
other related branded items without making any changes to the products, but 
that would send a message to the Chinese consumer that Hershey doesn’t 
care enough to suit that population’s particular taste buds. Or worse, the 
company might turn off the audience entirely by that move—forever—and 
open sweet opportunities for its competitors. It’s a perceptive judgment call, 
and Hershey has decided not to take a chance wondering  what if and instead 
is doing what is right for the Chinese market, its budget, and its resources.  
 Checklist to Prepare Your Product for  Export  
 So how do you go about getting your product ready for a foreign market, 
much like Hershey has done? Grab a sample of your export-ready product, 
get out your tablet to keep you organized, and let’s run through some rules of 
thumb to prepare your own product for export:
  1.   The name, logo, or tag line of your brand or product might work 
well in your local market but could have negative connota-
tions in a    foreign market’s local language . For example, in the 
1950s, there was a Swedish car magazine called  Fart , which 
in Swedish means “speed.” To Americans, however, the title 
meant a good laugh. Check to see what the translation of 
your brand’s name means in the language of the country 
you are about to enter. If you don’t, you will end up with a 
fiasco like Chevrolet had on its hands when it introduced 
its new automobile called the “Nova” in Venezuela—which 
in Spanish means, “Doesn’t go!”  

Chapter 13 |  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for 
   the Export Marketplace
230
 2.   The colors of your packaging need to take into  account 
cultural sensitivities . What do the colors connote in the 
country of destination? Vibrant, attention-grabbing red is 
often thought to signify warning or danger in the United 
States, but in Chinese culture it represents good luck. 
A slick black package with touches of embossed gold or 
silver conveys elegance and sophistication in the United 
States and some newly industrialized countries, but in 
certain parts of Africa, for example, it suggests death! 
Even if your design principles have been foolproof for 
products to be sold in the United States, expect to have 
to scrap them and start fresh when it comes to market-
ing products abroad.  
 3.  Look at the   overall packaging and labeling design  of your 
product. In addition to your color choices, your illustrations 
and graphics need to be appropriate, appealing, and under-
standable to your end user . If there is any possible way you 
can get opinions on your package design from actual 
consumers in your target market, do so. Would they 
buy your product on the basis of the way it looks? For 
example, if you put a smiling face on your package, but 
they take the purchase of that particular product quite 
seriously in their country, would your labeling be seen 
as trivial, cheap looking, or even offensive? Details like 
this matter, and they need to be thoroughly researched 
and addressed before shipping anything of significant 
value to a foreign market.  
 4.  The size or quantity of your product itself needs to match 
the  export country’s expectations . Your product’s size 
might be perfect by US standards but way too large in 
Japan, where the size of the typical household is very 
small. One Whopper may feed one American, but that 
same burger sold in France may make a lunch for two, 
or the extra burger might be tossed in the trash. If 
too much of your product will go to waste, it’s  not 
 economical or convenient for your consumer, and they 
won’t buy it.  

Exporting
231
 CASE STUDY: GIVE CUSTOMERS WHAT THEY WANT
 One of my past clients manufactured a very successful premium ice cream. 
Supermarkets throughout the United States could barely keep the decadent treat in 
their freezers because the demand was so great. The company wanted to build on 
this success by expanding internationally. It chose Japan as its entry point into the 
international market. The Japanese are exacting about quality and would appreciate 
this premium ice cream, it was  thought . 
 The test shipment fell flat. 
 What happened? My client looked deeper into the Japanese culture and discovered 
some very important differences betweens Americans and Japanese. First, Americans 
prefer gallon-sized containers, while the Japanese prefer individual-sized containers, 
which fit better into their smaller freezers. My client also discovered that the ice cream 
had too much sugar for Japanese tastes. 
 The company tried again; this time using a reduced-sugar recipe in individual-sized 
containers and shipping a twenty-foot freezer container to Japan monthly. Over time, 
that one freezer container a month grew to ten a month, and the company’s business 
in Japan was assured. 
 5.  Weights and measurements  vary from country to country . You 
must label your product according to local standard mea-
surements. The metric system is considered the global 
standard, but double check.  
 6.  The standard CE mark, which ensures consumer safety, is 
required on many products sold in EU countries . A manufac-
turer that has gone through the conformity-assessment 
process may then affix the  CE mark to the product. If you 
plan to do business in a country that is part of the EU, 
look into the benefits of securing the union’s approval, 
which will make your product appear safer in your target 
audience’s eyes.  
 7.   Look at how and where the product is sold . Do most con-
sumers like to make their  purchases online  in your 
export country? Or do they prefer to go to a local con-
venience store to make their purchases? It’s not about 
doing it your way. It’s about doing it in a way that the 
consumers of the home country prefer. Take the French 
cosmetics company L’Oréal, which is breaking the rules 
but with the hope of big payoffs. In Brazil, where women 
prefer door-to-door sales, L’Oréal will not be using 

Chapter 13 |  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for 
   the Export Marketplace
232
that approach. Instead, the company hopes its sales will 
increase by “creating six professional training centres - 
L'Oréal Professional institutes - in four Brazilian towns. 
These institutes aim to train and develop a new genera-
tion of contemporary hairdressers.”  iv Is L’Oréal attempt-
ing to make Brazilian women forget about that part of 
their culture? Only time will tell. Door-to-door vending is 
a long-standing custom in Brazil that has ushered millions 
of Brazilian women into the middle class. Some 2.5 mil-
lion women, out of a total female workforce of 42 million, 
earn a living by doing direct sales in Brazil.  v 
 
■ Tip  To cash in on growth in emerging markets,  Facebook is making adjustments to its social 
platform as it expands internationally. According to the  Wall Street Journal: “  [India] has about 100 
million Internet users mostly through desktops. But the real focus for digital companies will be on 
the group of 900 million-plus mobile-phone users, most of whom will get Web access for the first 
time over the coming years.”  vi Think that Facebook will adjust and accommodate those folks? More 
than likely it will, especially if it fuels its own growth. Look for Facebook to offer free access to a 
select set of websites to those without internet access in India, but not without running up against 
resistance from regulators.  vii 
 8.  Will you need to put a  bilingual label  on the outside of pack-
ages? Canada requires a French-English label. Finland 
requires a Finnish-Swedish one. Most Middle Eastern 
countries require it to be in Arabic-English. You must find 
out! For some destinations, the first order or trial ship-
ment requires only a sticker on the outside of the pack-
age in the language of the importing country. Generally, 
this sticker should state the importing agent’s name and 
address, the weight of the package in the country’s stan-
dard unit of measurement, an ingredient legend, and the 
expiration date if applicable.  
 
■ Caution   Even a close translation of your product’s name might not be close enough—“Jolly 
Green Giant,” for instance, translates into Arabic as “Intimidating Green Ogre.” Another example: 
Pinterest’s “pins” and “boards” are understood in the United States because it’s based on the 
concept of pinning things to a cork board. But in Brazilian Portuguese, for instance, users don’t 
understand the reference because pins in Brazil means for an item used to fasten a diaper. 

Exporting
233
 9.  Be careful of the  cultural significance  attached to the number 
of units you place in a box . Anytime you have a relatively 
small number of products packed showcase style in their 
box, check beforehand to make sure the quantity is not 
considered unlucky in the overseas market. Some coun-
tries, particularly in the West, find seven to be a lucky 
number and thirteen to be unlucky. In Japan, the number 
four is the sign of death, so packing anything four to a box 
will be the kiss of death for your marketing venture! (Not 
that you need to worry too much about the number of 
cookies in a single box.)  
  10.  Put pictures of your product on the label of your package . 
A  picture tells  a thousand words. When Americans read 
“pizza” on the outside of a box, they know what’s inside. 
But will they know what it means in New Caledonia? 
Probably not. Keep this in mind when you develop packag-
ing for worldwide sales. Illustrations are acceptable, two-
color pictures look nicer, but four-color photography on 
the label shows it like it is. Put yourself in the shoes of 
the prospective customer. If you don’t know what’s being 
sold, why buy it? Get visual: Images speak every language.  
  11.  Don’t skimp on  packaging material . If your packaging is 
behind the times in the United States, don’t think you’ll 
be able to unload it in the world market. Customers 
worldwide appreciate innovation and cutting-edge tech-
nology, and they  expect it from the United States. Don’t 
let your customers down. Keep informed on what is the 
newest and best in your packaging category.  
 
CASE STUDY: KEEP AN EYE ON THE COMPETITION
 My company used to export all-metal  tins  of gourmet nut snacks to Southeast Asia. 
We thought we were well received, until one customer asked why we didn’t package 
our snacks like a major competitor did: that company used a composite of tin and 
cardboard, which was safer and lighter—desirable qualities in Southeast Asia. 
Once we found a supplier that could manufacture the composite tin, we ordered 
enough labels for both the domestic and international markets. Listening to that one 
customer and making that one change grew our sales in Southeast Asia more than 
30 percent over one year.  

Chapter 13 |  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for 
   the Export Marketplace
234
 12.   Look for ways to  extend current product applications . This is 
where a few months of actually living in a foreign country 
would really pay off. It would teach you how the locals 
do things and what they need to be able to do things 
better. You may find that if you changed the speed of a 
kitchen mixer, a food item in China would be made bet-
ter and faster than ever before. Or you might want to 
reconfigure an existing vacuum attachment and it would 
be perfect for some out-of-the-way corners in Sri Lanka. 
Before you set out to do business in a particular country, 
ask some simple questions: How do the people there like 
to spend their time? What are their favorite foods? How 
do they clean their homes? How are their clothes laun-
dered? If you aren’t able to travel there, the information-
gathering strategies outlined in Chapter   5 should give you 
some answers along these lines.  
 13.  Make sure your  electrical products  are suitable and compatible 
for international use . If your wired product is not adjusted 
to the electrical standards in your target market, you’ll 
have all sorts of problems, especially if you have already 
shipped the unacceptable product! A good resource you 
should know about is   Electric Current Abroad (  http://www.
trade.gov/publications/pdfs/current2002FINAL.
pdf  ), a publication of the US Department of Commerce. 
It provides everything you need to know about electrical 
standards worldwide. If for some reason you don’t find 
the information you need, contact your local chamber of 
commerce or a government official in the country where 
you are about to do business.  
 14.   How will you handle warranties, guarantees, consignment 
sales, and service calls  overseas ? Anticipate what it will take 
to put one of these features in place, not locally, but glob-
ally. Can it be done? If so, map out the logistics from start 
to finish and determine who will be responsible. If it’s not 
feasible, then don’t offer it.  
 15.   Determine how the  physical environment affects  your product . 
Humidity, high energy costs, poor water supply, extreme 
hot or cold temperatures, or poor infrastructure can 
affect how your product holds up and works in a new 
market. You may only need to adjust your product to 
withstand a damaging environment, but if it’s a lot more 
than that you should choose a market that’s a better fit. 
If there are no roads to move your product, you can’t get 

Exporting
235
anywhere. Period. Consider the differences between your 
home market and the foreign market. For example, when 
air conditioners are exported to Egypt, they must have 
special filters and the coolers must be sturdy enough to 
handle the thick dust and heat of Egyptian summers.  
 16.   Determine how the  cultural environment affects  how you mar-
ket your product . When  Unilever  bought Slim-Fast in 2000, 
it wanted to expand the company’s market that existed 
outside North America, which accounted for more than 
90 percent of its sales at the time. Unilever wanted to 
increase Slim-Fast’s revenues fivefold by 2003. The com-
pany’s strategy was to plug Slim-Fast into its global mar-
keting and distribution system.  viii According to Smriti 
Chand Marketing, “When Slim-Fast was first launched in 
Germany, its ads used a local celebrity. In the U.K., tes-
timonials for diet aids may not feature celebrities . . . . 
[Also] in the U.K. banana was the most popular flavour 
but this flavour is not sold in continental Europe.”  ix This 
demonstrates the cultural effect each country has on a 
product and how vital it is to adapt to all the countries 
you export to in order to ensure that consumers love 
the product. Be aware of local customs and be willing to 
understand and accommodate any differences that can 
cause misunderstanding.  
 17.   Local product regulations  need to be scrutinized . In order to 
sell a product in retail stores or elsewhere, some coun-
tries require a statement on the product that indicates 
where it was made. Check with your prospective cus-
tomers or a logistics specialist to determine if a country-
of-origin label (see Chapter   22 ), for example, is required 
by law before you export a product to a foreign country.  
 Summary 
 It would be smart to determine if the anticipated export sales of your prod-
uct will outweigh the expense of adapting it to the country’s standards and 
to project how long will it take to recover the costs. You may find it more 
realistic, at least initially, to export your products to countries that will accept 
them as they are. From there, you can always grow and expand from your 
successes at your own pace. But keep a long-term perspective: being willing to 
make strategic changes to your product (a crucial attitude) will open doors to 
many more international markets. The risk is minimal compared to the risk of 
maintaining the status quo. 

Chapter 13 |  Preparing and Adapting Your Product for 
   the Export Marketplace
236
 
■ Tip  It’s crucial for your company to remain what it is (be it German, American, Japanese), 
but develop an understanding and willingness to accommodate cultural differences that exist. 
Follow that path, and great success in the export marketplace will come your way. 
 Now that we’ve spent a good deal of time looking at getting your product 
ready for export, we’ll shift our attention to exporting a service.  
 Notes 
  i.   “Bite the Wax Tadpole,” Phil Mooney, Coca-Cola Conver
sations, last revised March 6, 2008,   http://www.coca-cola-
conversations.com/2008/03/bite-the-wax-ta.html  .  
  ii.   “20 Epic Fails in Global Branding,” Geoffrey James, October 
29, 2014, accessed March 28, 2016, Inc.com,   http://www.
inc.com/geoffrey-james/the-20-worst-brand-
translations-of-all-time.html  .  
 iii.   “Hershey to Buy China Candy Maker,” Laurie Burkett, 
 Wall Street Journal , accessed March 28, 2016,   http://
www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270230477310
4579267634226586204  .  
 iv.   “L‘Oréal in Brazil,” Euromonitor 2013,  Wall Street Journal , 
accessed March 28, 2016,   http://www.loreal.com/media/
beauty-in/beauty-in-brazil/l'oréal-in-brazil  .  
  v.   “To L‘Oréal, Brazil’s Women Need New Style of 
Shopping,”  Wall Street Journal , Christina Passariello, last 
modified January 21, 2011,   http://online.wsj.com/
news/articles/SB10001424052748703951704576091
920875276938  .  
 vi.  “India, A New Facebook Testing Ground,” Amol Sharma, 
 Wall Street Journal , last modified October 20, 2012, 
  http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000087239639
0443749204578048384116646940.html  . 
 vii.   “Lessons from Facebook’s Fumble in India,” Bhaskar 
Chakravorti,  Harvard Business Review , February 16, 2016, 
accessed March 28, 2016,   https://hbr.org/2016/02/
lessons-from-facebooks-fumble-in-india  . 

Exporting
237
 viii.   “Unilever’s Slim-Fast Goes From Juggernaut to After 
thought,” Matthew Boyle,  Bloomberg , last modified January 
15, 2013,    http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-01-
14/unilever-s-slim-fast-goes-from-juggernaut-
to-afterthought.html  .  
 ix.   “5 Major Product Communications Strategies Used 
in International Marketing,” Smriti Chand Marketing, 
YourArticleLibrary.com, accessed October 24, 2013, 
  http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/marketing-
2/5-major-product-communication-strategies-
used-in-international-marketing/5834/  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_14
 C H A P T E R 
 Preparing Your 
Service for 
Export 
 Laughter is America’s most important export. 
 —Walt Disney 
 Exporting services  somehow doesn’t seem as impressive as putting big 
things on ships and sending them abroad. It also may not create the kind 
of broadly shared prosperity that exporting manufactured goods can. But 
for now, it seems to be where the U.S. has a comparative advantage—and 
we should probably do whatever we can to maintain that. 
 —Justin Fox  i 
 You don’t have to be a manufacturer to export. As you take your business 
into the digital age, you’ll find that keeping ahead of the competition takes 
more than just getting your product into world markets. You’ll also need to 
export superior services to cultivate additional strength. In this chapter, I’ll 
discuss exporting a service and how it differs from exporting a product. In 
addition, I’ll provide a brief look at services that have the best potential for 
export success, a list of the best international market prospects, and a couple 
of case examples. 
14

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
240
 The United States is the largest global importer and exporter of services in 
the world. Export.gov indicates that more than two-thirds of US small- and 
medium-sized exporters are nonmanufacturers. Business services alone—such 
as financial products, software publishing, and telecommunications—employ 
more than double the number of US workers in the manufacturing sector. And 
these jobs are not just ordinary blue-collar positions. They are white-collar 
services that involve high wages, high skills, high technology—and high growth! 
Because of this, the United States is likely to retain these jobs. 
 When it comes to services—such as travel, banking services, royalties, legal 
advice and education of foreign students—we export far more than we 
import. In each of the past five years, our surplus in services has exceeded 
$200 billion.  ii 
 Services are important because they account for most of the world economy 
and are steadily growing. Since 2000, their share of global output has expanded 
from 67 percent to 71 percent, while industry and agriculture have shrunk.  iii 
 U.S. service exports  continue to grow much faster than product exports, 
growing about 26% between 2010 and 2014, according to the World Trade 
Centre.  iv 
 And there is every indication that the growth will continue in the years ahead, 
with many countries currently emerging from a period of economic weakness 
and showing a strong demand for American know-how as well as American-
made goods. As long as countries’ local currencies remain fairly stable and 
technology continues to advance, this demand will continue to rise, notwith-
standing the ups and downs of the US dollar. Service exports typically don’t 
face tariffs, as goods sold overseas often do. 
 
AN EXAMPLE OF A SERVICE EXPORT: EDWARDS 
GLOBAL SERVICES PROVIDES EXEMPLARY SERVICES
 Take  Edwards Global Services   (EGS)      , the winner of the 2015 President’s E Star Award 
for export service. Presented by the Department of Commerce’s International Trade 
Administration, the award is the highest recognition any US entity can receive for 
supporting export activity. EGS was recognized for using a proven, stepped process 
that assesses the global potential for US-based franchisors to successfully expand 
into international markets, develops a business plan for them to go global, and then 
implements the plan using their experienced U.S.-based executive team and 
in-country associate network in 32 countries. 
 EGS has been in operation since 2001. In 2011, EGS was first given the President’s 
‘E’ Award for export services, and four years later received another award as a 
result of continued, documented success for the US-based franchises their company 
represents. 

Exporting
241
 There are, however, some nontariff barriers that do exist for service exports, 
such as safety standards, customs procedures, and regulatory hurdles (specific 
to investment trade), that can make it difficult but not insurmountable for an 
attorney, accountant, designer, or architect to work abroad. 
 Still, exporting a service attracts customers because the service usually offers 
original knowledge—and knowledge is power these days. People are starting 
new e-ventures every day, purely on the basis of a business model offering 
superior know-how and great ideas. Disseminating that knowledge aggres-
sively and at a profit worldwide is a winning formula for global success. With 
technology advancing at lightning speed, and worldwide communications 
becoming faster and easier with every passing day, now is an ideal time to 
consider this business avenue. 
 
■ Fact   According  Doris Nagel , President of  Blue Sky Consulting Services , “Service[s] are the 
fastest growing exports just about everywhere. The U.S. is the largest single country services 
exporter, and depending on whether you believe the U.S. International Trade Commission or the 
International Trade Centre, the U.S. exports between $662 and $710 billion in services each year.”  v 
 How Technology Drives the Economy—by 
 Fostering Competitiveness  
 Right now, a variety of technology-based industries, including communications, 
software development, cloud computing, and health care management, are 
booming. Take a look at the stocks traded on the NASDAQ—you’ll spot the 
longtime movers and shakers in these industri es typically growing at a dou-
ble-digit rate or more per year, with the young upstarts right on their heels. 
The good news for the prospective service exporter is that there is a strong 
correlation between technological advancements and the growing importance 
of knowledge. The greater the increase in the availability of technology, as is 
occurring now, the greater our need to learn how to use it and capitalize on 
it, fast. Time is of the essence if you want to stay at the cutting edge of your 
industry, and with current technology, particularly in the field of communica-
tions, not only can you count on being able to contact clients and colleagues 
worldwide in a matter of seconds, but you can also bet that it will cost you 
only pennies.  

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
242
 Exporting a Product vs.  Exporting a Service  : Is 
There a Difference? 
 Throughout this book, we have focused on exporting a product—one that 
you can see, hold, easily assign a monetary value to, and transport from Point 
A to Point B. Exporting a service, such as one that is business-oriented, profes-
sional, technical, financial, or franchise- or insurance-based, requires a some-
what different approach. Here’s a quick rundown of the differences between 
a product and a service that affect the export process (again presenting the 
table we looked at in Chapter   1 in order to jog your memory):  
 Product 
 Service 
 Tangible 
 Intangible 
 Visible 
 Invisible 
 Measurable 
 Immeasurable 
 High perceived value 
 Low perceived value 
 Transportable—freight costs 
 Transportable—negligible freight costs 
 Negligible human interaction 
 High human interaction 
 Low maintenance 
 High maintenance 
 High standardization 
 Negligible standardization 
 To revisit our discussion in the first chapter, you cannot see or touch a ser-
vice—it’s invisible—and you often cannot assess its true value until after you 
have used it and discovered all the resulting benefits. A service is in many ways 
a tougher sell than a product, both at home and abroad. Each of the listed 
ways in which services differ from products creates a marketing challenge for 
the service exporter, perhaps the most crucial being the need to convince a 
distant customer to buy your service sight unseen and without any real idea of 
how he will benefit. This is why a service business depends first and foremost 
on people (refer to Chapter   4 ). Of course, when you export a product, you 
are also relying on a whole string of people to do their jobs—bankers to help 
you get paid, freight forwarders to move your goods, local distributors to get 
your product on store shelves—but exporting a service demands a special 
emphasis on human interaction, both at home and abroad.  

Exporting
243
 People Power Drives Your Service Exports 
 Selling a service successfully requires even more people  power than selling a 
product. When you export a product the traditional way, you offer it, clinch 
your sale, follow through, and troubleshoot as needed. Then, once the product 
is in your customer’s hands, she oversees sales in her geographic territory and 
contacts you to order more of the product when she sells out. There is little 
need for communication between buyer and seller once the product is in the 
distribution pipeline and moving as it should. 
 By contrast, a service requires direct interaction with your customer, not 
just initially, but for the duration of the service contract. And for some ser-
vices, of course, the quality of the interaction with your customers is exactly 
what they’re paying for. This is why people with superior communication skills, 
diplomacy, and—this can’t be emphasized enough—acute cultural awareness 
are the single greatest asset for delivering a quality service export. Having the 
technology in place to deliver the service is important, too! 
 
■ Tip  Never increase customer expectation, such as offering free expedited shipping or a 
discount on work, to the point where you cannot deliver on your promises! That does not make for 
a satisfied customer. It creates a ticked-off customer who never returns. 
 Which Services Are Best for Export? 
 As with a product, if your service is a success locally, it is a likely candidate 
to be successful elsewhere—but you’ll need to do appropriate research to 
choose the new market most likely to respond well. (Also, just as with your 
product export, check the Export Administration Regulations [EAR] that can 
be found at the US Bureau of Export Administration [BXA] beforehand to 
find out if you need an export license [discussed in Chapter   22 ] to perform 
your service abroad.) 
 Your service should, of course, be relatively unique and difficult to come by in 
your target market. Services like a manicure at a beauty salon or a last-minute 
oil change at a car dealer, for example, are essential, but they are unlikely can-
didates for export because the skill level required to do them is very basic, 
plus the services themselves lack novelty. It’s all too easy for local operators 
to duplicate these services, so why should customers seek them beyond their 
own borders? 

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
244
 The following highly skilled and specialized services offer infinite export 
opportunities because they are in  demand worldwide  :
• 
 Architectural, construction, and engineering services : This sec-
tor requires special skills in operations, maintenance, and 
management with expertise in specialized fields, such as 
electric power utilities, construction, and engineering 
services. 
• 
 Financial services : These services include banking, insur-
ance, securities, leasing, and asset management. US financial 
institutions, for example, are very competitive interna-
tionally, particularly when offering account management, 
credit card operations, and collection management.  
• 
 Commercial, professional, technical, and business   services : 
This sector encompasses accounting, advertising, public 
relations, design, and legal and management consulting 
services. The international market for those services is 
expanding at a more rapid rate than the US domestic 
market. It is estimated that there are already 3.4 billion 
Internet users worldwide—but that figure represents 
only about 46.4 percent of the world’s population.  
• 
 Education and training services : Management training, tech-
nical training, and English language training are areas in 
which US expertise remains unchallenged.  
• 
 Entertainment and media : Films that are made in the United 
States and music that is recorded in the country have 
been very successful in appealing to audiences worldwide.  
 
■ Tip  According to the Wall Street Journal, there’s a bright spot for U.S. service exports. For 
example, when U.S. travelers spend abroad, that’s counted as an import. When nonresidents spend 
in the U.S., that’s an export, and U.S. exports of services are hitting record levels.  vi 
• 
 Environmental services : The United States is the largest 
producer and consumer of environmental technologies 
in the world. Environmental technologies are generally 
defined as the goods and services that generate revenue 
on the basis of environmental protection (pollution), 
assessment, compliance with environmental regulations, 
pollution control, waste management, design and opera-
tion of environmental infrastructure, or provision and 
delivery of environmental resources.  

Exporting
245
• 
 Healthcare technologies : Healthcare technologies “can be 
best described as the use of a suite of products and ser-
vices designed to improve and coordinate patient care, 
address growing health costs, and confront the long-term 
burden of disease through the use of technology ”  vii 
• 
 Retail and wholesale trade : The wholesale trade sector is 
made up of establishments engaged in wholesaling mer-
chandise. The retail trade sector comprises establish-
ments engaged in retailing merchandise and may include 
integral functions such as packaging, labeling, or other 
marketing services.  
• 
 Supply chain and distribution : The United States wants to 
secure a more efficient and integrated approach to supply 
chain issues, which will involve leveraging the capabilities 
and resources of the US distribution network to bring 
competitive service offerings to other world markets.  
• 
 Telecommunications and information services : The United 
States leads the world in marketing new technologies and 
enjoys a competitive advantage in online services, com-
puter consulting, and systems integration. This sector 
includes companies that generate, process, and export 
e-commerce activities, such as e-mail, funds transfer, and 
data interchange, as well as data processing, network ser-
vices, electronic information services, and professional 
computer services.  
• 
 Travel and tourism : This industry is diverse and encom-
passes services in transportation, lodging, food and bev-
erage, recreation, and purchase of incidentals consumed 
while in transit.  
• 
 Transportation, shipping, distribution, and logistic services : 
This sector encompasses aviation, ocean shipping, inland 
waterways, railroads, trucking, pipelines, and intermodal 
services, as well as ancillary and support services in ports, 
airports, rail yards, and truck terminals.  
 Figure  14-1 is a graphic depiction of the growth of commercial services by 
main sector, 1995-2014.  

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
246
 There are also other services, such as passenger fares and royalties and license 
fees, for instance, that can be exported. For more information, visit the “Trade 
Data Basics” page on the International Trade Administration Web site at   http://
www.trade.gov/mas/ian/referenceinfo/tg_ian_001872.asp#P51_7855  .  
 Top Service-Export Destinations by  Volume 
 The Census Bureau indicates the following are the top ten countries receiving 
the largest amount of service exports from the United States:  ix 
• 
 Canada  
• 
 United Kingdom  
• 
 Japan  
• 
 China 
• 
 Saudi Arabia  
• 
 Mexico  
 Figure 14-1.   viii Growth of commercial services by main sector, 1995-2014 (Sources: WTO-
UNCTAD-IT estimates).  
 

Exporting
247
• 
 Germany 
• 
 South Korea  
• 
 Brazil 
• 
 France 
 Targeting the countries that are known to be the most receptive to US ser-
vice exports will allow you to capitalize on the strengths of particular coun-
tries, adapt accordingly, and succeed.  
 
WHERE TO GET HELP
 The same agencies that can help you get your  product-export business up and running 
can advise you on marketing your service internationally. Start with the US Department 
of Commerce. If appropriate, it will direct you to export councils, US export assistance 
centers, or trade-development industry specialists. If, by some chance, these export-
specific agencies are unable to help you, ask them for a referral to other government 
organizations or private-sector companies that have experience in service exports. 
 Financing a Service Export  
 Because of the intangible nature of a service export, it can be more difficult to 
finance a sale, in terms of knowing the amount to actually quote a customer, 
but you can nonetheless utilize the basic procedures for product exports I will 
outline in Chapter   20 . It’s important to involve your banker right at the begin-
ning, before you attempt your first service export. As I have noted, it is hard 
to monitor a service, assess its value, and determine when delivery is com-
plete—all of which makes it just as tricky for a bank to work out the logistics 
of financing this type of export as it is for you and your customer. Your best 
bet is to draw up a service agreement outlining delivery and payment terms 
to be signed by you and your customer. This will solidify the transaction and 
serve as a guideline for your banker to organize the  financing  . 
 
■ Caution   Don’t get paranoid about how you are going to get paid on a service export. It’s true 
that since a service doesn’t have a form of collateral, financial institutions may be less willing 
to provide financial support to your company. However, many public and private institutions will 
provide financial assistance to creditworthy service exporters. Ask. By the way, try my method: Ask 
your customers for one-third of the payment upfront, one-third in the middle of the project, and 
one-third upon completion. This can be secured through your bank, provided you ask for help and 
have a legitimate business opportunity and a good credit history. 

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
248
 Planning for and Overcoming  Market Barriers  
 Whether you are exporting a product or service, it is a given that you will 
have to confront numerous market barriers—governmental, practical, cul-
tural, and economic. These barriers can be quite challenging, not to men-
tion extremely frustrating, to a new-to-export service company. To overcome 
them and beat out the competition, you will need to plan on being aggressive 
and persistent and taking longer to establish a business presence than you may 
have expected to have to. If you cannot make any progress despite your best 
efforts, you may find you need to target another region or country for your 
export operation. Let’s get acquainted with the  barriers  :
 1.  Government : Red tape, bureaucracy, bribes, infringements 
of copyrights, trademarks or patents, and special rules 
that only the natives seem to know about—these are 
just a few of the government-generated barriers you’ll 
encounter. For example, you might discover that your 
target market has a labor regulation stating that when-
ever there is a locally funded project, local experts must 
be hired for any specialized services that are required. Or 
there might be restrictions aimed at a specific industry, 
like accounting, which tend to rule out foreign partici-
pation. Sometimes you will make dozens of solicitations 
that will go unanswered—and you’ll never know why. 
The most notorious barrier is the governmental regula-
tion that locals never comply with even though, for some 
reason, they’re never caught. However, when you try to 
export, the regulation is enforced just rigorously enough 
to leave would-be exporters out of the trade loop. These 
slippery, elusive protectionist practices are very real, and 
they may well end up compelling you to take your busi-
ness elsewhere.  
 2.   Local practice and custom : Before you export your service, 
you must conform to global industry standards. If your 
service depends on scientific accuracy, for example, you 
need to perform any calculations using metric measure-
ments and notation. If you don’t, your proposal might get 
ignored because of your lack of compliance with local 
practices. Presenting your proposal in the local language 
is an obvious necessity if you want it to be read and 
understood. If you don’t know the language, hire some-
one who does and get a high-quality translation.  

Exporting
249
 3.   Cultural differences : Sometimes differences between the 
types of media used in different cultures can present bar-
riers if not used in a way valued by the other culture. 
Look closely at the photographs and print copy for an 
advertising campaign you are about to launch abroad, 
examine the materials you are about to use for an inte-
rior design project, and think through the pictures you 
have selected for your client’s Web site. Are any of these 
items offensive in any way? If they are, then edit accord-
ingly. If you don’t know, find out from someone who does 
before you implement the service package.  
 4.  Economic : One surefire giveaway that your target coun-
try is economically unstable is the situation where you 
are locked solidly into a deal and then find out that your 
customer is slow to pay or doesn’t pay at all! Also, watch 
out for infrastructure factors that may apply in another 
country, such as astronomical prices for land, making it 
impossible to start a building project; undrinkable water, 
making it impossible to open up a tourist bar; or electri-
cal service that is so scant and unreliable that additional 
power generators are needed to keep things running 
smoothly. All these factors present very serious barriers 
for your service business.  
 5.  Labor market issues. While sectors other than services are 
typically capital intensive, the service industry is heavily 
reliant upon human capital. As a result, labor and skills 
issues (shortages, for example) can have a significant 
effect on the services sector, and thus on its ability to 
export.  
 6.   Investment. Government policies affect investment deci-
sions, particularly in highly regulated industries such as 
healthcare, financial, and environmental. If not designed 
and administered effectively, regulatory pacts could pres-
ent barriers to investments needed to support services 
exports.   

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
250
 Seven Ways to Launch Your  Service  
 When you set out to enter a market with your service export, you will face 
four critical questions: How are you going to get a foot in the door? How 
are you going to get noticed by prospective customers (for a discussion, see 
Chapters   6 and   10 )? How are you going to keep your foothold once you’re 
there? And how are you going to do it all inexpensively? Here are some ideas 
that may help you answer all four questions:
 1.  Create new  working relationships . It may take a new work-
ing relationship to get your service business underway in 
another country. Find out who’s already operating where 
you want to be, see what they can do for you, and figure 
out how you’re going to make it an attractive proposition. 
Start by defining what you can share in terms of resources 
and what sort of partner you want. Look for individuals 
with a strong record of innovation and skills that can be 
combined with your own to create new opportunities.  
 2.  Consider an acquisition, joint venture, partnership, or  franchise . 
You can purchase, jointly own, partner with, or assign 
rights to a company that is operating in a country where 
you wish to do business. Discuss with your tax and legal 
advisors. If you can’t work out one of these relationships, 
try working for the company as a consultant first, and 
then attempt to obtain an equity stake.  
 3.   Expand your services to your   existing domestic clients  that 
have a global presence. One of the simplest ways to get a 
foothold in international markets is to follow your local 
customers to their international branch offices instead of 
starting an independent base of operations from scratch. 
It means a lot less risk for you, especially financial risk. If 
you’d like to try this route, find yourself a good confidant 
within a firm for which you are serving as a consultant. 
He can notify you well in advance of any future projects 
that may involve crossing national boundaries.  
 4.   Approach foreign companies  operating in the United States. 
If you have not yet performed a service for a global con-
glomerate, look for one that can take you where you 
want to go. If it has a presence in the United States, it is 
highly likely that it has already selected other foreign sites 
for further expansion.  

Exporting
251
 5.  Learn the language of your  target market . You will have an 
incalculable advantage if you already speak your prospec-
tive customers’ native tongue. You can at least be sure 
they will understand you! Try marketing your expertise 
in the area where your parents or grandparents were 
born. If you mention your ancestral ties to a prospective 
client, it may enhance her comfort level with you and 
make her more receptive to your solicitation.  
 6.  Seek representatives or  agents . Look for local professionals 
who perform a similar but noncompeting service, train 
them, and then hire them on a consultancy basis. Make 
sure your expertise adds value to their service package 
and vice versa—perhaps you can offer their specializa-
tion to your customers in the United States. It can be a 
global-sales and profit booster for you both as well as a 
relatively simple and inexpensive program to launch.  
 7.   Become a virtual consultant (also known as teleconsultant) . 
Market your knowledge and skills via telecommunica-
tions such as e-mail, Skype, Twitter, business apps, or the 
Internet. Don’t dismiss any medium as obsolete—each 
has its own place in the business of global interaction and 
each will enhance your power to communicate, making 
you more efficient and responsive to your global custom-
ers. And don’t forget to use digital platforms for mar-
keting. For example, design yourself a Web site where 
private individuals as well as companies can read all about 
your service. Anyone who responds is a potential client!  
 An Example of a Service Export: 
A  Wildflower-Nursery Business  that Also 
Exports a Service 
 Neil Diboll runs  Prairie Nursery  (  http://www.prairienursery.com ), a 
nursery that sells wildflowers and other native plants that many people dis-
miss as weeds. These products are tough and well suited to climates like the 
Midwest in the United States, where temperatures in May, for example, can 
swing anywhere from as low as 40°F at night to as high as 80°F during the day. 

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
252
 Think Diboll can export a service tied to the nursery? You bet. And that’s 
exactly what he has done so that he can operate a company that is more 
than a nursery. His team offers garden designs and customized advice that can 
be purchased from anywhere in the world, provided that person has access 
to the Internet. If you want an ecologically grown green roof or a backyard 
meadow, he will consult with you remotely or virtually via the Internet. Many 
product-based businesses have complementary services that can be exported. 
 To get the word out, use images—they have no language barrier. Every time 
Diboll does a great job creating a new garden for a client, he can take a picture 
and share it via Instagram, Pinterest, Facebook, and Google+. That’s how his 
work gets discovered and how his service becomes in demand worldwide! 
 
■ Tip  The primary benefit of any virtual-service export is its lower cost and unlimited opportunity. 
You don’t need to pay for travel and you don’t have to limit your customer base. 
 Whichever strategies you apply, remember that every contact you make in the 
process of offering your service-export package can potentially refer you to 
another, and still another. Plus, word-of-mouth testimonies from happy clients 
are your best free advertising (you might ask them to provide an endorsement 
on social platforms such as LinkedIn and praise you on your Facebook page). 
As you work to put your network in place, you’ll be doing more than building 
a strong base of operations—you’ll be working up a healthy momentum that 
will generate future prospects.  
 
 TOP 10 INTERNET MARKETS  
 Here is a listing of  Internet markets  with the highest number of Internet users (as of 
November 2015, the latest available date). What this means is if you have a service 
export, these countries will be the most receptive to your offerings:  x 
• 
 China 
• 
 India 
• 
 United States 
• 
 Brazil 
• 
 Japan 
• 
 Russia 
• 
 Nigeria 
• 
 Indonesia 
• 
 Germany 
• 
 Mexico 

Exporting
253
 The  Bottom Line  : Maximizing Your Chance for 
Success 
 When you’re running a service business abroad, you can’t afford to become 
complacent. Stay focused and committed to your export service plan. Don’t 
let your service offering ever become commonplace. Always work at becom-
ing better and better at what you’re doing. And be prepared to take aggres-
sive measures to establish and protect your business presence. The following 
strategies are essential:
• 
 Specialize, specialize, specialize. Find a type of service only 
you can deliver, enter a single market, and deliver it with a 
vengeance. Even if your customers have never heard of your 
service, make sure they see how they’ll benefit from it. Don’t 
just keep pace; be ahead of your time and ahead of the pack.  
• 
 Secure sufficient working capital to keep you operating 
over the long haul.  
• 
 Once you have staked out your territory, get the quick-
est, most extensive marketing exposure you can (reach 
out to key influencers—bloggers, Twitterers, and 
Facebookers alike who carry a huge fan base—via social 
media platforms).  
• 
 Use technology and rapid, inexpensive communications 
(e-mail, Facebook, LinkedIn, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, 
and Pinterest) to your optimal marketing advantage.  
• 
 Do whatever it takes to protect your copyright, trade-
mark, or other intellectual property related to your ser-
vice package.  
• 
 Even if your core business is in exporting products, con-
sider developing a multifaceted export package involving 
both product and service components (such as Prairie 
Nursery does, as we saw earlier). This will enable you to 
create cost efficiencies and immeasurable added value for 
your customer.  
• 
 Once you have a hot export product and a customer lined 
up, take it a step further and offer your other resource: a 
marketing campaign geared to the local market to jump 
start your customer’s sales of your product! Sound com-
plicated? Sure, it will take some more R&D, but it will give 
you the creative edge you’ll need to keep ahead of the 
competition and move freely within the world economy 
of the future.  

Chapter 14 | Preparing Your Service for Export
254
• 
 Don’t forget about profitability. The biggest hurdle is usu-
ally that. Choose a business model that will work in the 
real world, move fast, and monitor the inflow of money. 
You want to dominate the market before your competi-
tors do. When you are burning cash, you are at the mercy 
of others. When you are not, you are in control of your 
destiny. 
 Summary 
 As technology continues to grow, the market for service exports is only going 
to get bigger, making us all the more responsible and accountable for knowl-
edge outcomes. Countries would benefit from adopting policies that increase 
service exports, improve productivity, and promote service-export perfor-
mance. Breaking into export markets is a major achievement, but it’s what 
you do once you’re there that makes all the difference in whether you’ll be an 
also-ran or an industry leader. Remember: if you’re working hard on customer 
service, as I’ve been encouraging you to do, you’re already a service exporter. 
See how far you can take it—and how far it can take  you . 
 Notes 
  i.   “What the US Exports to the Rest of the World,” Justin 
Fox, accessed April 3, 2016,   https://www.ajot.com/
news/what-the-u.s.-exports-to-the-rest-of-
the-world-justin-fox  .  
  ii.   “What Trump and Sanders Get Wrong on Trade,” 
Steve Chapman, Real Clear Politics, access date April 3, 
2016, 
  http://www.realclearpolitics.com/arti-
cles/2016/04/03/what_trump_and_sanders_get_
wrong_on_trade_130172.html  .  
  iii.   Ibid. 
  iv.   “5 Things You Should Know About Service Exports,” 
Doris Nagel, LinkedIn, access date April 3, 2016,   https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/5-things-you-should-
know-service-exports-doris-nagel  . 
  v.   Ibid. 

Exporting
255
  vi.   “There’s a Bright Spot for U.S. Exports (Hint: It’s Not 
Goods),” Jeffrey Sparshott, November 4, 2015, accessed 
April 
10, 
2016, 
  http://blogs.wsj.com/econom-
ics/2015/11/04/theres-a-bright-spot-for-u-s-
exports-hint-its-not-goods/  .  
 vii.   “Healthcare Technologies Resource Guide,” Export.gov, 
access date April 10, 2016,   http://export.gov/indus-
try/health/healthcareresourceguide/index.
asp#P24_1438  .  
  viii.   “International Trade Statistics 2015,” World Trade 
Organization, access date April 3, 2016,   https://www.
wto.org/english/res_e/statis_e/its2015_e/
its2015_e.pdf  .  
  ix.  “U.S. Trade in Services by Selected Countries and 
Areas,” Census.gov, accessed April 10, 2016,   https://
w w w . c e n s u s . g o v / f o r e i g n - t r a d e / P r e s s -
Release/2016pr/02/exh20b.pdf  . 
 x.   “Internet Users: Top 20 Countries, Internet World Stats, 
access date April 10, 2016,   http://www.internet-
worldstats.com/top20.htm  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_15
 C H A P T E R 
 Web Design 
with the World 
in Mind 
 A global gateway is the initial point of contact between your website and 
the world—it is, in effect, a web user’s first impression. And as the old 
saying goes: You don’t get a second chance to make a first impression. 
To truly welcome visitors to your website, you’ll need a welcoming global 
gateway. 
 — John Yunker , cofounder,  Byte Level Research   i 
 A decade from now, I would predict, everyone reading this article will 
be able to converse in dozens of foreign languages, eliminating the very 
concept of a language barrier. 
 — Alex Ross  , author of “The Industries of the Future” and the former 
adviser for innovation to the U.S. secretary of state  ii 
 Why the meteoric rise of the importance of  web translation  ? Because the 
majority of the world’s population does not speak English. In fact, less than 
a third of the current Internet user base speaks English as a global language 
and this percentage, according to Yunker, will only decrease as the next billion 
15

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
258
Internet users come online over the next several years. If English is your lan-
guage, as it is mine, you’re out of luck if trying to make, as Yunker puts it, “a good 
first impression” on the vast majority of international people. Globalizing your 
Web site offers an enormous revenue opportunity for your business. 
 Web  globalization  , a strategy that conveys cultural, linguistic, and business 
information to meet the needs of a target audience in an increasingly multi-
cultural and multilingual world, is the next imperative for businesses, allowing 
them to gain traction and relevancy as a means to foster social engagement 
and enable online purchases. As more and more people access the Internet, 
English will become less prominent as the language of choice. What’s holding 
companies back from translating to non-English languages? CEOs typically say 
it’s because most of their audience only speaks English and then quietly men-
tion budgetary constraints. 
 That sort of thinking offers a perfect lead into Theodore Leavitt’s concept 
of “ marketing myopia.  ”  Theodore Leavitt  , a late marketing professor at the 
 Harvard Business School  , says, “Businesses will do better in the end if they 
concentrate on meeting customers’ needs rather than on selling products.”  iii 
Marketing myopia is shortsightedness, or the inability to see the future. Could 
that be you when it comes to web globalization? Are you giving customers 
what they want in the language they want? 
 Make no mistake. As a  Common Sense Advisory (CSA)  report puts it, 
“Companies that are in favor of technology grow nearly three times as fast 
as companies that have mixed feelings about it or are against it.”  iv CSA also 
says, “the global market for outsourced language services and technology was 
$38.16 billion in 2015 and could soar to $49.8 billion by 2019.”  v The Bureau 
of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook predicts the job outlook 
for interpreters and translators will grow 29 percent from 2014 to 2024, com-
pared to an average growth rate for all occupations of 7 percent.  vi 
 A Web site—or any online social  platform  , apps included—is a door to the 
world. “The Internet connects computers, but it is language that connects 
people,”  vii as Byte Level’s Yunker says. Without content customized for dif-
ferent regions, languages, and cultures, a digital presence can seem lacking. 
Translating your message makes a radical difference in how you get discov-
ered on the web. Whether you think your target audience only speaks English, 
you lack the resources to translate a Web site, or you believe your products 
and services are inappropriate for the global marketplace, you are missing out 
on a huge chunk of business and are most likely leaving a lot of money on the 
table that will go to competitors who are willing to translate. To conduct busi-
ness with most of the world, you must speak the language of your customers 
and ensure your Web site appears in the places where they are searching. It 
can’t be said enough: globalizing your Web site offers an enormous revenue 
opportunity for your business. Further, author Alex Ross predicts machine 
translation will take markets that are now viewed as being too difficult to 
navigate and open them up  viii . 

Exporting
259
 In this section, I discuss why you should design your Web site with the world 
in mind, the growth of Web globalization, the biggest challenges to Web site 
globalization, why  Web globalization  is essential to your Web marketing 
efforts, and what you can do now to get started. This information applies to 
translating marketing materials and campaigns on an as-needed basis as well. 
 Take it a step at a time, budget accordingly, and spend when and where you 
can. Perspective and a long-term horizon are what you need most, although 
you’ll probably end up making the same mistakes that the rest of us make 
when first getting started. That’s OK. We’re in this together. 
 
■ Caution   A  site translated into another language will not compensate for a poorly built 
English-language Web site. For example, if your English site is lacking in clarity and content, or 
the e-commerce bells and whistles are broken for your English-speaking visitors, don't expect 
a translated version to work any better. So, fix the English site first to get the highest level of 
awareness and traffic that is possible before putting funds into developing a translated version. 
Then, when you can afford it, develop a foreign-language version featuring customized content 
unique to a specific market. 
 
WHY TRANSLATE YOUR WEB SITE?
 Here are twelve things Web site globalization will allow you to do:
 
 1.  Increase visitors to your Web site 
 
 2.  Increase your international sales and profits 
 
 3.  Improve your global web performance metrics 
 
 4.  Broaden your reach and support 
 
 5.  Gain global market share 
 
 6.  Improve visitors’ engagement and interactions 
 
 7.  Become a more worldly brand 
 
 8.  Outperform competitors 
 
 9.  Deliver greater impact via an integrated strategy 
 
 10.  Give customers the world over what they need and want and 
an easier read  
 
 11.  Support a new market launch with the language that is 
spoken in that market  
   
 12.     Lead globally by supporting languages that you can realistically and 
affordably support 

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
260
 The Growth of Languages Online: Selling to 
the Eighth Continent 
 The Internet is the  eighth continent  , where everyone who is online is a global 
citizen in a common space. To understand what’s happening in web globaliza-
tion alone, conduct a search using the keywords “web translation” and see 
what pops up. You’ll most likely see  Bing Translator  (   www.bing.com/trans-
lator   ),  Free Translation  (   www.freetranslation.com  ), and  Google Translate  
(   www.translate.google.com  ). Now ask yourself this: Why would two of the 
world’s biggest technology companies be so concerned about capturing your 
search results for web translation? Because at some point everybody needs 
help with quick translations, whether working online or with a document, or 
even just trying to decipher a word or phrase. 
 
■ Note  Automated web translation services are good for translating short, easy passages on 
the fly or in a pinch. But don’t be fooled into thinking these tools will work effectively for Web site 
translations. They won’t, for they are never as accurate as skilled human translators. 
 Only 25.9 percent of the world’s Internet population speaks English, which 
presents you with a gigantic growth opportunity. The Internet is shifting from 
United States–centric and English only to more world-centric, with a multi-
tude of other languages being spoken by more than 70 percent of Internet 
users. According to  Statista  , “In 2013, the global language services industry 
market size reached 34.78 billion U.S. dollars and was forecasted to rise to 47 
billion by 2018.”  ix 
 Taking on the World One Country at a Time 
 The ability to offer more languages across  multiple platforms and devices  
guarantees a company a greater global reach. And translation is just one of 
several important factors to consider in the process of globalizing your Web 
site. 
 
■ Tip  According to web globalization expert Yunker, a global gateway “is an umbrella term for 
the visual and technical elements you employ to direct users to their localized web sites and 
applications.”  x  How’s your global gateway working for you? Are you making a good first impression 
with a lasting impact?  

Exporting
261
 The Top Ten Languages of Internet Users 
 More and more people are using the  Internet every day in many different lan-
guages. You cannot afford to alienate your audience by not offering the right 
language to the right customer. What is the best language to translate your 
Web site into? Base it on the number of Internet users and the language they 
use while visiting your site. Web site translation gives customers the ability to 
access a site in their own language. 
 Top Ten Languages Spoken by Web Users as of November 30, 2015  xi 
 Language 
 Percentage of Internet Users Among the Total Population 
 English 
 25.9 percent 
 Chinese 
 20.9 percent 
 Japanese 
 3.4 percent 
 Spanish 
 7.6 percent 
 Portuguese 
 3.9 percent 
 German 
 2.5 percent 
 Arabic 
 5.0 percent 
 French 
 2.9 percent 
 Russian 
 3.1 percent 
 Malaysian 
 2.9 percent 
 Through these ten languages, you can reach and communicate with 78.2 per-
cent of all the Internet users in the world, an ultimate incentive to consider 
web globalization. Although English is currently the top web language, as coun-
tries like China and Brazil continue to grow and get connected to the web, 
a non-English language might stand atop the list in the near  future . CSA says 
that buyers of translation services should verify that they’re not missing any 
popular languages that would allow them to appeal to a broader client base.  xii 
 Biggest Challenges to  Web Site Globalization  
 Once you have selected a language to translate your Web site into, other 
problematic issues come into play. The following is a list of the biggest chal-
lenges to Web site  globalization  along with the percentage of respondents 
who indicated that that was the most correct definition of the problem they 
were having. The survey was conducted by a company that monitors digital 
presence,  Limelight  , in August 2012.  xiii 

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
262
• 
 Use of multiple platforms to manage sites and content: 
57 percent  
• 
 Staffing/budgetary constraints related to creating regional 
content in local languages: 48 percent 
• 
 Lack of technical resources to build, maintain, and enhance 
regional sites: 29 percent  
• 
 Lack of staff and budget necessary to translate to local 
 language  s: 26 percent  
• 
 Giving staff located around the world publishing rights: 
16 percent  
 
■ Caution   The previously stated results do not take into consideration translating and supporting 
content on social platforms (Facebook and Twitter, for instance) or on mobile sites and apps. At 
some point, these areas must also be translated into content that has the look and feel of an 
integrated, compelling, and seamless experience regardless of which digital device or platform a 
user is on. Take a look at Starbucks. It does a great job offering a multitude of Facebook pages in 
different languages and therefore widening its global reach. 
 The Web Globalization Approach 
 Here’s how most companies approach  web globalization  . You create a Web 
site that I’ll call    www.organicdogcollars.com  and it does well with English-
speaking visitors. After a while, many of the inquiries you receive come from 
people who speak Spanish. You request that your IT technician or your web-
hosting company uses IP-address tracking to determine exactly what part of 
the world the inquiries are coming from and find out that it is Argentina. That 
triggers the consideration to translate or adapt your Web site to accommo-
date the Argentinian market. From there, you designate an area on your site 
that reads, “Argentina Inquiries,” where visitors can click to read content in 
their native language. This gesture takes them to an entirely new and different 
area that is translated into Spanish and takes into consideration Argentinian 
social customs. Task accomplished. 
 Not quite. While this provides an instant customized solution for visitors 
from Argentina, it doesn’t offer a seamless and consistent user experience 
for visitors in other parts of the world who would want to receive the same-
exact treatment for their native country and language. Let’s say someone from 
Spain visits. Does he click on the “Argentina Inquiries” tab or do you go back 
and change that tab to read “Spanish-Speaking Guests,” “Hispanic Visitors,” or 
“Español”? 

Exporting
263
 To  optimize  the potential for the greatest number of people to visit your site:
 1.  Decide on what you will be communicating (i.e., content 
plus design);  
 2.  to whom (which target market); and then  
 3.   translate (adapt) accordingly.  
 Much of the content you translate will be based on what your English-language 
visitors look at most, but you should concentrate on specific market needs. 
Brazil’s colors might be radically different than those of the United States, for 
example, and South Africa’s site might require more videos than Japan’s. The 
point is that no two countries are ever alike. To master market needs, first 
familiarize yourself with internationalization and localization services. Let’s go 
over both so you understand their place in web globalization. 
 Internationalization and Localization Services 
 According to  Globalization Partners  ,  internationalization  involves “enabling 
the back end of a website to handle different languages, character sets, cur-
rencies, submit form data, site search capabilities, etc., and entails understand-
ing what database and content management systems you are using to author, 
store and publish your site’s content.” Localization, on the other hand, involves 
“translating and localizing the front end of your website into different lan-
guages ensuring all content (text and graphics) is translated in an accurate and 
culturally correct manner.”  xiv 
 What is the subtle distinction between internationalization and localization 
services? Internationalization is the designing of a Web site so that it can be 
easily adapted for many different cultures and locales. It is a process that is 
generally only performed once, so it involves a one-size-fits-all solution that 
enables a site to be world ready. 
 Localization  , on the other hand, involves more of the  adaptation of a Web site 
for a particular area or culture (as in the case of Argentina). This includes 
translating the text into Spanish, making sure the design is culturally accept-
able in Argentina (e.g., doesn’t feature Hispanic images that will be perceived 
as stereotypical), and removing references that may not be relevant for 
Argentina. 
 Where internationalization is a process that is done only once, localization is 
performed each time you want to target a particular culture or language set, 
so you won’t really hire translators until the localization stage in targeting a 
specific market.  

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
264
 
THE 2016 WEB GLOBALIZATION REPORT CARD
 According to “The 2016  Web Globalization Report Card ,” here are the top ten leaders in 
the globalization of Web sites, mobile Web sites, and apps.  xv  Use these as examples of 
how you might translate your own site. Granted, these companies are big, but you can 
still steal insights into how to create a great global gateway without breaking the bank.
 
 1.  Google 
 
 2.  Facebook 
 
 3.  Wikipedia 
 
 4.  Hotels.com 
 
 5.  NIVEA 
 
 6.  Booking.com 
 
 7.  Nestlé 
 
 8.  Pampers 
 
 9.  Adobe 
 
 10.  Intel 
 
■ Tip  Yunker says that mobile is hugely important, particularly in emerging markets. More than 
100 million smartphones were sold in India last year. The idea that emerging markets don’t have 
Internet access is false. But it’s important to note that emerging markets have slower networks, so 
mobile websites need to be lightweight. 
 Example of a  Great Global Web Site  
 A quick visit to  NIVEA.com  and you will see a country list where you can 
select a local Web site. You can choose from seven different continents. 
Under each continent, there is a country listing. Country listings are in English, 
the country’s native language, or both. 
 Explore. Go through the process slowly click by click. NIVEA gives you an 
enlightening web-globalization education on how each country’s Web site dif-
fers in design to accommodate a market. Use the tour as an example on what 
you should be considering when translating a Web site to serve an audience 
in Tanzania, France, or Paraguay, for example.  
 A  Step-by-Step Process  to Web Globalization 
 To export to the world, a company needs to develop a Web site globalization 
plan. You can start out tactically (“We’re targeting Argentina!”), but be strate-
gic with your outlook (“Let’s be world ready in five years”). Your plan might 
look like the following step-by-step overview. 

Exporting
265
 
■ Caution   What I have tried to do here is simplify the web globalization process into digestible 
chunks of information where you can read one point, think on it, let it stew, and then move on to 
the next. Web globalization is a complex, not linear, process. The following is by no means an all-
inclusive list of things that need to be addressed, but it is a start—a primer. Solutions can be found. 
Use my list as a guide and then scour the web for more answers. 
 Target Your  Market  
 Where are you going to get the biggest bang for your web globalization buck? 
Once you decide on a market, speak the same language as that market! You 
can either research the market in advance (as you did in Chapter   12 ) or wait 
for visitor inquiries to come to you to determine the best place to target. Let’s 
hope your research and inquiries match up, where, for instance, you find that 
Argentina is the best market for your products and, lo and behold, inquiries 
through your Web site are all from Argentina. That makes it easy to figure out 
where to go. Don’t try to do too much too quickly. To keep things simple, take 
it one country and one language at a time.  
 Hire the Right People 
 When you’re ready to start the process of building a site, hire the right people 
or service  provider , get that person or company on board, and then develop 
guidelines. Who will translate your web platforms and who will be responsible 
for overseeing the process to make sure that everything gets done perfectly? 
You need external experts who are experienced in web globalization and 
you need internal people who are trusted and respected to do any work that 
needs to be done. The internal people should not be merely order takers; 
rather, they should be people who are professional, accomplished, and enthu-
siastic, and can provide insights into how the project should be managed. It can 
only help that the people you work with not only understand your products 
and industry, but also understand your target customers and how to best 
communicate with them. 
 Freelancers can also be used in a pinch. I regularly hire a handful of freelancers, 
for example, who I trust beyond measure, have been with me for years, and do 
magnificent work. And just as we talked about earlier in the book (Chapter   2  ), 
you need to get a companywide commitment to the internationalization 
effort, including one from the higher-ups. That buy-in should come fairly early 
in the game. Get the team on board quickly and effectively by developing 
guidelines or a standard operating procedure that everyone follows—from 
how the translators will work with your team to how the savvy technology 
folks will be a part of the grand plan. Consider having at least two translators 
on board—one to translate and the other to edit. Leave no stone unturned in 
terms of outlining how things will be handled.   

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
266
 Give the “ Skunkworks  ” Project a Name 
 A skunkworks is a small group  of  people who work on a project in an uncon-
ventional way. Usually, they are separate from other operating groups, at least 
in large companies. Nothing is more drab than referring to John Smith as 
heading up “that Canada Web site project” or Mary Jacobs by saying, “Oh, 
she’s spearheading the web globalization effort for the firm.” For goodness’ 
sakes, give the project a name that everyone can identify with, shows opportu-
nity, and charges them up and gets them going to make it happen! Try “Global 
Seabiscuit,” “Code Global,” “NWR!” (New World Ready!), or “TOA” (Take 
On Argentina) as project names.   
 Build for Growth 
 The next step is to pick a site structure and build for growth. According to the 
Google Webmaster Central Blog, to start a multilanguage site, “the first thing 
you’ll want to consider is if it makes sense for you to buy country-specific 
top-level domains . . . for all the countries you plan to serve. So your  domains 
 might be ilovebackpacking.co.uk (.uk for the UK),  ichlieberucksackrei-
sen.de (.de for Germany), and  irdemochilero.es (.es for Spain).”  xvi 
 The key question to ask, then, is how well known your  top-level domain (TLD)  , 
service, product, or company is. If it’s comparable in popularity to Mickey 
Mouse, for example, you might want to buy one TLD and use it for what is to 
become your multilingual site (see the second bullet point below), which is the 
easiest and least expensive route. Meanwhile, if you haven’t already, you might 
want to consider additionally purchasing the other types of TLDs using the 
same domain name (known, when you buy country-specific domain names, as 
geo-targeting) to ward off competitors from snatching them in the future. You 
have the options of  using :
• 
 Subdomain (   www.spanish.mickeymouse.com   ,    www.french.
mickeymouse.com   , or    www.german.mickeymouse.com  )  
• 
 Subdirectory (   www.mickeymouse.com/spanish  ,    www.
mickeymouse.com/french   , or    www.mickeymouse.com/
german   ) 
• 
 TLD (for Spanish,    www.mickeymouse.es  ; for French,    www.
mickeymouse.fr   ; or for German,    www.mickeymouse.de   ) 
 
■ Note  There are a variety of ways to phrase domain names that appear in different languages. 
You can use mickeymouse.com/es, mickeymouse.com/spanish, or mickeymouse.com/espanol, for 
example. To be safe, consult with an experienced web globalization expert. 

Exporting
267
 Whichever route you take, build for growth. Make sure you have the technol-
ogy bandwidth to support each and every different country you may move 
into. You may start in Argentina and a year from now expand to India. Your 
site structure must enable that global-growth expansion plan. 
 
■ Caution   We have a long way to go to come up with a clear standard on how to handle 
branding for localized international sites because it varies from company to company and country 
to country. Don’t be intimidated. Everybody is in the same boat when it comes to understanding 
web globalization rules and regulations. 
 Here is a sampling of how companies feature country-specific information (in 
this case, Spain) :
• 
 Engadget:   http://es.engadget.com/  
• 
 Mars:   http://www.mars.com/spain/es/  
• 
 Dodge:   http://www.dodge.com/es 
 When you visit these sites, notice the consistency in colors, images, font styles, 
amount of content, design layout, and flow. When you are making your own 
site, do a similar assessment of the country you’re going to cater to. 
 A professional web developer can help you with understanding subdomains, 
subdirectories, and TLDs, but you want to provide her with a consistent way 
to handle creating subdomains and adapting content to each country’s lan-
guage and culture.   This method is easier to handle when updating and main-
taining your site.  
 Invest Only in What You Can Afford But Don’t Ever 
be Cheap 
 You will need to not only adapt  your Web site, social platform, or app to an 
overseas audience, but also to invest in properly maintaining and managing 
your localized online properties. That requires people power. Some compa-
nies get in a cost-conscious mode (cheap) when it comes to translation, deliv-
ering poor-quality multilingual websites, which can have severe consequences: 
offending and dissuading non-English visitors more than English-only ones! 
Invest only in what you can afford but don’t ever be cheap. Count on con-
tinuous updates and improvements throughout the duration of growing your 
world-ready business. And one last thing to think about here: will you need 
on-the-ground support in the country where you are serving customers?  

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
268
 Welcome Visitors in a Way That Speaks to Them 
Directly 
 You also need to craft the type of welcome gateway you will have on your site 
that lets foreign visitors see what local content is available to them and directs 
 them to where they need to go. Will the name of the country be in English 
or in the native language of the country—for example, Spanish for Argentina? 
Will you show separate visual icons, such as the flags of countries with listings 
of native languages, for visitors to click on to enter their portal? Or will you 
feature one map or small globe where visitors can click on their part of the 
world? Before you decide, check with someone skilled in linguistics to make 
sure your choices don’t offend anyone. 
 On this topic, Yunker says a key factor in your decision should be whether 
you intend to keep adding languages and countries to your Web site in the 
future or only support a small number over a limited period of time. If you 
are going to stay small, perhaps you only need a visual element that displays 
the user’s current language or country setting, which gives him the ability to 
change this setting.  
 Get Started Translating 
 The next step is to choose a portion of content on your Web site to translate. 
You don’t have to translate every aspect of your English Web site into another 
language. You might decide to only translate products and services that  make 
 sense for a specific market. Take NIVEA, for example, where every one of its 
local sites feels like its own and no one else’s. On the USA site (  http://www.
niveausa.com/  ), for instance, you see photos of NIVEA products along with 
a couple affectionately embracing, whereas on the Bahrain site (  http://www.
ar.nivea-me.com/  ), you see a photo of a woman’s face but you only get a 
view of a limited portion of her body. That’s because in Muslim countries it is 
not acceptable to show skin in public. Whatever you decide to do, don’t give 
any hint that your Web site has been translated. What I mean by that is you 
want visitors to feel as if the content was written and designed just for them! 
Then, begin the process of translating that information to meet their needs.  
 Track Metrics 
 After doing the basics, you will need to establish a way to track metrics. Most 
hosting companies offer a way to track visitors or page views. Check  with 
 yours. Google offers  Google Analytics  , which can be added to most online 
platforms. The point of tracking is to see how your translations are measuring 
up in terms of the quality of content, visitors, returning visitors, inquiries, and 
sales from a certain part of the world.  

Exporting
269
 Create a User Experience 
 It is important to create a user experience for your site visitors. This can be 
done by creating a personal design on the site (an infographic, for example, 
showing how to design the perfect tabletop setting using your company’s 
candles), making visually appealing  transitions   between content areas, or 
developing an interactive story that surprises the user by describing how to 
enjoy your product or service in a way they never imagined. Maximizing the 
user experience can be a powerful tool for unleashing the full potential of an 
application, product, or service offering by allowing an engaged user to look at 
what you are offering in a holistic way. The goal is to put users first. Determine 
what they want and what they need. Then, translate accordingly to meet those 
requirements in a fun and inspiring manner. Whether visitors are in North or 
South America, using a PC or a smart phone, you must provide a consistent 
look and feel along with a flawless experience. Deliver the content in the 
native language of the customer.  
 Keep It Simple 
 Keep the translation process simple. Even if your Web site is aimed at an 
English-speaking audience in Hong Kong,  it  still needs to be professionally 
translated in a culturally appropriate way. Stay away from generic translation 
sites as mentioned earlier. It is not enough to translate a Web site from one 
language to another. Your translation to the native language must sound 
natural and not as if it’s a Web site that started out in English. To reach any 
new overseas visitor online, your site should be reviewed for both cultural 
customization and accuracy and be localized with the target language for 
the locale. 
 
■ Tip  Poor efforts in the level and quality of the translation can cause more harm to your business 
than had you made no effort at all. You don’t want to alienate, offend, or reject visitors altogether or 
look foolish (remember, first impressions matter). It’s all about usability and customer satisfaction!  
 Set a Schedule 
 At this point, you need to determine how material will  get   translated and 
published and at what times. Just as we talked about a companywide com-
mitment in Chapter   2  , you need a similar international commitment for 
web globalization. Take it a step or country at a time. Match your target 
country to your product or service offering, your capabilities, your budget, 
and your objectives. Appoint a chief champion or project manager, a lead 
translator (a human is preferable over a computer), an astute multicultural 

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
270
designer, and a top-notch tech person to oversee each translation proj-
ect. And remember, it’s not just about translating words; there are other 
translation factors that must be addressed, such as design, currency con-
version, customer service support, and transportation costs. This is where 
the external web globalization team needs to shine with experience and 
provide answers.  
 Test, Test, Test! 
 Before going live, you need to test your site locally in the overseas market. 
Use different browsers to do so. And don’t forget to test your site extensively 
on mobile devices,  because   that’s where the growth will be in the future.  
 Consider the User’s Search 
 Another essential step to take before the site goes live is to optimize the 
content for search results. Consider search engine optimization for each lan-
guage you’re translating into (referred to by Google as multilingual AdWords). 
Figure out how  local  search engines will recognize your translated material or 
hire someone with experience in international search engine visibility. Match 
English words, for example, with high-ranking translations in other languages, 
which can be found through Google Trends. 
 Go Beyond Translation 
 It is necessary to adapt—not merely translate—your Web site and blog to 
the global marketplace, just as it is  with   graphics. Pay attention to how people 
read in different countries. Failing to do so will negatively affect readability 
on your site. Do they read from left to right, as we do in the United States, 
or from right to left (RTL), as they do in Arabic-speaking countries? In this 
instance, adjust the text accordingly by making the RTL direction the default 
text direction on your Web site.  
 Measure Specific Results 
 Now that you’ve done everything there is to do to localize your site, you need 
to use the metric tracking you have set up to measure the return on your 
investment for your efforts. Track four key areas: web traffic, leads generated 
from that traffic,   leads that translate into actual business (revenues and prof-
its), and e-commerce sales increase. 

Exporting
271
 
■ Tip  Start reading! There are a couple of really good books on web globalization. Conduct 
a search for “web globalization books” and the most popular will rise to the top, such as John 
Yunker’s  The Art of the Global Gateway . Many of these books offer a good primer to understanding 
what is involved with web globalization. 
 Web Globalization: Getting Started 
 There are a couple of places to look for external guidance in getting started 
with  web globalization efforts  . I caution you to work with a firm that has a 
proven history of success in adapting Web sites for international markets (Get 
references!) and understands the key roles that database-driven Web sites 
and dynamic architecture play in web globalization. Each firm takes a different 
approach to web globalization. Some offer software solutions in the cloud 
(something we haven’t covered here but need to be aware of the emerging 
presence of), while others don’t. Find out what the firm does, how it does it, 
and how much it will cost. For the layperson, this can be a complex process, 
but for a firm that has vast experience, it’s a walk in the park. Don’t forget 
your primary focus before you dive in: know your audience, because you are 
about to get even closer to them! 
 Web Globalization Service Providers 
 Here are some  service providers I  culled from a variety of sources:
• 
 Eriksen Translations  :   http://www.eriksen.com/  . Eriksen 
provides translation, interpreting, typesetting, project man-
agement, web localization, and cultural consulting in over 
one hundred languages.  
• 
 Euroscript :   http://www.euroscript.com . Euroscript 
provides global content management solutions.  
• 
 Globalization Partners International (GPI)  :   http://www.
globalizationpartners.com  . GPI provides Web site 
translation, documentation translation, and software 
translation. 
• 
 Hewlett-Packard’s Application and Content Globalization 
(HP ACG)  :   http://www8.hp.com/us/en/business-
services/it-services.html?compURI=1079061  . 
HPACG provides language solutions for applications and 
content.  

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
272
• 
 LanguageLine Solutions  :   http://www.languageline.
com/  . LanguageLine offers interpretation, translation, and 
localization services.  
• 
 Lionbridge  :   http://www.lionbridge.com . Lionbridge 
provides translation, online marketing, global content 
management, and application-testing solutions.  
• 
 Moravia  :   http://www.moravia.com . Czech Republic-
based Moravia provides translation, localization, language 
services, and a full range of other globalization services, 
including testing and engineering to prepare products for 
a successful global market launch.  
• 
 RWS Group :   http://www.rws.com . RWS Group pro-
vides intellectual property translation, filing and search 
services, and technical and commercial translation and 
localization  
• 
 SDL International  :   http://www.sdl.com . SDL delivers 
an integrated localization solution and translation ser-
vices to connect with customers worldwide.  
• 
 STAR Group :   http://www.star-group.net . Translator 
and language service provider STAR Group is repre-
sented globally, with 51 locations in more than 30 coun-
tries, allowing for project managers, translators, and 
experts to have expertise on site in a local market.  
• 
 Translations.com  : 
  http://www.translations.com . 
Translations.com, a TransPerfect company, specializes in 
a variety of Web site translations, including specializa-
tion in legal, patent, certified, and software translations.  
• 
 Welocalize  :   http://www.welocalize.com  . Welocalize 
specializes in both translation services and analyzing 
cultural characteristics to ensure that a company’s web 
offerings are more accessible worldwide.  
• 
 TransPerfect  :   http://www.transperfect.com/ . TransPerfect 
provides language services and translation-related tech-
nologies for companies ranging from small businesses to 
global enterprises.  
• 
 Sajan :   http://www.sajan.com . Sajan is a global transla-
tion service provider offering localization solutions and 
language translation management system technology.  
• 
 adaQuest  :   http://www.addaquest.com . adaQuest helps 
you take on the whole world with your localization goals.  

Exporting
273
• 
 Language Services Associates  :   http://www.lsaweb.com . 
Language Services Associates delivers a full range of lan-
guage translation services and language interpretation 
services to companies across the globe.  
• 
 U.S. Translation Company  :   http://www.ustransla-
tion.com  . U.S. Translation Company provides interpre-
tations and translation services in over 100 languages.  
 Consulting Companies Specializing in Web 
Globalization 
 The following companies offer support services in web globalization to indi-
viduals and businesses—from translation, to interpretation, to localization 
projects. If you want an unbiased expert opinion on the service providers 
previously mentioned, for example, these two companies should be able to 
assist you. Prior to entering into a consulting arrangement, double-check as 
to whether the company has any commercial ties to the organization listed. 
 Byte Level Research  
 A longtime front-runner in web globalization,  Byte Level Research  (  http://
www.bytelevel.com  ) is a research and consulting firm that helps companies 
create and improve their Web sites to successfully speak to the world. In 
addition, for more than eight years BL has published  The Web Globalization 
Report Card (  http://bytelevel.com/reportcard2013/  ) annually. It is a 
much-sought-after, in-depth analysis of the world’s leading global Web sites, 
language trends, and best practices.  
 Common Sense Advisory 
 Common Sense Advisory ( CSA  ;   http://www.commonsenseadvisory.com ) 
supports firms in the areas of translation, localization, interpreting, interna-
tionalization, globalization, marketing, international strategy, market intelli-
gence, web content, and procurement.  
 Additional Considerations 
 Whichever company you decide to work with, in  addition  to the basics, make 
sure it covers nitty-gritty details, such as legal, statutory, and privacy issues, as 
well as providing customer service support through e-mail, global site registra-
tion, and so forth. All of those things can be problematic if you don’t have an in-
house expert . Consult with your international attorney throughout the process 
to ensure the legal requirements are satisfied, including but not limited to local 
domain names, privacy, data restrictions, and online terms and conditions.  

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
274
 Additional Resources: Associations 
• 
 European Language Industry Association (ELIA): 
  http://www.elia-association.org . Members of ELIA 
include a large number of European translation agencies.  
• 
 Globalization and Localization Assocation (GALA) :  
  http://www.gala-global.org . GALA is an international 
association whose members are major players in transla-
tion and interpretation with a focus on new technologies.  
• 
 American Translators Association (ATA) :   http://
www.atanet.org  . ATA members include freelance trans-
lators and translation companies.  
• 
 Association of Language Companies (ALC) : 
  http://www.alcus.org . ALC is a professional organiza-
tion for American translation companies.  
• 
 Chambre Nationale des Entreprises de Traduction 
(CNET) :   http://cnetfrance.jimdo.com . CNET is a 
professional organization for key players in the French 
translation market.  
 
■ Tip  Translators Without Borders (  http://translatorswithoutborders.org  ) is considered 
the world’s leading nonprofit translation organization. It facilitates the transfer of knowledge from 
one language to another by managing a community of NGOs that need translations and professional, 
vetted translators who volunteer their time to help. Two other translation organizations that come to 
mind are  PerMondo (  http://www.mondo-lingua.org/ ) and  ITC Global Translations (  http://
itcglobaltranslations.com  ), an affiliate partner of SDL International. If you run a nonprofit 
organization and need translation help on your web initiatives, check to see whether the service 
providers mentioned earlier offer a discounted rate or special service packages especially for nonprofits. 
 How Much Will it Cost? 
 According to  Globalization   Partners, there are many factors involved when 
determining how much web globalization efforts will cost. These include the 
number of words; the number of target languages; the web-graphic require-
ments; the requirements of the devices you’re catering to, whether PCs, apps, 
or digital technology; the number of publishing platforms; the content manage-
ment system used; the markup and scripting languages; and so forth.  xvii That 
said, a proposal is generally required so that a package can be tailored to your 
specific needs. 

Exporting
275
 Word on the street says that for a simple translation project, fees can aver-
age anywhere from ten cents to thirty cents per word (and possibly more 
depending on the nature and scope of the project). One must not forget 
about the additional cost of technology to support the project and other 
related elements in the Web site design that must also be adapted. 
 Jack Welde  , the CEO of  Smartling  , says, “Typically, professional translation 
involves one or more translators plus an editor/reviewer. You might also find 
additional costs to write a style guide for translating your site, to develop a 
glossary of standardized terms, and to do linguistic Q&A, to review the final 
product.”  xviii 
 Creating a global presence for your Web site is not easy and is likely to be a 
costly undertaking, but to play the global game competitively, you must buy 
the services required to keep your brand understood, strong, and enjoyed by 
the world. 
 Vigdis Eriksen, the founder and president of Eriksen Translations, says, “To 
reach out to the world for business, your website should be flexible enough 
to adapt to other languages in the future. Build for scalable global growth and 
success.”  
 Summary 
 Your Web site is oftentimes the first and strongest impression visitors have of 
you. If you want international customers to find you, stay longer on your Web 
site, and buy something from you, then create content that is communicated 
in their native language. You don’t have to leap into this—you can “lean in,” as 
 Sheryl Sandberg  , COO of  Facebook  , would say. You can take baby steps to get 
where you desire to go (say by satisfying the needs of Argentinian visitors to 
start with). The core challenge is this: Do you want to remain a sleepy small 
business serving only English-speaking customers for the rest of your life, or 
do you want to wake up and learn how to outcompete the companies in 
your category by offering multiple languages and serving the world? The latter 
requires the right architecture, the right information, the right technology, the 
right people, and the right integration. 
 Now that you are poised to sell to the world, one language, country, or global-
ized Web site at a time, you are ready to serve customers. In case customers 
don’t discover you, we’ll go find them!  

Chapter 15 | Web Design with the World in Mind
276
 Notes 
  i.    http://bytelevel.com/books/gateway/  , accessed April 
17, 2016.  
  ii.   “You Will Speak Every Language,” Alex Ross, The Wall 
Street Journal, accessed April 17, 2016,   http://www.
wsj.com/articles/the-language-barrier-is-
about-to-fall-1454077968  .  
  iii.   “Marketing Myopia,” Theodore Levitt,  Harvard Business 
Review , last modified July 2004, accessed April 17, 2016, 
  http://hbr.org/2004/07/marketing-myopia . 
  iv.   “Language Service Provider Growth Factors,” Common 
Sense Advisory, last modified November 2010, 
  h t t p : / / w w w . c o m m o n s e n s e a d v i s o r y . c o m /
AbstractView.aspx?ArticleID=736  . 
  v.   “Monterey: The Importance of Being the ‘Language 
Capital of the World,’” Marie Vasari, Monterey Herald, 
accessed April 17, 2016,   http://www.montereyherald.
com/article/NF/20160402/NEWS/160409939  . 
  vi.   Ibid.  
 vii.   “Frequently Asked Questions About Byte Level Research 
and Web Globalization,” John Yunker, accessed April 17, 
2016,   http://bytelevel.com/about/faq.html . 
  viii.    http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-language-bar-
rier-is-about-to-fall-1454077968  . 
  ix.   “Global 
Language 
Services: 
Market 
Size 
2009-
2018,” Statistic, accessed April 17, 2016,   http://
w w w . s t a t i s t a . c o m / s t a t i s t i c s / 2 5 7 6 5 6 /
size-of-the-global-language-services-market/  . 
 x.   “The Ultimate Guide to Global Navigation,” accessed 
April 
17, 
2016, 
  http://www.globalbydesign.
com/2010/09/09/the-art-of-the-global-gateway/  . 
  xi.   Adapted from “Internet World Users by Language: Top 10 
Languages—World Internet Statistics,” Internet World 
Stats, accessed April 17, 2016, last modified November 30, 
2015,   http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats7.
htm  . 

Exporting
277
  xii.   “The Top 10 Languages That Reign Online,” Stephen 
Henderson, Common Sense Advisory (CSA), accessed 
April 17, 2016,   http://www.commonsenseadvisory.
com/Default.aspx?Contenttype=ArticleDetAD&tab
ID=63&Aid=36478&moduleId=390  . 
 xiii.   “Limelight CMO Survey Confirms That Globalization 
of Digital Presence is a Strategic Priority,” Limelight 
Networks, accessed April 17, 2016, last modified August 
23, 
2012, 
  https://globenewswire.com/news-rele
ase/2012/08/23/483584/10002888/en/Limelight-
CMO-Survey-Confirms-That-Globalization-of-
Digital-Presence-is-a-Strategic-Priority.html  . 
  xiv.   “Language Globalization Guidebooks,” Globalization 
Partners International, accessed October 29, 2013 
  http://www.globalizationpartners.com/ser-
vices/guide-books.aspx  .  
  xv.   “The 2016 Web Globalization Report Card,” ByteLevel 
Research, accessed April 17, 2016,   http://bytelevel.
com/reportcard2016/#top25  . 
  xvi.   “How to Start a Multilingual Site,” Google Webmaster 
Central Blog, last modified August 7, 2008, accessed April 
17, 2016,   http://googlewebmastercentral.blogspot.
com/2008/08/how-to-start-multilingual-site.html  .  
  xvii.   “Website 
Translation 
and 
Localization 
Services,” 
Globalization Partners, accessed April 17, 2016,   http://
www.globalizationpartners.com/services/web-
site-translation.aspx  . 
  xviii.   “How Much Does It Cost to Translate a Website from 
English into German, French, Spanish, Japanese, Korean, 
and Chinese?,” Jack Welde, Quora, accessed April 17, 
2016, last modified February 25, 2011,   http://www.
quora.com/How-much-does-it-cost-to-translate-
a-website-from-English-into-German-French-
Spanish-Japanese-Korean-and-Chinese  . 

P A R T
 Developing 
Sales and 
Distribution 
Capabilities 
IV

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_16
 C H A P T E R 
 Finding 
Cross-Border 
Customers 
 The purpose of a business is to get and keep a customer. Without 
customers, no amount of engineering wizardry, clever financing, or 
operations expertise can keep a company going. 
 —Theodore Levitt, late marketing professor at the 
Harvard Business School  i 
 In the future, our customers will create greater value for us. They not only 
generate income for us, they can also help us evolve. 
 — Zhu Bin, CEO, GuangDong Create Environment & Technology Co., 
China  ii 
 Finding  customers  for your export product and services can be accomplished 
through a range of programs, largely government sponsored, including trade 
shows, trade missions, and related trade-networking services. I’ll introduce a 
number of these services to you and explain how you can take advantage of 
them. I’ll also revisit how to use social media and networking to attract poten-
tial customers worldwide. 
16

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
282
 This section is one of my favorites because, as Levitt says, you can’t keep a 
company going without customers, and most books on international trade 
never provide a specific course of action on how to find them. I’ve been in 
your shoes and know the struggles that come with starting an export venture, 
so use me as a resource to help you get started. Get out your customer com-
pass (sounds like a great new product idea!), and let’s go. I want this part to be 
fresh, fun, relevant, and accessible to everyone everywhere. 
 Define Your Cross-Border  Customers  
 As we discussed in Chapter   12 , the goal of the export research you did is to 
help you select a likely market for your products, envision your end user, and 
refine your product or marketing strategy, if need be. This usually involves 
learning the demographics of your targeted consumer in the country you 
are about to enter and considering how to reach them in the most efficient 
manner. 
 
■ Caution   By now, you’d better know what is important to a consumer when she makes a 
purchasing decision related to your product or service, because if you don’t (and if Theodore 
Levitt were alive today, he would most likely agree), your best intention will not satisfy, or woo, the 
extremely selective, busy, and value-conscious visitors to your online properties. 
 Learning about consumer trends is another means of helping you to determine 
where your product belongs and predict how successful it will be. Another 
goal of your research has been to assemble information about your first tier 
of customers—in other words, the intermediaries or end users who will actu-
ally purchase your product. Regardless of whether you are selling direct or 
indirect, your customers will tend to fall into one of six categories, which I 
will get to later. 
 However you move your product, it’s important to be aware of how many 
intermediaries will be involved in getting your product or service to your con-
sumers. Each one will add his markup to the price of your product in order to 
earn his due profit. You need to take this into consideration when you price 
your product, so that it won’t end up being excessively expensive by the time 
it actually hits store shelves or arrives at a consumer’s door. The most attrac-
tive import won’t be able to compete with local products if it costs more than 
a consumer is willing to pay. 

Exporting
283
 
■ Caution   When you set up an e-commerce shop (look back at Chapter   8 ), you must decide 
what type of customers your transactions will primarily involve:  business to business (B-to-B) , 
 business to consumer (B-to-C) ,  consumer to consumer (C-to-C) , or  business to government 
(B-to-G)  . If your target customer is B-to-B, the analysis in this chapter applies because B-to-B 
describes commerce transactions between two businesses, such as between a manufacturer and 
a retailer, a manufacturer and an overseas agent, or a manufacturer and a distributor. It also works 
with a B-to-C target. 
 There are six different categories of customers I will talk about in this chapter: 
the distributor or importing wholesaler, the overseas agent or representative, 
the overseas retailer, the overseas end user, the trading company, and the 
e-commerce customer (your Everyday Joe who might buy a single belt, for 
instance, at your e-commerce site for himself). 
 Let’s start first with the large-volume customer.  
 Distributor  or Importing Wholesaler 
 A  distributor  buys products from you (the seller, or exporter in this case) in 
large volumes, and then warehouses, distributes, and resells them to its cus-
tomers. It also takes care of after-sales service. It is the most common first-
tier buyer you will find and can offer the most efficient and profitable way to 
get your product to the consumer. 
 
■ Note   Don’t get too bogged down with titles and terminology. They vary from country to 
country. In Japan, for example, distributors are referred to as wholesalers. 
 When evaluating prospective distributors, look for the following critical 
 characteristics  :
 1.  They trade in the geographic areas where you want to 
sell your product.  
 2.  They have experience in importing, selling, marketing, and 
promoting your type of product.  
 3.  They have distribution channels in place that will reach 
your targeted consumer.  
 4.  They distribute products that are similar to yours but are 
noncompeting.  

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
284
 5.   They are large enough in size to accomplish the desired 
results. 
 6.   They have the financial strength to meet the demands of 
your business over the long haul.  
 7.  They have a substantial number of sales outlets and a 
successful sales performance.  
 8.  They have facilities to warehouse your products.  
 9.  They have a reputation in the marketplace for scrupulous 
honesty, reliability, and regular customer service.  
  10.  They deliver the kind of after-sales follow-through you’ll 
be proud to have associated with your product.  
  11.  They understand local culture, know how to negotiate 
the ins and outs of government regulations, and might 
even have helpful political connections.  
 After you find a distributor or two that match this criteria, I recommend that 
you meet with each one—preferably in person, or via Skype if you are con-
serving expenses—and decide which one comes closest to sharing your views 
on market penetration. 
 You will be establishing an important and long-term relationship, ideally, and 
that means you should find out everything you can about them well before 
you structure any contract. When you interview them, use the following list 
of  questions as a guide:
 1.  How long have you been in business?  
 2.  Can you share a few success stories about similar yet 
noncompeting products you have sold? 
 3.  Have you represented other foreign companies? Explain 
what you did.  
 4.   How long has your relationship lasted with the top three 
companies you represent?  
 5.  How will our line fit in or complement your existing 
portfolio of products?  
 6.  What’s your game plan for building our brand in your 
country?  
 7.  Do you have good market coverage, including a trained 
and educated sales force? 

Exporting
285
 8.  What specific territory, customer type, or product range 
are you interested in covering (either exclusively or 
nonexclusively)?  
 9.  Can you deliver on pre-agreed sales targets?  
  10.  Where do you see our brand in three, five, and ten years?  
 
■ Tip  Conducting serious due diligence on a distributor who intends to buy a large volume 
from you consistently over the course of years can spare you from headaches later on. You 
don’t want to doubt your partner throughout the relationship. The relationship should be fluid, 
trusting, adventurous, and growth oriented. For more information, read, “Pre-Screening Overseas 
 Distributors : 50 Questions:   http://importexport.about.com/od/DevelopingSalesAndD
istribution/a/Pre-Screening-Overseas-Distributors.htm  . 
 In the  case of  exclusivity, as referred to in number eight,  Dan Harris  , an expert 
on Chinese law and the publisher of the   China Law Blog , says this: “If you grant 
an exclusive, you should be sure to set sales quotas and performance targets 
[as noted in number nine] that will allow you to terminate the contract if not 
met.” He goes on to say, “Setting adequately high minimum sales quotas will 
protect you from getting stuck with an under-performing or non-performing 
distributor. Clearly defining the sales quotas and performance targets is essen-
tial. The typical provision mandates a certain minimum dollar value of sales or 
a minimum number of units sold. Failure for a distributor to meet the mini-
mum for a certain period might result in termination or, alternatively, it might 
just lead to it losing exclusivity.”  
 Harris also cautions, “If you are going to sell your product into a new inter-
national market (whether through a distributor or otherwise), you absolutely 
must register your trademark in the country before doing so and you abso-
lutely must register that trademark in your name, not that of your distributor.” 
Control over intellectual property rights is important! 
 He finishes with, “A good distribution contract makes clear what happens 
upon termination because doing so greatly improves your chances of smoothly 
transitioning to a new distributor. Is your distributor allowed to sell down its 
remaining inventory of your product or must it cease sales immediately? Are 
you required to buy back the inventory and, if so, at what price? You want to 
put in your contract that the distributor must inform you of any pending and 
future sales. Lastly, where will your disputes with your distributor be resolved, 
and by whom?”  iii 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
286
 
CASE EXAMPLE: TAKE YOUR TIME AND ALWAYS 
PARTNER WITH SOMEONE YOU HAVE GOOD 
INSTINCTS ON
 
 Founder  Alison Larson of  WorldBlazer Consulting LLC , who has managed such 
big-name fashion brands as OshKosh B’Gosh and Carter’s, says: “The worst partner 
I can remember was a company from Turkey and the UK who wanted to roll out 
our [fashion] brand throughout Europe. They gave us a business plan with huge 
sales numbers and pushed us to begin immediately (the first bad sign). Although my 
instincts said “Run!,” the plan was too big to ignore and the company wanted to go 
forward. It wasn’t long before the market went south, the company went bankrupt and 
the owner disappeared with the money of some of his customers.”  iv She goes on to 
say, “… you can never turn a bad partner into a good partner no matter how hard you 
try.” Don’t rush into any deal and always go with your instincts. 
 Prequalifying Distributors 
 Once you have found a  distributor  , how do you prequalify it beyond your 
interview process to ensure that it is a reputable organization? These 10 help-
ful resources will give you some tips:
 1.  Country Riskline Report : (  http://www.dnb.com/risk-
management/international-risk/14909183-1.
html  ). A Dun & Bradstreet (D & B) service that provides 
an in-depth analysis of political, commercial, and eco-
nomic risk covering of doing business in a single country.  
 2.   The Million Dollar  Database : (MDDI;   http://www.mer-
gentmddi.com  ). Also put out by D & B, this database 
provides a flexible gateway to a database of 1.6 million 
international business records from outside the U.S. and 
Canada.  
 3.   USEmbassy.gov : Websites of U.S. Embassies, Consulates, 
and Diplomatic Missions : (  http://www.usembassy.gov ). 
This Web site provides a list of US embassies in other 
countries. Contact the one in the country in which you 
hope to do business and run your prospective customer’s 
name by the people there, just in case they know any-
thing. You’ll be surprised at how willing they will be to 
help.  

Exporting
287
 4.  International Business Credit Reports from  Experian.com : 
(  http://www.experian.com/b2bglobal  ). 
Experian 
provides global information on a wide range of busi-
nesses from more than 225 countries. The suite offer-
ing consists of three products: the  United Kingdom Risk 
Report , the  European Company Report , and the  International 
Developed Report . Pricing varies based on the complexity 
of the inquiry and the country.  
 5.   ICP : (  http://www.icpcredit.com/ ). International 
Company  Profile  provides international credit-status 
reports, company profiles, and business information 
on companies all over the world, especially in the 
emerging markets. Pricing varies based on the region 
and delivery time, but generally starts around US $75.  
 6.  U.S. Commercial Service’s International Company Profile :  
(  http://www.export.gov/salesandmarketing/eg_
main_018198.asp  ). The U.S. Commercial Service’s ICP 
provdes financial reports on companies in more than 
80 countries. Pricing varies based on the complexity of 
the inquiry and the country.  
 7.  GloBIS : (  http://www.glo-bis.com  ). GloBIS provides 
business credit reports, market intelligence, and data-
bases in China and everywhere else around the globe. 
Delivery times and pricing vary by region.  
 8.  LexisNexis : (  http://www.lexisnexis.com/risk/products
/instant-identity-verification.aspx  ). LexisNexis 
lets you verify professional credentials instantly by tapping 
more than 34 billion public and proprietary records.  
 9.  Global Verification Network : (  http://globalverifi-
cationnetwork.com  ). GVN, formerly a RedRidge 
verification service, screens applicants and conducts 
investigations for private sector financial transactions.  
  10.   Onfido : (  http://www.onfido.com  ). Onfido can verify 
anyone in the world within seconds.  

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
288
 
■ Tip  Managing Director  Louise M. Kern of GloBIS says that at the very least you should request 
from all key business distributors their: full name, name in the local language, business registration 
number, address, and contact numbers. Once you have that data, conduct your own Internet-based 
due diligence search in your native language and in their language—include search terms such as 
“scam” or “fraud” – to reaffirm truths or uncover discrepancies. Statements from your distributors 
always need to be verified and consistent with reality. 
 Other Ways to Prequalify Distributors 
 The following should be used in addition to, not in lieu of, the above listed 
resources.
• 
 WHOIS Search for Domain Registration Information, 
Network 
Solutions: 
(   www.networksolutions.com/
whois-search/TYPECOMPANYDOMAINNAMEHERE   ). When 
a company   registers a domain name   , the Internet 
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (  ICANN  ) 
requires the domain name registrar to submit personal 
contact information to the WHOIS database. Once a list-
ing appears in the online directory, it is publicly available 
to anyone who chooses to check the domain name using 
the WHOIS search tool. You can find out when a com-
pany was established and registered, and who the listing 
is under. For a small monthly fee, a registrar can also elect 
to keep their listing information private so that instead of 
showing their contact information, Network Solutions’s 
contact information will be featured.  
• 
 Check all social media platforms such as Facebook, 
LinkedIn, Twitter, or a blog to see if company informa-
tion is current and consistent with all other information 
a distributor has provided. 
 Once you have qualified several prospective distributors and found a good 
one that can carry out your export action plan, you’re ready to discuss an 
export business contract. Consult with your international attorney to set up 
a contractual agreement that establishes terms of mutual cooperation and 
assures you of an exclusive market, product type, or customer type for a spec-
ified period of time, with defined sales performance targets. Cross-border 
specialist, attorney, and Harvard Business School alum  Randall Lewis  believes 
you need to control mechanisms in your distribution partnership, such as 
distribution channels, key account management, and annual sales volumes, in 
order to achieve full market entry penetration levels.  v Commit to a minimum 

Exporting
289
of one year so that you have time to see how well you and the distributor 
work together. You should also monitor sales performance closely during this 
time. If sales are satisfactory and both parties are agreeable, you can extend 
the agreement as often and as long as you wish. As Harris adds, clearly defin-
ing the sales quotas and performance targets is essential because failure of the 
distributor to meet the minimum for a certain period might result in termina-
tion, which could later become your way out if the relationship is not working.  
 Overseas Agent  or Representative (Importer) 
 An overseas  agent  works on a commission basis (ranging from 2.5 to 15 per-
cent) to locate buyers for your product, which is considered indirect export-
ing (more in Chapter   17 ). It involves selling to an intermediary, who in turn 
arranges the sale of your products either directly to customers or to import-
ing wholesalers. Once a buyer is found, however, customer service and all 
transaction logistics, including setting up payment and arranging transporta-
tion, become your responsibility. The agent oversees your work, stays in close 
contact with the customer, and will step in to assist on behalf of either party 
if needed. The advantage of this type of working relationship is that you have 
a fair degree of control over price and who your customers are. 
 Since overseas agents, sometimes considered foreign country brokers, typi-
cally have a vast knowledge of a target market along with solid relationships 
with customers, they can easily identify and exploit opportunities for your 
enterprise, from tracking demographic trends, to announcing radical customer 
shifts, to identifying emerging hot new products in any given country. The trick 
to working effectively with agents or reps is to stay in close contact by e-mail, 
telephone, or Skype and set expectations in writing right at the outset. 
 To find agents, work with the US Commercial Service; check online sourc-
ing platforms such as  Alibaba  (  http://www.alibaba.com ),  Global Sources  
(  http://www.globalsources.com ),  EC21  (  http://www.ec21.com ), and 
 TradeKey  (  http://www.tradekey.com ); inquire with the international trade 
team at your bank for recommendations; reach out to industry trade-show 
executives who have access to the exhibitors and buyers who attend; and 
conduct a search via the Internet by typing in “Sales agent, UK, pet supplies,” 
for example. Many of the ways to find an overseas agent are similar to those 
that I will look at in Chapter   17 in my discussion of  export management com-
panies (EMCs)  .  
 
■ Note   Using a company’s own sales force will exert the most international control, but often for 
small businesses it is at a cost that is not affordable. Using overseas agents, representatives, and 
distributors is a prudent stepping-stone for testing the market and learning whether your product and 
services can be sold successfully first through someone who knows the market better than you do.  

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
290
 Overseas Retailer  
 You can also sell your products directly to  overseas retailers  , such as depart-
ment stores, supermarkets, or mail-order houses on either an exclusive or 
nonexclusive basis. However, retailers are generally small in size, service only 
a regional location, and have limited warehouse space. This means that their 
purchases are usually small and they can only give your product limited geo-
graphic distribution. Larger retailers like Costco, Walmart, and Tesco have the 
capability to import directly but rarely do because of the challenges it pres-
ents (local culture and tastes vary from country to country), so you will still 
need to appoint a local agent or distributor to service the local on-demand 
needs of the small and big firms alike. 
 Alternatively, small businesses with ties to major domestic retailers (Toys “R” 
Us, Costco, and Target, for example) may also be able to use them to sell 
abroad. Many large American retailers maintain local buying offices and use 
these offices to sell abroad when practical.  
 Overseas End User  
 You can also sell your products directly to certain types of end users, such as 
hospitals, universities, or original equipment manufacturers. They, in turn, may 
resell your products to their customers or incorporate them into their own 
 manufacturing   processes. 
 Buyers can be identified at trade shows, through international-trade publica-
tions, or through your local US Export Assistance Center (  http://export.
gov/eac/  ). When you sell directly to an overseas end user, you are respon-
sible for shipping, collecting payment, and after-sales service unless other 
arrangements are made. 
 Through e-commerce, you can also sell directly to anyone, anywhere in the 
world through a B-to-C transaction, as discussed in Chapter   8 . 
 Trading Company 
 As I note  in  the next chapter, you can sell your products directly through 
a  trading company,   which resells them to its customers. Trading companies 
such as Jardines (Hong Kong, and one of the original Hong Kong trading 
houses that date back to Imperial China) and Mitsui & Co. (Japan) have long 
histories as import intermediaries in the development of international trade 
between countries. They are virtually identical to export management com-
panies (EMCs), but they tend to function on a more demand-driven basis; 
that is, the demand of the market compels them to buy specific commodi-
ties. Trading companies usually have long-standing customers for whom they 

Exporting
291
source products on a regular basis, and these customers can be located not 
just in one country but all over the world. Nowadays, some people refer to 
trading companies as global B-to-B traders that specialize in one commodity 
and in one market with strong logistics capabilities. (An example would be 
eTransWorld [  http://www.lexecongroup.com/etransworld.php  ].) 
 Trading companies, better known in Japan as  sogo shosha companies, are useful for 
establishing contacts or making introductions for you, but they are rarely qualified 
to do extensive marketing of your product. This is because they tend to be huge, 
loosely structured organizations that lack both the appropriate investment funds 
and the focused commitment to bring a product to market. Their efforts show very 
little continuity, which means poor repeat business. If you use a trading company 
and it develops some business for you, consider meeting the customers it finds in 
person, taking responsibility for the sales, and doing the marketing and distribution 
yourself. It could be a great way to lay the groundwork for future direct  sales  .  
 
■ Note   Many large trading companies maintain buying offices in the United States and use 
these offices to sell abroad when practical. 
 e-Commerce  
 The proliferation of smart phones,   tablets, and other portable and wearable 
devices is driving the growth of e-commerce. More and more companies are 
using this method of distribution and marketing for selling and, as a result, 
more and more individuals are buying via e-commerce. Technically, e-com-
merce is a form of direct selling. However, due to the unique issues associated 
with this form of commerce and distribution, it needs to be placed in a direct-
method distribution class of its own. Sales of e-commerce are those to the 
second type of customer I mentioned earlier, your Everyday Joes. 
 E-commerce happens on three primary types of sites:
 1.  Transactional site : This type of site is one where people buy 
directly (Apple, Coach, and Sunglass Hut, for example).  
 2.  Information site : Here, people visit a site but are led to buy 
elsewhere (e.g., eBay, Amazon)  
 3.   E-Marketplace : On this type of site, people browse thou-
sands of products, shop, and buy online (Zazzle and Etsy, 
for example).  
 Now that you know who your customers are, let’s talk about how you’re 
going to meet  them  . 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
292
 Making  Customer Contacts  —Composing 
Your  Inquiry 
 When a large-volume customer, such as an overseas wholesaler, contacts you 
or you contact him either by snail mail or over the Internet, always respond 
promptly and completely. Include the following materials and information:
 1.   A cover letter : It should establish your credentials as a reli-
able and reputable supplier in the industry. I always sug-
gest e-mailing a scanned, signed copy of the letter and 
then sending the original via airmail, especially if you have 
attractive letterhead and marketing materials. (If snail 
mailing, attach your business card.)  
 2.  Product specification and pricing sheets : These should pro-
vide enough information for the customer to make an 
intelligent decision as to whether or not he wants to 
continue communicating with you. Your letter to the cus-
tomer might look like this:
 Dear [Name of Customer]: 
 Thank you for your interest in our _______________ 
product line. We have enclosed product catalogs and special 
export pricing for your review. Additional information can be 
found at our Web site called _______________, located at 
_______________, on our Facebook page at _______________, 
on our LinkedIn page at _______________, and on our Google+ 
page at _______________. You can visit us on Twitter, too: 
______________________. 
 Our company was established in 1974 and has been serving 
customers worldwide with quality products since then. We have 
the manufacturing capacity to keep up with demand. In addition, we 
only require a fourteen-day lead time to produce any quantity you 
might wish to order. 
 We look forward to your reply and the opportunity to do business 
with you. 
 Sincerely, 
 [Your Name]  

Exporting
293
 Your goals here are very basic:   to identify yourself, to reference the inquiry, to 
provide the information requested, to establish yourself as a solid, reputable 
institution, and to respectfully express your interest in entering into a rela-
tionship with the company. A lot of this information might already be featured 
on your Web site, but when it comes to specifically tailored information, such 
as pricing, it’s best to respond directly and with a personal touch. 
 I've already discussed a number of sources from which you are likely to 
obtain lists of likely customers in the course of your market research. Start 
e-mailing inquiries to the customers on your lists and keep adding new names. 
Meanwhile, the following are some high-powered services and activities that 
can put you directly in touch with people who are actively seeking products 
like yours. 
 Next, I’ll cover some valuable US Department of Commerce’s International 
Trade Administration programs that help companies succeed in export mar-
kets around the world.   
 Gold Key Matching Service 
 Start with the most useful program: the  Gold Key Matching Service  (  http://
export.gov/salesandmarketing/eg_main_018195.asp  ), a US Commercial 
Service. 
 For a small company with a reasonable budget, the  Gold Key Matching Service 
(GKMS)  —which is run by the US Department of Commerce, US Commercial 
Service—is one of the most efficient ways to meet with prescreened potential 
cross-border business associates, whether you are seeking an agent, distribu-
tor, or joint-venture partner. The service arranges individual meetings, most 
taking place at the US embassy in the host country. Many companies say that 
this is a wise investment because you pay only for your airfare, lodging, and 
entertainment and have a series of productive meetings already set up. 
 Many businesses could benefit from learning more about the GKMS. Every 
year, the US Commercial Service helps thousands of national companies navi-
gate the challenges of exporting goods and services worth billions of dollars. 
Located in 109 cities across the United States and in US embassies and con-
sulates in more than seventy-five other countries, its global network of trade 
professionals opens doors that no one else can. First and foremost, it can con-
nect US companies with international buyers worldwide. After all, isn’t that 
what you are after:  finding customers the world over? 
 The GKMS will also  help  you with:
• 
 Creating custom market reports and industry briefings to 
target the best trade prospects and opportunities with 
the help of trade specialists  

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
294
• 
 Conducting market research that pertains to a specific 
country and examines cultural issues, analyzes market 
potential and size, and includes market-entry strategies 
for your product or service offering  
• 
 Performing due diligence on foreign competitors  
• 
 Setting up appointments with prospective trading part-
ners in key industry sectors  
• 
 Conducting effective debriefings with trade specialists and 
assisting in developing appropriate follow-up strategies  
• 
 Booking international travel, accommodations, inter-
preter service, and clerical support  
• 
 Arranging participation in trade shows sponsored by 
state and federal agencies  
 
■ Tip  If you are operating on a shoestring budget and cannot afford to travel internationally, the 
GKMS also offers a video service whereby you can receive all the same benefits but you meet your 
potential business partners via videoconferencing instead of in person. Inquire. 
 Gold Key Service in India 
 Let’s say you are interested in visiting  India  with the intention of eventually 
doing business there. (In calendar year 2014, the United States saw exports 
of nearly $37.2 billion to India, a 4.3 percent increase over 2013.  vi ) First, you 
would need to brush up on India (to do this, you could go to   http://export.
gov/india/doingbusinessinindia/index.asp  ) and then review the 
“Frequently Asked Questions” and look at “I am an American company and 
want to export to India. Where do I start?” (  http://export.gov/india/
frequentlyansweredquestions/index.asp  ). Next, you would get in touch 
with the Gold Key Service for India (  http://export.gov/india/contac-
tus/index.asp  ), which will assist you in identifying attractive opportunities 
tailored to your business and arrange appointments with prescreened key 
players in the Indian market. 
 The service can help you set up appointments with your choice of agents and 
distributors; importing wholesalers in your industry; key governmental offi-
cials; service experts (e.g., bankers, consultants, and lawyers); potential Indian 
partners’ trade associations; joint venture specialists; and major end users. It’s 
up to you and what your business needs are. GKS makes it easy to enter the 
market and does most of the work, if not all, at a modest fee. 

Exporting
295
 Fees vary depending on company size and the scope of service, but for stan-
dardized services they typically are as follows (the prices are as of 2016): $350 
for small- to medium-sized new-to-export companies that are using the ser-
vice for the first time; $700 for a small- to medium-sized company; and $2,300 
for a large company.  
 Other Helpful US Government-Sponsored 
Programs 
 The Gold Key Matching Service isn’t the only useful program. Here are some 
of the others. 
 The US Export Assistance Centers 
 The  US Export Assistance Centers  (EAC;   http://www.sba.gov/content/
us-export-assistance-centers  ) are staffed by professionals from the 
Small Business Administration (SBA), the US Department of Commerce, the 
US Export-Import Bank, and other public and private organizations. They can 
provide the help you need to find reputable distributors to compete in today’s 
global marketplace.  
 Trade Leads Database 
 The  Trade Leads Database  (TLD;   http://export.gov/tradeleads/index.
asp  ) contains prescreened, time-sensitive leads and government tenders 
gathered through US Commercial Service offices around the world. You can 
search leads and receive notification when new leads are posted.  
 Platinum Key Service 
 The  Platinum Key Service  (PKS;   https://build.export.gov/main/sale-
sandmarketing/eg_main_018196  ) allows US companies to take advantage 
of longer-term, sustained, and customized US Commercial Service assistance 
on a range of issues. The fee-based service can include a range of issues includ-
ing but not limited to identifying markets, launching products, and developing 
major project opportunities. Ongoing service is available for six months, one 
year, or a specified time frame based on the mutually agreed upon scope of 
work. To request this service, inquire with an EAC (  http://www.sba.gov/
content/us-export-assistance-centers  ).  

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
296
 International Buyer Program 
 The International Buyer Program ( IBP  ;   http://export.gov/ibp/  ) recruits 
thousands of qualified foreign buyers, sales representatives, and business part-
ners to US trade shows each year, giving exhibitors an excellent opportunity 
to expand business globally.  
 International Partner Search 
 International Partner Search ( IPS  ;   http://export.gov/salesandmarket-
ing/eg_main_018197.asp  ) will put its trade specialists, located in more than 
eighty countries, to work finding you the most suitable strategic partners. All 
you do is provide marketing material and company background information, 
and IPS does the work!  
 Business Intelligence Companies  
 No matter what business you are in, you will benefit tremendously from study-
ing your competitors and working to lure their customers by offering bet-
ter products or services. The following business intelligence companies offer 
searchable trade databases, covering international trade activities throughout 
the world, for a fee. They are a fantastic source of tracking what companies 
are exporting and to where. 
 As you review these sites, you must know what to look for. For example, if 
you want to export refurbished computers, study your competitors to find 
out: Are they growing? Do they have websites, blogs and other social media 
platforms? Do they make the news? Are they global? This doesn’t mean copy-
ing every move they make. It means analyzing what your competitors are 
doing and then understanding why they are doing it so that you can tap into 
lucrative opportunities just as they are—but with a better, stronger, or new-
and-improved version. 
 Find out where all their exports are going. You can either steal away business 
from them by exporting to the same location, provided you have a competi-
tive advantage or a better value proposition (vastly improved quality, design, 
or price on a refurbished computer, for instance), or you can predict where 
they might go next and enter that market before they do. (Tread carefully 
here, because you are on your own, carving out a new unproven market—can 
you do it profitably?) 

Exporting
297
 If you duplicate a competitor’s strategy, tweak it to accommodate your 
strengths and then execute it better. And don’t forget to utilize the transpar-
ency of social media and social networking. See what people are saying about 
your competition. If there is a thread of discontent, capitalize on it with a new 
product or differentiate an existing product in the market where the competi-
tor is weak. Two critical key points: Find out what works, and do it better. Find 
out what doesn’t work, and avoid it. A few good sites to review your competi-
tors and their strategies are the following:
• 
 PIERS : (  http://www.piers.com ). Whether you need to 
conduct market research, generate sales leads, or find 
buyers, PIERS is a comprehensive source of US water-
borne import and export trade data online.  
• 
 Datamyne : (  http://www.datamyne.com ). This site pro-
vides real-time data about US exporters and export 
movement.  
• 
 Import Genius : (  http://www.importgenius.com ). This 
site provides real-time data on containers that enter the 
United States.  
• 
 Journal of  Commerce : (  http://www.joc.com ). The JOC 
provides trade data and offers everything from a listing 
of the top hundred US exporters (including the top ten 
states exporting to China) to import/export trade leads 
and international trade news.  
• 
 Panjiva : (  http://www.panjiva.com ). If you desire to grow 
your market share, gain new insights, or reduce costs in 
your global supply chain, Panjiva provides solutions in 
these areas by providing shipment, company, and location 
data from more than 600 million shipment records and 
spanning more than 10 million companies.  
• 
 Export    Abroad :   (  http://www.exportabroad.com  ). 
Whether it is identifying sales targets or staying up to 
date on compliance issues, Export Abroad helps you keep 
track of markets around the world and alerts you to new 
opportunities as they occur.  
 
■ Tip  Revisit Chapter   12  , because all the market research resources I list there can also help 
you find customers—from the Small Business Administration, to world trade centers, to American 
embassies. All you need to remember is to ask: “Help me put together a list of potential customers 
in _______(fill in country) for _________________ (fill in your product or service offering).” 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
298
 Other Ways to  Snag Customers Worldwide  
 You can do all the social networking in the world to find potential interna-
tional buyers for your product or service offering, but one surefire way to 
corral people to one central location in person is to exhibit at a trade show. 
You can do this either locally or internationally. 
 Domestic (Local)  Trade Shows  
 A good first step and a low-cost way to generate international sales—for both 
the large-volume customer and Everyday Joe—is to exhibit at a domestic 
trade show in your industry that offers an “international buyer” exhibit area. 
This will allow you to keep your transportation expenses to and from the 
show low. If the show’s local, you can even drive to it and sleep at your own 
home each night.   
 It may sound counterintuitive to make international sales without leaving the 
country, but the fact is that international buyers are attracted to large trade 
shows in the United States. And let’s not forget the draw of Las Vegas, Chicago, 
Miami, and other big trade show venues. 
 For example, many years ago, I exhibited at the International Home & 
Housewares Show in Chicago, where I am based, to tap into its international 
buyer audience and number of global member benefits. Afterward, I was able 
to use the directory in order to prospect customers. 
 After you generate national interest and sales success, you can think about 
exhibiting overseas at a show that brings in worldwide buyers in your industry. 
From there on, and as discussed in Chapter   10 , others in your industry will 
expect to see you there every year as long as you’re in business. If you exhibit 
once and then disappear, they’ll think you gave up on the market or went out 
of business. 
 For a listing of domestic trade shows, many of which will be within driv-
ing distance of your city, visit the ExpoPromoter Web site at   http://www.
tradeshowsusa.com/  . 
 
■ Tip  Instead of exhibiting at a trade show, you can organize your own program anywhere you 
choose—call it what you wish—to bring customers all over the world to you. In 2015, we did exactly 
that with our first ever Global Small Business Forum (  http://globalsmallbusinessforum.
com  ) held in Chicago at the famous Navy Pier. We plan to host the forum every year to meet with 
new customers and suppliers in person, educate them on the latest trends, better understand their 
needs, and develop solutions together. 

Exporting
299
 International Trade Shows  
 When you decide to exhibit internationally at a trade show, you incur trans-
portation, food, hotel, and exhibition-related expenses. Yet those additional 
costs are often more than offset by the potential of finding customers on the 
ground from all over the world. 
 Many big international trade shows, such as Hannover Messe in Germany 
(  https://texaswideopenforbusiness.com/news/texas-joins-larg-
est-ever-us-business-delegation-hannover-messe-2016  ), offer a US 
Pavilion, where the actual cost of the exhibit is subsidized by our govern-
ment, offering a substantial discount from the regular exhibit rate (inquire 
with your state’s US Export Assistance Center). The pavilions are strictly for 
the American exhibitors. Market experts from the US Embassy are typically 
on hand at the show to help national firms make connections and further 
establish themselves in a new market. 
 For a listing of international trade shows, try these sites (but also conduct a 
web search on your industry—automotive, technology, or food, for example—
to find out when and where the next overseas trade show will take place):
• 
 Trade Show News Network :   http://www.tsnn.com/ 
• 
 BizTrade Shows :   http://www.biztradeshows.com/  
• 
 Events Eye :   http://www.eventseye.com/ 
• 
 export.gov :     http://export.gov/eac/trade_events.
asp  
 
■ Tip  The US Commercial Service has what is called a trade fair certification program. It is a 
cooperative arrangement between private-sector trade show organizers and the US government 
for the purpose of organizing a US pavilion. The goal is to increase US exports and expand national 
participation in overseas trade shows. 
 Government-Sponsored Trade Mission  
 Trade missions serve US firms that want to explore and pursue export oppor-
tunities by meeting directly with potential clients in their respective markets. 
They typically offer one-to-one meetings, networking events, site visits, brief-
ings, and media coverage. 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
300
 Certified Trade Missions (CTM;   http://export.gov/ctm/index.asp ) are 
overseas events that are planned and organized by private- and public-sector 
export-oriented groups outside of the US Department of Commerce. They 
are  designed   for new and experienced exporters to establish sales and set up 
representation abroad at a low cost. CTMs typically bring representatives of 
US companies into contact with potential agents, distributors, joint venture 
partners, licensees, local businesses, and government contacts.  
 Binational Societies  , Councils, and  Trade 
Associations  , and  Chambers of Commerce   
 As I discussed in Chapter   12 , it is important to search the Internet for local 
binational groups that will put you in touch with customers in the country 
where you’d like to do business. The National Association of Japan-America 
Societies (  http://www.us-japan.org/ ), the US-China Business Council 
(  https://www.uschina.org/ ), and the US-India Business Council (  http://
www.usibc.com/  ), for example, all promote bilateral trade between the 
United States and their respective countries and also provide a stimulating 
social forum for people with common interests. In addition, they can help with 
prospecting for export customers. You just need to ask. 
 Check with your state to see if it has an export promotion agency, or a foreign 
relations or export council. Organizations like these usually assemble at least 
once a month and offer a forum for discussion about how to better facilitate 
international relations, expand trade, and acquire new customers. 
 Contacts made through business colleagues and associations can often 
prove invaluable to exporters. Find someone who is successfully export-
ing and doesn’t compete with you, and buy her lunch and pick her brain. 
Many states offer associations—such as The International Trade Association 
of Greater Chicago (  http://www.itagc.org/ ), Monterey Bay International 
Trade Association (  http://www.mbita.org/ ) and the International Trade 
Association of Southwest Ohio (  http://www.mvita.org/)—that focus 
strictly on promoting world trade. Check with your local and international 
chamber of commerce to see which of these associations have chapters in your 
area and sit in on a meeting—then sign up. There are American chambers of 
commerce located all over the world.—for example, in China (  http://www.
amchamchina.org  ), India (  http://amchamindia.com ) and Japan ( http://
www.accj.or.jp )—each with the goal of promoting trade with the United 
States.   
 All of these are ways to scout for new, promising customers in export mar-
kets, and each can be a valuable source of knowledge.  

Exporting
301
 Tap Local Clients  for Their International Reach 
 One of the easiest ways to quickly enter a new foreign market is to partner or 
form an alliance with a company (it could be a client—Brother International, 
IBM, or American Express, for example) who is more powerful than you and 
is already conducting like-minded yet noncompeting business in that market. 
Before you consider this avenue, I caution you to consult with tax and legal 
advisors to learn what type of partnership you should form, if you form one 
at all, what compliance issues need to be addressed, and whether or not you 
will be required to file tax returns in the host country. Please note that not all 
partnerships need to be formalized. Sometimes a trusting relationship and a 
handshake is all it takes to get started. 
 Most companies decide to partner because they sense that there is great 
synergy between two specific companies—a mutual need and desire to share 
risk in achieving a common objective. I’ll go into more detail about partner-
ships and alliances in Chapter   17 when I discuss methods of exporting, but for 
now I’ll just say that partnering can open doors to new markets by enabling 
the acquisition of export customers at a faster rate. Inquire with your global 
clients. Ask for an introduction to the individual who heads up the in-country 
office. Take it one country at a time.  
 
CASE EXAMPLE: PARTNER WITH A DOMESTIC CLIENT 
THAT HAS A GLOBAL PRESENCE
 When I first started exporting foodstuff, I contacted one of the largest Japanese trading 
companies in the world: Mitsui & Co. The company had a local office in Chicago 
and did a significant amount of exporting to Japan. I approached the company about 
piggybacking my products with those it carried. Since I had the suppliers and the 
company had the established distribution channels and customer base, it was a good 
match. By combining my company’s gourmet food items with Mitsui’s beef products, 
we were able to provide extra value to customers throughout Japan. We went on to 
export container loads of product every month for many years. That experience taught 
me the importance of partnering in growing a business internationally—especially for 
small businesses! 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
302
 Find Customers Through Advertising  
 If you’ve done a good job of marketing your business by implementing a variety of 
tactics over a long period of time and have placed a strong emphasis on organic 
search engine marketing, the world will find you. If that’s working, you should not 
have to spend money on public relations or advertising—a far more costly way to 
market your business. However, if those Everyday Joe customers are not beating 
down your online door, here are a few options for profitably acquiring customers 
through advertising. Note that these are merely a sampling of what’s available.
• 
 Search engine ads : Focus on search engine marketing by 
purchasing ads on search engines. All companies have the 
possibility of using the same tactic. Thus, you are competing 
against everyone else who wants to spend money on adver-
tising to get customers. For service providers, try Google 
AdWords, Microsoft Bing Ads, and Yahoo Gemini Ads.  
• 
 Affiliate and performance-based marketing : If you have a 
product or service that others want to promote, get 
your constituency base involved by asking them and 
explaining how you can reward them with each visitor 
or customer they bring to you through their efforts. This 
can be affordable, scalable, and controllable. For affili-
ate programs, try CJ Affiliate, ClickBank, and LinkShare 
(a Rakuten Affiliate Network).  
 
■ Caution   No amount of money spent on advertising will make up for a poor customer experience.   
• 
 Retargeting : This process works by keeping track of people 
who visit your site and then retargeting your ads to them 
as they visit other sites. This advertising only works for 
sites that already have traffic, so if you already have visitors 
and want to leverage and increase traffic, give it a try. 
 Here’s how it works: Let’s say an individual visits your site 
to buy a special Irish bracelet. She stays for a bit and then 
leaves to look elsewhere on the web for a similarly styled 
bracelet at a better price or better quality. When that 
person shops other sites on the web for Irish bracelets, 
your retargeted ad will appear on their screen showing 
the Irish bracelet with a special discounted offer. If this 
sounds a bit complicated, work with a vendor to provide 
you with a marketing solution that fits your needs. For 
retargeting providers, try Criteo, FetchBack, Quantcast, 
AdRoll, and MediaForge (a Rakuten Affiliate Network).  

Exporting
303
• 
 Display ads : This type of ad allows you to target a specific 
demographic, extend your reach, and build your brand. 
It can be a video, banner, wallpaper, company logo, or 
other similar graphic. For display ad providers, try Google 
AdWords, Burst Media (a RhythmOne company), AOL, 
and Yahoo.  
 
■ Tip  Many social media and networking platforms have targeted advertising programs in place 
to help you acquire new customers for your business. Facebook claims you can reach more than 
1.4 billion people with its targeted advertising and will help you choose the right ones. LinkedIn 
offers targeted self-service ads as well, where you can pay by clicks or impressions and control 
your ad campaign from beginning to end. Inquire. 
 Summary 
 Finding customers for your export product and services can be easily accom-
plished through a wide variety of methods, including but not limited to social 
media and networking best practices, government-sponsored programs, trade 
shows, trade missions, and related trade-networking services. You can even 
advertise to acquire customers. But it’s not simply one tactic that will bring 
export customers to your door. It’s several different things in combination, 
and each part must be done exceptionally well, including becoming fluent in 
each market’s cultural sensitivities (as we will get to in Chapter   24 ). 
 As a result of your diligence, you will get customers. Now, we’re on to the 
easy part—determining your best export-sales strategy. How will you serve 
your customers?  
 Notes 
  i.   Theodore Levitt,  The Marketing Imagination (New York: 
Free Press, 1983) . 
  ii.   “Disrupt or be Disrupted,” Jane Hiscock, accessed 
April 24, 2016,   http://insights-on-business.com/
gbs-strategy/disrupt-or-be-disrupted/  . 
 iii.   Dan Harris, publisher of the  China Law Blog ,    www.chi-
nalawblog.com   ; used with permission.  
 iv.   “10 Critical Errors That Fashion Companies Make 
When Going Global,” Alison Larson, accessed April 24, 
2016, 
  http://www.worldblazer.com/wp-content/
uploads/2013/10/worldblazer-ebook.pdf  . 

Chapter 16 | Finding Cross-Border Customers
304
  v.   “A Guide to Controlling International Distribution 
Relationships: A Checklist for Success,” Randall Lewis, 
Pulse LinkedIn, accessed April 22, 2016,   https://www.
linkedin.com/pulse/guide-controlling-interna-
tional-distribution-checklist-randall-lewis  . 
 vi.   “Doing Business in India – the second fastest growing 
market in Asia,” accessed April 24, 2016,   http://export.
gov/india/doingbusinessinindia/index.asp  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_17
 C H A P T E R 
 Methods of 
Exporting 
 Direct, Indirect, and Collaborative Sales Channels  
 [Be] prepared to change your strategy or combine several options as 
your business needs evolve. By opening your mind to the full range of 
possibilities, you broaden perceived opportunities, sharpen your strategic 
decisions, and enhance global performance. 
 —Pankaj Ghemawat, Anselmo Rubiralta Professor of Global Strategy at 
IESE Business School in Barcelona, Spain  i 
 There are several  factors  to consider when determining whether a direct, 
indirect, or collaborative sales strategy is best for you—the most important 
are the extent of your resources, the degree of control you wish to exercise 
over your export ventures, and other in-country issues. The following analysis 
will help you to make a decision that is tailored to your needs. 
 First, let me emphasize that timing is everything. Readiness to seize an opportu-
nity is more important than having your whole strategy nailed down beforehand. 
If you get a promising inquiry for your export product, go for it. Don’t analyze 
it to death until after you’ve responded to the inquiry. If there’s one thing I’d 
like you to take away from reading this particular section and entire book, it’s 
the exporter’s habit of action: It’s better to do something—anything—that will 
17

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
306
put you in the export marketplace than to expend enormous amounts of time 
researching and debating options and wondering what other people would do 
if they were in your place. When an opportunity comes, you must be ready to 
operate via any sales channel, be it direct, indirect, or collaborative. 
 Methods of Exporting 
 Let’s look at the two primary  methods of exporting  : direct and indirect. 
 Direct Exporting 
 Direct exporting  means you export directly to a customer interested in buy-
ing your product. You are responsible for handling the logistics of shipment 
and for collecting payment. 
 The advantages of this method are:
• 
 Your potential profits are greater because you have elimi-
nated intermediaries.  
• 
 You have a greater degree of control over all aspects of 
the transaction.  
• 
 You know who your customers are.  
• 
 Your customers know who you are. They feel more 
secure in doing business directly with you.  
• 
 Your business trips are much more efficient and effective 
because you meet directly with the customer responsible 
for selling your product.  
• 
 You know whom to contact if something isn’t working.  
• 
 The feedback you receive from your customers on your 
product and its performance in the marketplace gets to 
you faster and more directly.  
• 
 You get slightly better protection for your trademarks, 
patents, and copyrights.  
• 
 You present yourself as fully committed and engaged in 
the export process.  
• 
 You develop a better understanding of the marketplace.  
• 
 As your business develops in the foreign market, you have 
greater flexibility to improve or redirect your marketing 
efforts. 

Exporting
307
 The  disadvantages  of direct exporting:
• 
 It takes more time, energy, and money than you may be 
able to afford.  
• 
 It requires more people power to cultivate a customer 
base. 
• 
 Servicing the business will demand more responsibility 
from every level of your organization.  
• 
 You are held accountable for whatever happens. There is 
no buffer zone. 
• 
 You may not be able to respond to customer communi-
cations as quickly as a local agent can.  
• 
 You have to handle all the logistics of the transaction.  
• 
 If you have a technological product, you must be prepared 
to respond to technical questions and to provide on-site 
start-up training and ongoing support services.  
 Indirect Exporting 
 Indirect exporting  refers to selling your products to an intermediary, who in 
turn sells them either directly to customers or indirectly to importing whole-
salers. The easiest method of indirect exporting is to sell to an intermediary in 
your own country. When selling by this method, you normally are not respon-
sible for collecting payment from the overseas customer nor for coordinating 
the shipping logistics. 
 An export management company ( EMC ) is one such intermediary. A good 
one will, in all respects, act as a global extension of your own sales-and-service 
presence—more or less executing your intentions on behalf of the product. 
These companies offer a wide range of services, but most specialize in export-
ing a specific range of products to a well-defined customer base in a particular 
country or region. For example, one of these companies might specialize in 
exporting agricultural products to restaurant customers in Europe. An EMC is 
highly market driven, representing your product along with other companies’ 
noncompeting products as part of its own import “product line” aimed at the 
customer base it has created. Generally, it buys the product from a manu-
facturer and marks up the price to cover its profit. This is called a buy-resell 
arrangement. Other common compensation structures include commission 
and buy-and-resell, start-up payment, project fee only, fee plus commission, 
and buy-and-resell. An EMC will carry out all aspects of the export transac-
tion. Fees vary depending on the services rendered and risks accepted but can 
range anywhere from 1 to 7 percent of sales value. 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
308
 
■ Tip  An example of an EMC is Provisions International (  http://www.provisionsinter
national.com  ), which exclusively sells and markets well-known brands internationally for major 
companies. 
 Finding a good EMC is not that difficult. You can conduct a search through 
Google or Bing with the keywords “Export management company” to access 
a list of them. For each company, make note of how long it has been in busi-
ness, the number of employees it has, the products in which it specializes, and 
the countries to which it exports. Start your own select list of companies that 
export products that are similar to yours but don’t act as competition to it. 
Then consult the following resources for more referrals to add to your list:
• 
 A  local trade association  with an international focus : Attend a 
few meetings and talk some shop—somebody’s bound to 
know of an EMC or even run his own.  
• 
 The  international division  of your bank : The division is likely 
to have an inside line on which EMCs are reputable and 
doing well.  
• 
 A conference or  trade  show that specializes in a particular 
industry, such as agricultural, construction, or hunting and 
sporting goods : Attend a show or even consider exhibit-
ing so you can access a list of exhibitors and buyers who 
attend. As you walk through the show, ask questions. Find 
out who is using whom for export movements.  
• 
 As always, your local Chamber of Commerce or  small business 
assistance center : It generally knows who has been in the 
export trading business for a while. At the very least, it 
can point you to a good exporting resource. 
• 
 Freight forwarders : They might be able to provide you with the 
names of EMCs that use their service. Because you probably 
haven’t made a sale at this point, you probably don’t have 
a working relationship with a transportation company. Ask 
someone you know who uses a freight forwarder regularly.  
• 
 Social media, trade magazines, and newspapers : In addition 
to tracking what’s going on in your industry by way of 
social media, trade magazines and international newspa-
pers, you can also place a paid ad or conduct an outreach 
effort indicating “distributor wanted” or “representative 
wanted” on your specific product line in an overseas 
market. Vet all inquiries (refer to Chapter   16 ) to ensure 
respondents prequalify and can do the job.  

Exporting
309
 You might also use the services of an  export trading company  . ETCs are virtu-
ally identical to EMCs, but they tend to function on a more demand-driven 
basis, according to which the demand of the market compels them to buy 
specific goods or commodities. They usually have long-standing customers for 
whom they source products on a regular basis. For example, they might get a 
request from a customer to find a supplier of canned corn who can provide 
twenty container-loads a month for a given number of months. The ETC will 
then seek out a reputable manufacturer that can handle the demand at an 
economical price and arrange for the transport of the goods to the customer. 
You can track down a good ETC using the same channels recommended 
above for finding an EMC. 
 Indirect exporting can also involve selling your products to an intermediary 
in the country where you wish to transact business, who in turn sells them 
directly to customers or other importing distributors (wholesalers). Under 
these circumstances, you will not know who your end consumers are. When 
selling by this method, you are normally responsible for collecting payment 
from the overseas customer and for coordinating the shipping logistics. In 
some instances, the overseas agent might request that it be allowed to handle 
the shipping, usually because it receives special transportation rates from car-
riers with whom it has done volume business for years. In this case, you will 
need to arrange for the cargo to be ready by the shipment date. You must 
still collect payment from the customer, but your actual involvement in the 
transaction is minimal. It is nearly as easy as a domestic sale. 
 The  advantages  of indirect exporting are:
• 
 It’s an almost risk-free way to begin.  
• 
 It demands minimal involvement in the export process.  
• 
 It allows you to continue to concentrate on your domes-
tic business.  
• 
 You can learn about export marketing as you go rather 
than needing to master it immediately.  
• 
 Depending on the type of intermediary with which you 
are dealing, you don’t have to concern yourself with ship-
ment and other logistics.  
• 
 You can field-test your products for export potential.  
• 
 In some instances your local agent can field technical 
questions and provide necessary product  support  . 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
310
 The  disadvantages are  :
• 
 Your profits are lower.  
• 
 You lose control over your foreign sales.  
• 
 You very rarely know who your customers are and thus 
lose the opportunity to tailor your offerings to their 
evolving needs.  
• 
 You are a step removed from the actual transaction, caus-
ing you to feel out of the loop.  
• 
 The intermediary might also be using your product to 
test the market for her own products that are similar to 
yours, including ones that are directly competing with it. 
They might be selling their products to the same custom-
ers instead of providing exclusive representation.  
• 
 Your long-term outlook and goals for your export pro-
gram can change rapidly, and if you’ve put your product 
in someone else’s hands, it’s hard to redirect your efforts 
accordingly.  
 Questions to Use for Deciding on the Method 
of  Exporting  
 Only you can determine which strategy suits your needs. Your choice will 
depend on your goals, your available resources, and the type of business you 
run. I do recommend that you choose the method that makes you most com-
fortable and lets you focus on your own core competencies or business pri-
orities, so that you aren’t wasting your energy worrying that something isn’t 
working. At the same time, though, I think I’ve made my bias in favor of direct 
exporting abundantly clear—it’s the only way to maximize control, profits, and 
market presence. I urge you to move in that direction as soon as you feel able. 
 
■ Tip  If at all possible, go the direct marketing route. It’s the best way to learn, grow your 
presence in the market, and maximize profits. 

Exporting
311
 Let’s start with a list of questions to consider before you decide which method 
of exporting will be best for you:
 1.   How big is your company? A larger company will have more 
people power to dedicate to the task of achieving direct 
sales than a small firm or a solo operator, who may find 
the indirect route to be more readily within his reach. 
 2.  How big do you (or your company or division) want to get? If 
you want to be the size of Siemens AG someday, tackling 
direct sales now will help you build the foundation for 
that blockbuster future. But even if you prefer to con-
tinue doing business as a one-person operation, you’ll 
want to establish some direct channels as your business 
develops.  
 3.  How much time and money do you have? If you have deep 
pockets and all the time in the world, then you have 
nothing to lose by selling direct. If time is of the essence 
because you don’t have unlimited funds, indirect channels 
are more likely to bring you a fast sale.  
 4.  Will your product require extensive on-site training and sup-
port? Look at Apple, one of the world’s largest producers 
of smart phones. It wants to maintain a reputation not 
only for making high-quality, expertly designed products, 
but also for improving its customers’ lives. The only way 
to express this commitment to them is by staying right 
in their faces all over the world and constantly improv-
ing upon and updating existing products. Would Apple 
rely on local agents or set up a joint venture to culti-
vate the high degree of customer satisfaction it’s after? 
Unlikely. The more complex and technical your product, 
the greater the importance of on-site customer service. 
In Apple’s case, this involves retail stores featuring only its 
own products, staffed by highly trained company employ-
ees. But if you’re exporting a product that comes without 
instructions, you’ll do your customers no disservice by 
going indirect.  
 5.  Do you feel like you know what you’re doing and where you 
want to go? Do you have a strong heart, mind, and stomach? 
If you can honestly answer yes to these questions, then 
go direct. If not, start off indirect and slowly move into 
developing collaborative relationships.  

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
312
 
■ Caution   Early in my career, I worked with an export trading company that purchased goods 
from my company so it could export them to Japan. I, in turn, was acting as an export trading 
company for the manufacturer, who thus had two intermediaries between itself and its foreign 
customers. Imagine the high retail price the consumer paid once the product landed in his country! 
If you are two or three times removed from a direct relationship with your customers, think twice—
or even thrice!—about how you might get to them directly. After all, the name of the export game 
is to generate your own network of customer relationships. The sooner you begin building this 
foundation, the sooner you will have a flourishing export business. 
 In-Country Factors  that Can Affect Your 
Distribution Choice 
 To ensure you make an intelligent decision regarding whether to export 
directly or indirectly, confront the following issues. Going in with your eyes 
wide open will help enable success in an overseas market.
• 
 Your potential costs and profit margins can help you determine 
whether it is more profitable to sell directly or indirectly . In 
some emerging countries, competition in large cities is so 
fierce that costs are low and margins thin. On the other 
hand, particularly in rural areas, the lack of capital can 
cause just a handful of big, established companies to grow 
significantly, often gaining monopolies. Hence, the large 
companies in these areas get away with charging higher 
prices and achieving wider profit margins. As a potential 
exporter, determining the competition you will face will 
help you figure out whether selling directly will truly be 
profitable, or if it makes more sense to do it indirectly.  
• 
 The competition you face in your export area can affect your 
choice of entry. Is the market you are about to enter satu-
rated with lots of competitors? Will you end up a “me 
too”-type product with no key differentiator to spur 
sales? Or do you have a value proposition (better pricing, 

Exporting
313
design, or quality, for instance) that will disrupt the mar-
ket and allow you to become a market leader?  
• 
 The length of a sales channel can affect distribution choice. 
In Japan, for example, the traditional distribution system 
adds many layers to get a product transported to a con-
sumer. In this country, perhaps it would be better to work 
directly with a big retailer than to go through an importer 
that might sell to three other intermediary companies to 
get the product in the hands of the end user.  
• 
 The reach or availability applied to your product line can 
affect whether it is profitable to bring it into a new market. 
Is there an existing distribution system for your type of 
product in the country you are exporting to, or must it 
be established? Does the government have any restric-
tions to direct sales on your product line, sales to inter-
mediaries, or limitations on licensing requirements? The 
more established the system for bringing your product 
into the country and the fewer restrictions, the less time 
and labor will be required to export the product.  
• 
 The channel of distribution affects how a product enters a 
market . If there is no distribution system to be found in 
an export country or it is blocked, it will be impossible 
to enter the market. Or perhaps your product can only 
be sold door to door or through street stands and the 
country you wish to enter does not support that method 
of selling.  
• 
 The product inventory needs to be handled, paid for, and 
stocked. Nothing is worse than having lots of interest and 
demand for your product, only to find out later that it is 
out of stock at the factory. Get a feel for power, control, 
and competition in a market. If you see or hear of any 
distribution company dominating a market (distributing 
to many middlemen across the country), it’s a sign that it 
will be a tough market to crack unless you get that com-
pany on your side. Go elsewhere.  
• 
 Barriers to entering a country, whether real or imagined, can 
influence a market-entry strategy. Certain economic or 
political trade controls and restrictions can cause impedi-
ments to an import. Two of the key controls are tariff and 
nontariff barriers set up to reduce imports that might 
compete with locally produced goods. It’s a form of pro-
tectionism. Others include: embargoes, sanctions, export 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
314
license requirements, entry time restrictions, restrictive 
government policies, high entry and exit costs, and weak 
infrastructure.  
• 
 Distance can matter. According to Pankaj Ghemawat, writ-
ing in the  Harvard Business Review , “By distance, I don’t 
mean only geographic separation, though that is impor-
tant. Distance also has cultural, administrative or political, 
and economic dimensions that can make foreign mar-
kets considerably more or less attractive.”  ii Make sure 
you evaluate the many dimensions of distance and how 
they can impact opportunities in a foreign market, allow-
ing you to decide whether it will be profitable to export 
directly to a country.  
 The bottom line is: you need to spend as much time as you need surveying the 
market before you decide on your method of exporting.  
 Other Methods to Entering an Export Market: 
 Collaborative Sales  
 Now that we’ve looked at direct or indirect exporting, let’s examine other 
means for entering an export market: global strategic initiatives, or what I 
refer to as collaborative sales. Each of these new styles of selling enables you 
to enter an overseas market faster to expand your existing sales or opera-
tions into a foreign country and improve your competitive position. And none 
of them are mutually exclusive. Rather, these options should be considered 
along with, or in addition to, direct and indirect exporting. You can, for exam-
ple, export if a market permits it and has a licensing arrangement in place or 
form a joint venture. Once you form a new relationship, you reduce domestic 
dependence and increase export revenues and profits worldwide. I’ll start 
with the most widely used initiative first and then drill down as best I can 
from there. 
 
■ Tip  All global strategic initiatives involve an attempt to achieve outcomes that are acceptable 
to all parties involved. Keep it clear in mind what you are seeking to gain from the initiative but 
don’t lose sight of the valuation creation opportunity either, select the right type of relationship, and 
choose a partner whose contribution will enable you to achieve those goals. Most important, seek 
international legal (for agreement help) and financial advice. Consult with your export dream team 
before taking formal action. 

Exporting
315
 Partnership  
 If you’ve gotten  about as far as you can on your own in charting your export 
strategy, it’s a good time to consider partnering with another company that is 
located in a foreign country where you are already doing business or would 
like to be doing business. First, it’s important to understand exactly how a 
partnership works and what it can and cannot do for you. 
 A  partnership  is a commitment (voluntarily made) by parties to work col-
laboratively rather than competitively to achieve mutually desired results in a 
complex endeavor. A partnership does not necessarily involve a formal con-
tract. It can be formed with a handshake and be based purely on trust. “You do 
this. We’ll do that.” Done. 
 Partnerships can be project based, narrowly defined, or spelled out with a 
definite time frame. It depends on what needs to be accomplished. If the 
arrangement is relatively long in duration, say five to ten years, some refer to 
that as “strategic partnering.”   
 In a partnership, each side knows and commits to the goals of the project 
and to those of one another, but independence is generally retained. In other 
words, each party may individually suffer or gain from the relationship.   
 The biggest downside or disadvantage to a partnership is conflict resolution 
or the question of who takes responsibility should a crisis arise. The biggest 
advantage is you can get a partnership going rather fast by minimizing risks 
while maximizing your leverage in the marketplace.  
 Global Strategic Alliance 
 There is no precise definition of a  global strategic alliance (GSA)  . There have 
been many different versions put forward by thought leaders with the focus 
on what it achieves. In my experience, a GSA is usually established when 
a company wishes to edge into a related business or new geographic  mar-
ket —particularly one in a country where the government prohibits imports in 
order to protect domestic industry. Strategic alliances can come in all shapes 
and sizes—from an informal business relationship based on a simple contract 
to a licensing or joint-venture agreement that spells out what needs to be 
done.  Typically, these alliances are formed between two or more corporations 
in the same or complementary businesses, each based in its home country, for 
a specified period of time. They are formed between a group of companies 
that would benefit equally from the partnership. The arrangement can create 
a win-win environment—or a big-time lose—for all parties. The common 
goal, however, is for all parties to achieve their objectives more efficiently, at a 
lower cost, and with less risk than had they acted alone. 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
316
 The  cost of a GSA is usually shared equitably among the corporations involved, 
and the alliance is generally the least expensive way for all concerned to form 
a partnership. An acquisition, on the other hand, offers a faster start in exploit-
ing an overseas market but tends to be a much more expensive undertaking 
for the acquiring company—and one that is likely to be well out of the reach 
of a solo operator. While a global strategic alliance works well for core busi-
ness expansion and utilizing existing geographic markets, an acquisition works 
better for immediate penetration of new geographic territories. Hence, an 
alliance provides a good solution to export marketers that lack the required 
distribution to get into overseas markets. 
 A GSA is also much more flexible than an acquisition with respect to the 
degree of control enjoyed by each party. Depending on your resources and 
the type of relationship you form, you can structure an equity or nonequity 
alliance. Within an equity alliance, each party can hold a minority, majority, or 
equal stake. In a nonequity alliance, the host-country partner has a greater 
stake in the deal and thus holds a majority interest. 
 Yet the right choice of a partner is arguably more important than how the 
alliance is structured. When it gets down to business, you want a partner 
who will have an active contribution to make and who is flexible and able to 
resolve conflicts as the alliance evolves. Even more important, however, is that 
you have a clear idea of what you are seeking to gain from the alliance, what 
the value creation opportunity is, and that you have chosen a partner whose 
contribution will enable you to achieve those goals. 
 
■ Tip  The whole point of a healthy collaboration is to draw out new and diverse knowledge. Cast 
a wide net. Partners can provide a different perspective and opportunity for reframing rather than 
merely confirming expections or assumptions. Seek variety. It is the spice of business and fosters 
innovation. 
 What do alliances look like?  Starbucks  , once a  small business  , opened its first 
store in Seattle in 1971. Since then, it has created more than twenty-four thou-
sand stores in more than seventy countries  iii . It was strategic partnerships that 
enabled it to advance a lot of its growth. “Starbucks partnered with Barnes 
and Noble bookstores in 1993 to provide in-house coffee shops, benefiting 
both retailers.”  iv A couple of years later, Starbucks partnered with Pepsico to 
bottle, distribute, and sell the coffee-based drink Frappacino. Soon, they will 
be working with Microsoft to develop their Starbuck’s Windows phone app  v . 

Exporting
317
 In 2010, Intuit, which serves millions of small businesses around the world 
with its financial software, and Nokia (soon to be a part of Microsoft), which 
sells hundreds of millions of devices each year, announced an alliance to 
develop and deliver an innovative new mobile and web-based marketing ser-
vice. This service has catered to small businesses around the world, bringing 
their respective expertise to bear for a wider audience than had they not 
partnered up.  vi 
 The world’s biggest shipping lines, China Ocean Shipping Co. (Cosco), and 
China Shipping Group, plan to form a new shipping alliance that helps them 
control around 26 percent of the trade between Asia and Europe, the world’s 
busiest container shipping hub.  vii 
 Forming an Alliance: Where to Look 
 You might be  surprised to find that you can build mutually  advantageous alli-
ances with some unlikely allies. Many companies make conscious decisions to 
form partnerships with complementary or even competing companies that 
can offer them a market share in countries they have been struggling to break 
into for years. South Korean technology company Samsung and American-
based Best Buy, for example, have entered into a broad global strategic alli-
ance that involves setting up 1,400 ministores called Samsung Experience 
Shops, selling Samsung products in Best Buy and Best Buy Mobile locations 
across the United States. The locations feature Samsung’s laptops, connected 
cameras, and accessories, giving Samsung a presence in Best Buy locations, 
previously held only by Apple. By using their complementary strengths and 
expertise, these companies ensure their mutual survival and foster continued 
growth in their respective industries. 
 Even if you’re not an international technology company or one of the world’s 
leading retailers, you can follow the example set by Samsung and Best Buy 
and see which of your contacts, colleagues, peers, or competitors in the inter-
national market might have compatible needs and objectives. You’ll probably 
feel most secure with a company that you already have a reasonably long-
standing business relationship with, especially if you have achieved substantial 
sales growth together. It could be your distributor in Athens, a manufacturer 
that took on distribution of your product in Vietnam, or that trading company 
in Japan that can’t keep up with consumer demand. Any one of your contacts 
with a problem you can solve or a need you can fulfill might serve as a poten-
tial partner.  

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
318
 Advantages of a GSA 
 There are many specific  advantages  of setting up a GSA. It will allow you to:
• 
 Get instant market access, or at least speed your entry 
into a new  market  
• 
 Exploit new opportunities to strengthen your position in 
a market where you already have a foothold  
• 
 Increase sales  
• 
 Improve competitive position  
• 
 Create value  
• 
 Gain new skills and technology  
• 
 Shape and sharpen the innovation opportunity  
• 
 Develop new products at a profit  
• 
 Originate new conversations  
• 
 Share fixed costs and resources  
• 
 Enlarge your distribution channels  
• 
 Broaden your business and political contact base  
• 
 Gain greater knowledge of international customs and 
culture 
• 
 Enhance your image in the world marketplace  
 Disadvantages of the GSA 
 There are also some inevitable trade-offs of a GSA to consider:
• 
 Weaker management involvement or less equity stake in 
the larger  company 
• 
 The dreaded market insulation—an inability to see 
the realities of the market—due to the local partner’s 
presence 
• 
 Less efficient communication within the company  
• 
 Poor resource allocation  
• 
 Difficult to keep objectives on target over time  
• 
 Potential loss of control over such important issues as 
product quality, operating costs, employees, and cus-
tomer service.  

Exporting
319
 For example, if you enter into a GSA with even a little less equity stake—say, 
49 percent—you lose managerial control. You may end up with that equity 
percentage because the host government only allows up to 49 percent for an 
outsider, because you could only negotiate that amount, or because you were 
willing to accept a minority stake in exchange for gains (e.g., responsibility for 
R&D) that you thought important during  the  negotiation phase. Whatever the 
reason, what are you going to do if profits plummet, product quality deterio-
rates, or customers are dissatisfied? You do not have enough interest in the 
venture to take action. Your 49 percent can swiftly depreciate when it comes 
to exercising any control. In any partnership, the majority-interest holder 
tends to dominate, putting its needs first and its partner’s last. The ideal situa-
tion is a fifty-fifty partnership, which allows both parties to share the decision-
making. If you do settle for a minority interest, make sure you maintain enough 
control to accomplish your objectives in the target market. 
 
■ Caution   There are always exceptions to the fifty-fifty partnership being the ideal scenario. In 
the United States, for example, there can be advantages to a business having 51 percent ownership 
by women, minorities, or service-disabled veteran-owned firms. This can be used to gain contracts 
or preferential treatment in the marketplace. The Small Business Administration, for example, 
offers many special programs and services to help these designated groups who have 51 percent 
or more stock ownership succeed.  viii 
 It’s also critical to explore all the legal and financial implications before enter-
ing into an alliance with an overseas company. Seek legal counsel from those 
who are well experienced in international trade, acquisitions, joint ventures, 
and divestitures and ask them to go over the best- and worst-case scenarios 
with you. You should hire counsel both in your own country and in the host 
country for maximum protection of your rights. You are not only seeking 
to ensure the fundamental integrity of the partnership, but also to work out 
crucial entitlements and obligations, such as copyrights, trademarks, patents, 
taxes, antitrust, and exchange controls. 
 You will also need to keep informed about the host country’s political and 
economic stability. Get in touch with the local economic development offices 
within that country. They should be able to assess the country’s future invest-
ment climate and to provide you with past, present, and future growth trends. 
This will give you a better idea of what kind of risks you will incur,   if any, if you 
go ahead with the alliance. 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
320
 As an exporter, it’s only a matter of time before you consider a GSA as a logi-
cal step in expanding your business. It’s not enough to expand domestically; 
that is not an exporter’s core business. Your core business is the world. Up 
until now, you may have single-handedly cemented strategic alliances with a 
network of agents and distributors to maintain access to markets worldwide, 
but you are currently finding that this is no longer enough to remain competi-
tive. You may feel that you’ve gotten about as far as you can on your own and 
want to explore alternatives for kicking your export business into high gear. 
You’re prepared to exchange a limited measure of creative control if it will get 
you established in highly lucrative new business territories. 
 So you’ve decided to create a GSA. Now what?  
 Negotiating a Deal for the GSA 
 In negotiating a deal for a GSA, your main concern should be that you and the 
other party share  the  same goals and  see the deal-making process in the same 
light. The knowledge and experience each partner brings to the table should 
complement a firm’s core knowledge base and provide the underlying basis 
for mutual learning. 
 During the initial phase of negotiations, rather than discussing an agreement 
point by point, you might be better off outlining in draft form how you would 
like the joint venture to work. This keeps the draft-in-progress simple and 
provides a tangible way for the other side to see your ideas. Then expand 
on each point in your outline and make sure that each party understands the 
objectives and implications. You can accomplish this by presenting each issue 
in draft form and having a representative from each side write a synopsis 
of her understanding of it. If there are any discrepancies or disagreements, 
you can clear them up at this point, prior to putting together a final draft 
agreement. 
 After you submit your draft, it’s up to the other party to make a counterpro-
posal that sets out its own conceptual framework for a GSA. This method 
allows for shared control of negotiations and gives the parties an opportunity 
to offer alternate ways of setting up the venture. With each proposal and 
counterproposal, the parties will narrow the gap and come closer to a viable 
agreement.  
 Retaining Autonomy and Independence 
 A good GSA allows for both parties to retain a fair degree of autonomy and 
independence with minimal restrictions on complementary business opportu-
nities. Ideally, the two parties will form a whole that equals more than the sum 
of its parts. So, it’s important to spend a significant amount of time getting to 
know the party with which you are considering  joining   forces. 

Exporting
321
 Problems usually occur when there is poor communication between parties 
or when there is a staggering difference in strengths and management philoso-
phies. Without a clear-cut mission statement that clarifies goals or objectives 
from the beginning, things can take a disastrous turn when business gets well 
underway. For example, it might initially seem that an alliance between a com-
pany that has a stronger management team and one with a weaker one offers 
enormous opportunities for the weaker partner, but in the long run it turns 
out that the weaker party becomes a drain on resources, forcing the stronger 
management team to carry the entire weight of the alliance. In the end, the 
strong partner buys out the weaker one. It’s a no-win situation. 
 To have a reasonable chance of success, the merging parties should both have 
six vital elements: (1) good communication skills, (2) matching corporate cul-
tures or at least awareness of cultural incompatibility, (3) matching corporate 
philosophies and commitments, (4) accurate capability and contribution assess-
ment, (5) credibility as a good partner, and (6) compatible strategic ambitions. If 
you do not see these elements operating during the time of negotiations, you 
never will. Cut your losses and look for a more  compatible   partner.  
 Considering the GSA: What Can We Learn? 
 Before you decide to enter into a GSA, make an excruciatingly honest 
appraisal of your own goals, strengths, and limitations. Determining at the 
outset if you’re really ready to form an alliance or not and what you can real-
istically expect to accomplish will save you losses down the road. Appraise 
your potential partner just as carefully. And remember, no two deals are alike; 
the final structure of any alliance depends on what each  party   has to offer the 
other and what each hopes to gain. 
 Expect cultural factors to complicate the smooth running of business. For 
instance, if your partner-to-be behaves in a way you experience as flat out 
weird in that it goes against the grain of your own culture, or they take forever 
to get back to you, factor that in and consider it very carefully while you are 
reviewing the upside and downside of the deal. This odd behavior could mean 
trouble waiting to happen. Picture yourself living with the alliance you’ve made 
for a long, long time. Make sure you can live with your partner before you sign 
on the dotted line. 
 As a longtime independent businessperson, you might approach such an 
arrangement with ambivalent feelings and dread the potential headaches of 
working out all the details. But if the arrangement is structured properly, 
thoughtfully, and equitably, a GSA can pay off handsomely for both parties in 
terms of greater growth, higher profits, and excellence in export business. I 
recommend that you review and consider all the options I have talked about 
and then harness your newfound skills and direct your efforts exactly as you 
see  fit . 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
322
 Joint Venture  
 Just as GSAs allow companies with complementary skills to benefit from one 
another’s strengths, a joint venture can do the same. When two companies 
invest money into forming a third jointly owned enterprise, that new enter-
prise is called a joint venture. For a joint venture to work, there should be 
a nice give-and-take, a codependency, or a shared management arrangement. 
The joint venture can receive market knowledge (customer and distribu-
tion, for example), assets, and financing from both parent companies without 
altering the condition of the parent company. The new venture is an ongoing 
enterprise whereby the parent companies—“parents”—own the joint ven-
ture and share in the profits (or losses) it generates. 
 A joint venture spells out a defined project that each of the respective parties 
involved agrees to and carries out. Again, I repeat: Not only do the parties 
share in the venture’s profits, but they also share in the losses. Each parent 
company has an equal voice in controlling the project, which means there is 
more than one parent. Oftentimes they each can be powerful and visible.  ix 
 
■ Tip  Oracle founder Larry Ellison purchased the Hawaiian island of Lanai. He was cited in an 
interview in the  Wall Street Journal , saying, “We have the right climate and soil to grow the very 
best gourmet mangos and pineapples on the planet and export them year-round to Asia and North 
America. We can grow and export flowers and make perfume the old-fashioned way—directly 
from the flowers, like they do in Grasse, France. We have an ideal location for a couple of organic 
wineries on the island.”  x The big question is this: Should Ellison do this on his own or elect to go 
the sales collaboration route and negotiate with Dole on the pineapple side and Chanel or Estée 
Lauder on the perfume side? If Ellison is eager to get to market and doesn’t mind giving up a piece 
of the action, collaborating with other companies who have been there, done that will speed up the 
process. If not, he can launch on his own, take as much time as he wants and reap 100 percent of 
the rewards. Knowing Ellison, I think he will go it alone. It’ll be fun to watch his progress. 
 One illustration of how a joint venture might work would be a situation in 
which you currently export a ton of stuff to a particular overseas market. The 
importer asks you if he can make the product in his market and reexport to 
other contiguous markets. That’s how the seed is planted. You form a joint 
venture, and that newly formed enterprise spells out intent, and it starts to 
service customers in other parts of the world. You continue exporting to the 
importer, but he has a new obligation or role and vested interest, as you do, in 
the success of the newly formed organization. 

Exporting
323
 
■ Tip  Two classic articles on the subject of joint ventures worth a read are: “How to Make a 
Global Joint Venture Work,” by J. Peter Killing ( Harvard Business Review , May 1982,   http://hbr.
org/1982/05/how-to-make-a-global-joint-venture-work/ar/1  ), and “Launching a 
World-Class Joint Venture” by James Bamford, David Ernst, and David G. Fubini ( Harvard Business 
Review , February 2004,   http://hbr.org/2004/02/launching-a-world-class-joint-
venture/ar/1  ). 
 International Franchising 
 International franchising is a strategic way to reduce dependence on domes-
tic demand and grow new  future   revenue and profit centers worldwide. 
Extending a brand globally through franchising involves a lower risk than doing 
it through more hands-on exporting, requires minimal investment, and offers 
a huge upside potential on scaling capabilities. Let’s look at what international 
franchising is, its benefits, examples of companies that have successfully fran-
chised internationally, how to get started in franchising, and where to look for 
additional help. 
 What Is International Franchising? 
 Franchising is a pooling of resources and capabilities to accomplish a strategic 
marketing, distribution, and sales goal for a company. It typically involves a fran-
chisor—potentially you—granting an individual or company (the franchisee) 
the right to run a business or sell a product or service under its successful 
business model and giving the other party the right to be identified by its 
trademark or brand.  
 The franchisor charges an initial up-front fee to the franchisee, payable upon 
the signing of the franchise agreement. Other fees, such as marketing, advertis-
ing, or royalties, may be applicable, and are largely based on how the contract 
is negotiated and set up. Advertising, training, and other support services are 
made available by the franchisor.  
 Benefits of International Franchising 
 In addition to entering new  overseas   markets with additional customers, inter-
national franchising can also offer franchisors the opportunity to use what are 
called foreign-master owners, rather than franchisees. These individuals are 
typically natives of the country and understand the political and bureaucratic 
problems in their country far better than any outsider. Foreign master fran-
chise owners pay a hefty up-front fee to acquire a designated geographic area 

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
324
or, in some instances, an entire country, where they operate as a mini- or sub-
franchise company, selling franchises, collecting royalties, training the owners, 
and overseeing all other related matters. They can even open units by them-
selves. In general, a specified number of franchises must be outlined to gain the 
exclusive right to use the business model in an entire  country  . 
 Examples of Successful International Franchising 
 Domino’s Pizza International began serving consumers outside the United 
States in 1983 when the first store opened in Winnipeg, Canada. Since that 
time, Domino’s Pizza International has extended its global reach to include 
more than seventy international markets, serviced by more than 10,000 cor-
porate and franchised  stores . 
 The company claims, “The success of Domino’s Pizza outside the U.S. is due 
to the collaborative relationship between our exceptional franchisees and the 
corporate team that supports them. Together, we continuously strive to sup-
port a policy of ‘One Brand–One System’ in order to be the best pizza deliv-
ery company in the world.”  xi 
 Another fast-food giant, McDonald’s, does business in 118 countries around 
the world. For those countries where McDonald’s does not already have a 
presence (Afghanistan, for example), the company does not have any firm 
plans to open locations. The company says it is instead focusing on the mar-
kets where it already has a presence.  xii 
 Many of these companies weren’t huge when they started their overseas 
operations, yet little acorns grow into mighty oaks. A friend and colleague of 
mine,  Shelly Sun  , CEO and cofounder of Illinois-based  BrightStar  , has visions 
of having her company follow such a path: The company was established in 
2002 as a full-service health care staffing agency serving corporate and pri-
vate clients. Sun has big plans to use the franchise model to take her com-
pany international. Currently, her firm generates $350 million annually and 
has more than 300 locations throughout the United States and Canada, and 
she has plans to expand it further within Canada as well as to the UAE and 
Australia in 2016. She wants to first make sure she has a solid base of fran-
chisees and an equally solid basis of royalties coming in before going global. “If 
we had expanded internationally prior to 2012, we would not have had the 
resources to invest in the high level of support, which we believe is indispens-
able in a successful international  expansion  strategy,” says Sun. Future growth 
will occur in the United Kingdom and Asia.  xiii 

Exporting
325
 Getting Started in International Franchising 
 The best place to find out how to get started is the International Franchise 
Association (  http://www.franchise.org ). It can help you with the first 
steps to take and tell you what opportunities are available in the global mar-
ketplace. As in any new international expansion, there will be challenges: cul-
tural differences, legal considerations, contract negotiations, and intellectual 
property issues, to name just a few. For a snapshot on what is involved, see the 
article “Dealing with the Complexities of International Expansion.”  xiv 
 
■ Tip  For information on preparing your franchise to go global, such as choosing a deal structure 
for international franchise expansion, and negotiating an international franchise agreement, visit 
the International Franchise Association’s International Toolkit Courses:   http://www.franchise.
org/InternationalToolkit  . 
 Where to Look for Franchising Help 
 Here are a couple of  resources  that will guide you in the international fran-
chising area:
 1.  International Franchise Association : (  http://www.fran-
chise.org/  ). This site is considered the go-to source on 
anything to do with franchising—from country profiles 
to international franchising articles and information on 
 international franchising laws  . 
 2.   Franchising World : (  http://www.franchise.org/fran-
chising-world-digital-version  ). The International 
Franchising Association site offers digital versions of 
current Franchising World issues and archives of past 
articles.  
 3.  3.  DLA Piper’s FranCast Series : (  https://www.dlapiper.
com/en/us/insights/publicationseries/fran-
cast/  ). The FranCast Series is put out by DLA Piper. DLA 
Piper is considered the number one global law firm in the 
area of franchise law by  Who’s Who Legal and is ranked 
the top practice in the United States by the respected 
research firm Chambers & Partners.  

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
326
 4.  Grow Smart, Risk Less :  A Low-Capital Path to Multiplying Your 
Business Through Franchising : Written by Shelly Sun, this 
book provides a road map to guide you in franchising 
your business.  
 5.  International Franchising : A Practitioner’s Guide : Written by 
Marco Hero, this book is a practical guide for all those 
involved in planning and operating an international fran-
chise program, describing a range of topics from in-
house counsel, to managing directors, to those in private 
practice. 
 For other book selections on franchising, try the IFA Publications and Book 
Store:   http://www.franchise.org/ifa-publications-and-book-store 
 Establishing a  Foreign Office  or  Acquiring  an 
Existing Company 
 When companies want to quickly gain access to markets or a new area of 
expertise (technology, for example), they usually form a partnership or GSA. 
They can also open a foreign office or acquire a smaller company with those 
assets in the targeted market. 
 To maintain better control of your exports, you can establish a foreign branch 
office, subsidiary, or joint venture, in which you make the decisions and staff 
it with local people who receive the imported goods (your exports) and see 
that they are properly distributed to the intended customers and serviced 
thereafter. 
 The advantage of this type of arrangement is that the branch office can serve 
both as the initial link in the marketing channel in the foreign market and can 
facilitate customer loyalty for the brand. The biggest disadvantage is that you 
have higher setup costs and the potential for higher credit risks at the begin-
ning stages of operation. 
 Acquiring a smaller company, on the other hand, offers a faster start in exploit-
ing an overseas market and might avoid getting a trade restriction (which 
blocks an export or makes it cost prohibitive to sell a product at a profit) but 
tends to be a much more expensive undertaking for the acquiring company—
one that is likely to be well out of the reach of a smaller enterprise.   
 Due to uncontrollable economic factors, many companies can be forced into 
establishing a foreign branch office if they want to maintain a market pres-
ence. This often happens when companies are doing well with their exports 
in a foreign market, only to discover later on that the government has raised 
the tariff on their particular commodity from 20 percent to 70 percent. As a 

Exporting
327
result, they must decide to either stay in the market, take the hit, and hope for 
the best—thereby remaining competitive—or beat the system by acquiring a 
company in the foreign market that can make and distribute the product, in 
which case they will enjoy a definite cost advantage by eliminating the tariff. 
Obviously a lot depends on competition (if you are the only one in a market, 
you might be able to sustain the tariff increase), customer demand, funding, 
human resource capability, and long-term outlook. 
 Whatever route you take, keeping track of regulations that constantly change, 
not to mention having the experience needed to run an operation and distrib-
ute products through the distribution chain, can be complicated. Before you 
consider this option, check with your international attorney and tax accoun-
tant. Make sure the opportunity you see or anticipate justifies the investment. 
 With ever-changing compliance issues and new country alerts appearing fre-
quently, you will need to be kept informed of issues that can impact your over-
seas operations. Will your office staff handle this, or will you need to appoint 
an outside person to manage the foreign operation? This is sometimes neces-
sary because seemingly routine tasks, such as issuing payroll or taking care of 
back-office mail and supplies, can absorb huge amounts of time, particularly 
when dealing with different time zones, multiple languages, and a wide variety 
of service providers. 
 Take into consideration these ten points before establishing an office overseas:
 1.  Who are your core customers?  
 2.  Where is your best talent pool located?  
 3.  Is the market attractive enough?  
 4.   What are the legal structure, especially as it pertains to 
establishing a business entity, and regulatory climate of 
the other country like?  
 5.   Are there any legal restrictions on foreign investment in 
the target sector?  
 6.  What are the preliminary tax consequences?  
 7.   Is there any intellectual property (IP) protection strategy 
in place?  
 8.   Should you consider locating your business in a free trade 
zone area (refer to Chapter   3 )?  
 9.   How will cultural differences impact your enterprise?  
  10.  Do you speak the language?  

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
328
 Licensing  
 Where laws prohibit the establishment of a foreign branch office, subsidiary, 
or joint venture, licensing can prove useful to an exporter. Licensing is differ-
ent from obtaining an export license, which is covered in Chapter   22 . 
 Licensing is a contractual arrangement where the firm—the licensor—offers 
some proprietary assets (a trademark, a patent, marketing know-how, tech-
nology, or an established production process, for example) to a foreign com-
pany—the licensee—in exchange for royalty fees or other kinds of payments. 
The licensing agreement can be long term or on a per-project basis. 
 Companies like HP  xv and Oracle  xvi license some of their software technology 
to companies in other parts of the world to jointly create better products, 
speed up time-to-market, and generate lucrative royalties fees. To allow cus-
tomers to legally use its images for their projects, Getty Images licenses its 
stock photos, illustrations, and archival images to individuals and companies 
worldwide.  xvii 
 Royalty fees for licensing can range anywhere from one-eighth of 1 percent of 
the gross-sales revenue stream to 15 percent or greater. Before you sign on 
the dotted line, consider these factors: you must account for currency conver-
sion, how royalties will be paid, geographic jurisdiction, what taxes might be 
applied, and how progress will be monitored and audited. 
 Licensing can be very beneficial to small companies that lack the resources to 
invest in foreign facilities. Compared to exporting, licensing can also offer an 
entry mode that requires a low commitment of capital and allows you to navi-
gate around import barriers while still providing you with access to markets 
quickly that might otherwise be closed to imports. 
 As in all modes of entry into the market, there can be risks with licensing. The 
biggest one I see is—as the licensor—serving as a feeder to a potential future 
competitor. Once an agreement expires, the licensee can run with your idea. 
That brings us to—once again—the ever-important issue of consulting with 
your international attorney about how to protect yourself against the risks of 
licensing arrangements. When evaluating prospective licensees, look at the list 
of characteristics to look for in distributors and the list of questions to ask 
them that follows, provided in Chapter   16 . 

Exporting
329
 Summary 
 When all is said and done, the best strategy for export market expansion is 
one that makes you feel like you have the whole world in your hands. Although 
most companies begin their foray into foreign markets through exporting, 
the best long-term global-market entry strategy is a diverse one—employing 
direct, indirect, and collaborative initiatives—to ensure you don’t rely on one 
single channel for export growth. The collaborative initiatives we’ve looked 
at in this chapter are options to be considered along with, or in addition to, 
direct and indirect exporting. 
 Once you’ve decided what type of exporting method you are going to use, 
you must figure out how to put the deal together and make the export sale 
happen. Next, I’ll show you how to choose safe, prompt, and cost-effective 
transport; arrive at an appropriate price-per-product unit; and work with a 
freight forwarder to prepare your final quotation. Read through these next 
two chapters carefully and refer back to them often. You want to be on top of 
all the information you’ll need at each stage of the process.  
 Notes 
  i.   “Managing Differences: The Central Challenge of Global
Strategy,” Pankaj Ghemawat,  Harvard Business Review , 
March   2007     http://hbr.org/2007/03/managing-
differences-the-central-challenge-of-
global-strategy/ar/1  .  
  ii.   “Distance Still Matters: The Hard Reality of Global 
Expansion,” Pankaj Ghemawat,  Harvard Business Review ,
September 2001,     http://hbr.org/2001/09/distance-
s t i l l - m a t t e r s - t h e - h a r d - r e a l i t y - o f -
global-expansion/ar/1  .  
 iii.    h t t p : / / w w w . s t a r b u c k s . c o m / b u s i n e s s /
international-stores  .  
 iv.   “Examples of Successful Strategic Alliances,” Je’ Czaja, 
 Chron , accessed October 27, 2013,     http://smallbusi-
ness.chron.com/examples-successful-strategic-alli-
ances-13859.html   .  

Chapter 17 | Methods of Exporting
330
  v.    h t t p : / / w w w . f o o l . c o m / i n v e s t i n g / g e n -
eral/2016/04/16/microsoft-and-starbucks-are-
finally-working-togeth.aspx  .  
  vi.   “Nokia and Intuit Form Global Alliance to Create Mobile
Marketing Services to Small Businesses,” Intuit: Press
Releases, September 15, 2010,    http://about.intuit.
c o m / a b o u t _ i n t u i t / p r e s s _ r o o m / p r e s s _
r e l e a s e / a r t i c l e s / 2 0 1 0 / N o k i a A n d
IntuitFormGlobalAlliance.html  .  
  vii.   “Shipping Lines Take New Global Alliance to Regulators,” 
Costas Paris, The Wall Street Journal, accessed May 1, 2016, 
  http://www.wsj.com/articles/shipping-lines-take-
new-global-alliance-to-regulators-1461100105  .  
  viii.   “Woman Owned, SDVOSB, and Minority Owned:
Are Business Designations Necessary?,” SBA.gov,
accessed May 1, 2016,   https://www.sba.gov/blogs/
woman-owned-sdvosb-and-minority-owned-are-busi-
ness-designations-necessary  . 
  ix.   See “How to Make a Global Joint Venture Work,” 
J. Peter Killing,  Harvard Business Review , May 1982,  
  h t t p : / / h b r . o r g / 1 9 8 2 / 0 5 / h o w - t o - m a k e -
a-global-joint-venture-work/ar/4  . 
 x.   “Larry Ellison’s Fantasy Island,” Julian Guthrie,  Wall Street 
Journal , June 13, 2013,    http://online.wsj.com/arti-
cle/SB100014241278873247989045785296822301855
30.html  . 
  xi.   “International 
Franchising 
With 
Domino’s,” 
biz-
dominos.com, accessed May 1, 2016, ,  https://
biz.dominos.com/web/public/international/
international-franchising  . 
  xii.   “International Franchising,” the About McDonald’s Web 
site, accessed October 27, 2013,     http://www.about-
mcdonalds.com/mcd/franchising/international_
franchising.html  . 
  xiii.   Shelly Sun, CEO and co-founder, BrightStar, email 
exchange April 25, 2016.  

Exporting
331
 xiv.    “Dealing with the Complexities of International 
Expansion,” Bachir Mihoubi, International Franchising 
Association, published in  Franchising World , March 2011, 
  http://www.franchise.org/Franchise-Industry-
News-Detail.aspx?id=53325  . 
 xv.    “HP Intellectual Property Licensing,” HP, accessed 
May 1, 2016,     http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/abouthp/
iplicensing/  .  
 xvi.   “Global Pricing and Licensing,” accessed May 1, 2016,  
  http://www.oracle.com/us/corporate/pricing/
index.html  .  
 xvii.    “License Agreements,” gettyimages, accessed May 1, 
2016,  
   http://www.gettyimages.com/Corporate/
LicenseAgreements.aspx  .  

P A R T
 Managing the 
Transaction 
 
V

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_18
 C H A P T E R 
 Transport, 
Logistics, and 
Fulfillment 
Options 
 The number one thing you can do is figure out how to ship to people 
globally. 
 —Joanne Bethlamy, former director, Cisco Internet Business Solutions 
Group  i 
 The container is at the core of a highly automated system for moving goods 
from anywhere, to anywhere, with a minimum of cost and complication on 
the way. The container made shipping cheap, and by doing so changed the 
shape of the world economy. 
 —Marc Levinson, author,  The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the 
World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger  ii 
18

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
336
 People have been trading with each other, between countries, across roads 
and oceans, for thousands of years. According to the  International Maritime 
Organization  , “We live in a global society which is supported by a global econ-
omy—and that economy simply could not function if it were not for ships 
and the shipping industry. Shipping is truly the lynchpin of the global economy: 
without shipping, intercontinental trade, the bulk transport of raw materials 
and the import/export of affordable food and manufactured goods would sim-
ply not be possible.”  iii Since export shipment involves moving goods from one 
country to another—a somewhat riskier and more complicated enterprise 
than domestic shipments—it is extra important to find a company that offers 
safe, reliable, quick, and cost-effective transport services. 
 In this chapter, I discuss a range of air and ocean transport choices (containerized 
shipments, for example), including special state-of-the-art vehicles for cargo with 
special handling requirements, and a variety of methods for loading your export 
shipment. In addition, I’ll introduce you to global freight forwarders, logistics spe-
cialists, and third-party logistic providers (3PLs)—the all-around experts who 
will become an indispensable part of your export transport operation. 
 The quantity, value, and perishability of your product; your customer’s loca-
tion; how fast the shipment is needed; and how much you are willing to spend 
will determine which method of transportation you should use. Oftentimes, 
a compromise among these factors takes place. Product movement between 
neighboring countries, such as the United States and Canada, is relatively 
simple and economical, and you can always ship overland by road, by con-
ventional rail, or by double-stacked trains, whichever your customer prefers. 
Product movement over water is somewhat more complicated and expensive. 
Accordingly, I’ll focus on air and ocean shipping options. I’ll also take a look at 
third-party logistics providers that support e-commerce sales. 
 
SHIPPING  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR GOODS  
 Always remember that if you are shipping hazardous materials or goods, such 
as products packaged in aerosol cans or containing dry ice, you must notify your 
transportation company. This type of shipment requires special transit treatment and 
is carefully regulated by the US Department of Transportation under the US Code 
of Federal Regulations, Title 49. These regulations determine which products may 
or may not be transported via air and offer guidelines for preparing the product for 
safe export. Whether shipped by air or ocean, hazardous goods must be properly 
certified, marked, and labeled and must be packed and handled with appropriate 
care. Should your transport company, freight forwarder, or 3PL provider be unable 
to guide you through the process of shipping a hazardous product, contact the US 
Department of Transportation (DOT) or International Air Transportation Association 
(IATA), or conduct a Google or Bing search with the keywords “Shipping hazardous 
material internationally” to obtain more information. 

Exporting
337
 Air Transport  
 Shipping by air used to be an emergency strategy, used only when a customer 
needed a product immediately, but with the proliferation of international air 
delivery services such as Federal Express, DHL, UPS, and soon to be Amazon, 
it is now easy and economical to move your product around the world, even 
overnight. You’ll generally pay a higher price per kilo than you will for ocean 
shipment, but in some expense categories you’ll actually rack up some sav-
ings. For example, packing costs tend to run less for air transport. One major 
consideration is the weight of your cargo. Are you exporting feathers? If so, 
air transport would be cheaper, provided you don’t use cartons that take up 
a lot of space. Tractors, on the other hand, should be transported via ocean.  
 If exporting highly perishable items is your business, you’ll want to familiar-
ize yourself with carriers that offer affordable worldwide express shipments 
of chilled, frozen, and fresh foods, such as seafood, meats, and produce. You 
will see more and more demand for this service as the market for organic, 
fresh, and convenience foods expands. I suggest you call the US Department 
of Agriculture’s international marketing office for additional help. It usually has 
directories, workbooks, and guides to assist exporters of highly perishable 
products. 
 The International Air Transport Association ( IATA ;   http://www.iata.org ) 
represents 260 airlines worldwide and more than 400 strategic partners. 
When these members reach agreement on a fixed rate, they file a tariff with 
the US Department of Transportation (DOT;   http://www.dot.gov ).  Tariffs 
define the rate, rules, and regulations governing air cargo deliveries for a given 
carrier or conference. Only when an exporter is charged by a shipper a cost 
that is beyond the maximum amount specified in the tariff (unless it is under 
a service contract) will she need to notify a regulatory agency to complain. 
 There are two major types of equipment used in  air transport:  
 1.  Air cargo containers : These types of containers are loaded 
by hand or forklift. They come in more than a dozen dif-
ferent styles and sizes.  
 2.  Air cargo pallets  made of wood or plastic (corrugated plastic 
is used but not recommended) with netting : These are also 
loaded by hand or forklift.  
 Which type of equipment you use depends on the type and quantity of the cargo 
you are shipping. To determine the absolute best way to ship your cargo, always 
discuss your situation with your transportation company. And don’t forget to find 
out the distance from your customer’s door to the closest seaport or airport. If 
one delivery destination is closer than the other, you’ll save your customer time 
but not necessarily money in the case of shipping to the nearest airport, because 
air cargo can be expensive. 

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
338
 The top two considerations when choosing air vs. sea freight are transit time 
and the cargo itself. It usually takes a product a couple of days to arrive by 
air, whereas sea freight takes anywhere from twelve to fourteen days. The 
cargo itself, whether delicate in nature (fine art, for example) or large in size 
(as is heavy equipment), forces you to make the best decision for your cargo 
shipment. 
 
■ Caution   Always check with your shipping specialist to verify the pallet requirements for your 
destination country. Some countries, for example, require certain types of wood packaging to be 
treated with chemicals or heat before being allowed into their country. 
 Ocean Transport  
 Shipping by  ocean   takes much longer than shipping by air, but it is nearly 
always much less expensive. That is why it will generally be your overseas 
customers’ preferred method of transport. Whereas with air shipment, the 
greater the volume of your shipment, the more expensive it becomes, with 
ocean shipment a greater volume of shipment actually decreases the cost. 
Ocean transport is less simple, though, because it involves many more choices 
that you may know very little about. These include the choice between ter-
minals, vessel types, container loading options, and so forth. You’ll have to rely 
on your transport company to give you advice. 
 When choosing a transport company, you’ll want to find out the following:
 1.  The frequency that the vessels sail  
 2.  The transit times  
 3.  The reliability measures  
 4.   The ports served by the steamship line  
 5.  The company’s safety record  
 6.  The computerization for cargo management  
 The last point, computerized cargo management, is vital these days. You want 
to be able to track your cargo at any given point. If it gets lost, you want to 
know that the transport company can find it. Cargo management is an impor-
tant part of the package you offer your customers, so anytime you find a new 
and better way to serve them in terms of cargo, jump on it.  

Exporting
339
 Shopping for an Economical Transport Package 
 Shipping lines  —whose vessels are still commonly referred to as “steamships” 
although the days of steam-powered shipping are long gone—can be classified 
as either independent or conference.  Independent lines tend not to have as 
many ports of call, which can cause shipping delays. Sometimes, while compari-
son shopping, you will find an independent line that quotes you a rate that is 
cheaper than what the conference lines are offering. However, when using an 
independent line, you can’t be sure of your shipper’s timeliness or reliability.   
 Conference lines  , on the other hand, guarantee similar standards and rates. If 
you can contract with a conference line on an exclusive basis, rates are usually 
cheaper than, or at least competitive with, those offered by an independent 
line. The guarantee on rates during a specified period of time is a savings that 
you can then pass on to your customer or use to pad your own profit margin. 
Other types of ocean transport companies that have evolved over the years 
are NVOCCs, or non-vessel-operating common carriers, and shipper’s  asso-
ciations  .  NVOCCs book space on vessels and then sell the space to shippers 
with smaller cargoes in smaller-volume units. They consolidate these smaller 
shipments into container-loads under one bill of lading, and as a result can pass 
on more favorable rates to the small cargo shipper. You can also take advan-
tage of a larger shipper’s economies of scale to move your smaller loads more 
cheaply. Shipper’s associations, similarly, were formed to pull together several 
different shippers’ cargoes to achieve greater volume and hence lower rates. 
 Don’t forget that ocean and air shipping itself is only part of the transport 
package you’ll need to assemble. To get your product to an ocean-going ves-
sel for loading, you must also transport your cargo overland by truck or rail. 
How do you do this without spending an arm and a leg? The most advanced 
and efficient transport mode currently available to exporters to handle this 
problem is intermodal transportation. This is a start-to-finish transport pack-
age that takes your cargo from its point of origin to its point of destina-
tion (commonly described as “door-to- door ”) under a single bill of lading. 
It involves the use of at least two different transportation modes—rail and 
ocean, for example—to cover the overland and overseas movement of the 
cargo. The company that offers the package is liable for getting the cargo from 
the point of origin to the final destination, and it will charge you a “through 
rate” to do so. The rate represents a substantial savings over what it would 
cost you to engage separate carriers for each leg of the trip. An added bonus: 
The company can issue a computer-generated bill of lading within hours of 
the cargo’s receipt at an inland terminal or immediately after the vessel has 
left port. This means faster turnaround time in collecting payment from your 
customer. Some intermodal service packages also offer container freight sta-
tions, which save you time and drayage (local transportation) costs by bringing 
their service closer to your door.  

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
340
 
■ Tip  With the Internet and the advent of e-commerce sales transactions for B-to-C transactions, 
most international carriers and third-party logistics providers now offer all-inclusive door-to-door 
landed costs (meaning they include the price of the product, the delivery charge, taxes, duties, 
customs, all in a currency your shoppers understand) on single-product shipments delivered to a 
consumer. In 2009, this was unheard of. What a difference seven years makes! 
 If you are an exporter of refrigerated commodities, most sophisticated trans-
portation companies can offer cost-efficient transport via refrigerated vehi-
cles. For example, there are railcars equipped with individual generators to 
ensure the preservation of perishable products during transit. Some compa-
nies offer what is called a “ motorbridge  ” (trucking) service to exporters of 
frozen meat and other perishables, which entails a through transportation 
rate from the producer’s door to the customer’s door. Other companies offer 
multipurpose vessels for more cost-effective shipment of noncontainerized 
cargo, such as tin, tea, equipment, and grain. These vessels are usually smaller 
in size than those found in a regular containerized ship, allowing them to travel 
safely through rough seas and narrow channels. They also make the difficult 
portside dockings at newly industrialized countries easier. 
 It’s imperative to shop around and compare rates to get the best possible 
transportation package for your customer. Don’t be shy about questioning 
a transportation company or freight forwarder at length and in great detail 
about its service and rates. That is what it is there for, and you don’t owe 
them anything until after you’ve hired them. Always inquire about the latest 
and most advanced methods for moving goods overseas. Even as you read this, 
improvements are underway. Keeping current with the transportation indus-
try will help you offer your customers the most innovative and cost-effective 
service and equipment options.  
 Break-Bulk and Container Loading 
 What kind of vessel you choose to ship your cargo, and what special handling, 
loading or storage apparatus, if any, should be used, will depend on the type 
and quantity of your goods. Here are a variety of common options and tech-
niques for loading your shipment. 
 Break- Bulk  
 Better known as less-than-container-load, or LTL shipment, break-bulk ship-
ment is the most likely option to be used by new exporters, whose first 
orders are likely to be small. It allows your customer to test the product in his 
market before committing to a large quantity, such as a full container-load or 

Exporting
341
more. The shipper can still load the goods into a container, but the container 
will be delivered to a consolidation point (port of exit) where other shippers’ 
goods will also be stowed in the container. The advantage of this method is 
that it allows smaller, low-volume exporters to have their cargo container-
ized, although it is not as desirable as a sealed door-to-door container, as I 
will discuss.  
 To control the expense of small-quantity shipment, find a transport company 
that specializes in break-bulk. Naturally, when you are shipping a small trial 
order and hoping for repeat business, it will be to your advantage to control 
your customer’s costs by offering them the best rate possible. When shipping 
LTL, you’ll need to take extra care in packing and marking your cartons. (I’ll 
discuss carton marking in greater detail later.) Break-bulk shipments are com-
monly packed using the following materials:
• 
 Pallets : Wood pallets must be strong enough to be stacked 
on racks and reused numerous times.  Never let your car-
tons overhang a pallet. Your whole load might collapse! 
As previously mentioned, some countries require certain 
types of wood pallets to be treated with chemicals or 
heat before allowing the shipment to cross its borders. 
Check with your transportation specialist.  
• 
 Slipsheets : Used to pull your cargo to the point of loading, 
these sheets are usually made of fiberboard or plastic. 
They must be strong enough for the forklift operator to 
clamp onto and pull. Slipsheets cost less than pallets and 
eliminate the expense of transporting pallets back to the 
shipper for reuse. Cartons placed on slipsheets must be 
cross stacked, shrink-wrapped, or secured with extra-
strength strapping. 
• 
 Crates : Wood crates are still popular with some shippers 
due to their strength and resistance to humidity, at any 
temperature and at any point in transit.   
 All onboard packing aids should be recyclable or reusable. Use the minimum 
amount of material necessary to protect your product. Pallets, slipsheets, and 
crates are loaded using the following methods:
• 
 Bulk loading  by machine or hand (for bulk commodities, 
for example)  
• 
 Hand loading using individual shipping containers, with or 
without pallets  
• 
 Unit loading  using palleted or slipsheet stacks into con-
tainers with  forklifts 

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
342
 Container Loading  
 Shipment by container-load continues to be the preferred method for export-
ing goods because each container is sealed (allowing it to stay closed from the 
factory door to the customer’s door), strong, theft resistant, and stackable. 
Containers are also easy to load and unload; transport by truck, rail, or ship; 
and store. The only time the container may be opened while in transit is for 
the customer’s inspection, so the transport of the goods becomes nearly bul-
letproof concerning safety and pilferage issues.
 “It’s a simple steel box, but it revolutionized trade and made globalization 
possible. Today, around 95 percent of goods transported around the world 
see the inside of a shipping container at some point.”  iv 
 
■ Note  According to Journal of Commerce senior editor Joseph Bonney, US containerized 
exports are to rebound in 2016. “Although global economic growth is expected to increase in 
2016 and China’s growth remains strong by world standards, China’s double-digit growth appears 
unlikely to return soon. Eleven of the 12 economists surveyed by Bloomberg last week said they 
expect China’s economic growth to continue to decelerate at least through 2018.”  v 
 Containers are available in various volumes and in a number of specialized 
constructions to accommodate various cargo types. Typically, shipping com-
panies provide containers, but you can also rent or buy them new or used. 
If you want to do so, try eBay, contact a local shipping company to inquire 
about used shipping containers, or contact the  Container Alliance (  http://
www.containeralliance.com/  ), a network of portable storage and shipping 
container providers. 
 A container can cost anywhere from $1,500 (used) to $8,000 (new). Rental 
costs range from $75 to $295 per month. You can also expect to pay delivery 
and pickup charges on any of these scenarios. The twenty-foot container, the 
most popular volume, works well for starting up with exports. The forty-
foot container is the second most popular choice. It’s important to resist the 
temptation to overload this larger container or you won’t be able to move 
your cargo over land! For large loads, a forty-five-foot container is an attrac-
tive bargain because it gives you a 27 percent increase in interior capacity over 
the forty-foot unit for the same handling costs. Containers come as large as 
forty-eight feet, but these are comparatively rare. 
 Just as you conducted market research on where the best market is for your 
product using a variety of sources, keeping track of where all your exports 
are going provides a good basis for asking yourself, “Should we be looking at 
these markets since there are so many containers going to that part of the 

Exporting
343
world?” Take  The Journal of Commerce ’s  annual  ranking of the top fifty world 
container ports for 2014.  vi Here is a snapshot of the top ten container ports, 
which shows heavy concentration in China (Asia):  
 1.  Shanghai, China  
 2.   Singapore, Singapore  
 3.   Shenzhen, China  
 4.   Hong Kong, China  
 5.   Ningbo-Zhoushan, China  
 6.   Busan, South Korea  
 7.   Qingdao, China  
 8.   Guangzhou Harbor, China  
 9.  Jebel Ali, Dubai  
  10.  Tianjin, China  
 The port of Shanghai handled 35.29 million twenty-foot-equivalent container 
units, and is considered the busiest container port in the world in 2014  vii . 
 High-cube containers  (referred to as HQ; they include twenty-foot, forty-foot, 
and other measurements) are oftentimes shipped at the same rate as a stan-
dard container but offer more cargo space and are typically one foot taller. 
 Garment containers  have a movable track system, so that prepressed and pre-
labeled garments can be shipped on their individual hangers, unloaded, moved 
right into a showroom, and racked for sale.  Open-top containers  , designed for 
awkward, oversize goods, such as heavy equipment, can be loaded from the top 
by crane. This reduces handling costs.  Refrigerated containers  come in high-
cube and wide-body dimensions and offer temperature-controlled environ-
ments that can be monitored by means of an exterior temperature recorder, 
a central shipboard control, or even satellite transmission.  Bulk-hatch contain-
ers  , used for commodities such as corn and grains, can be loaded from the top 
or the rear for easy access and minimal handling.  Vented containers  allow for 
appropriate ventilation and thus eliminate potential condensation, preventing 
damage to moisture-sensitive goods like tobacco, spices, and coffee.  Flat-rack 
containers  , designed for moving huge goods, such as heavy equipment, lumber, 
and pipes, can be loaded from the top or the side, thus reducing handling 
costs. An expandable chassis accommodates a variety of box sizes and allows 
for easy offloading from ship to train or truck. 

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
344
 
■ Tip  If you are interested in learning more about shipping containers and who invented 
containerized cargo (hint: an American by the name of Malcolm P. McLean), read the article “The 
Truck Driver Who Reinvented Shipping,”  viii and try  The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the 
World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger,  ix by Marc Levinson. Both are fascinating reads! 
 Having shown you what’s entailed in getting your shipment underway, I’d like 
to introduce you to one of my favorite solutions for the shipping phase: the 
freight forwarder.  
 The Global Freight Forwarder: Your One-Stop 
Transport  Pro  
 Global freight forwarders  serve as all-around transport agents for moving 
export cargo, typically transporting it from a factory door to your customer’s 
warehouse or storage facility. Their service saves you lots of time, effort, and 
anxiety and is available for a very reasonable fee, usually under US$200 per 
transaction—an expense that you’ll include in your price quotation to your 
customer and recoup when you collect payment. These are just some of the 
things a freight forwarder will do for you:  
• 
 Handle all shipping arrangements on the basis of your 
specifications  
• 
 Take legal responsibility for the shipment  
• 
 Pay up-front costs to move the product  
• 
 Arrange for a carrier to arrive at your factory door at a 
specified date and time  
• 
 Book space with transportation carriers  
• 
 Handle all documentation and see that it is properly 
processed  
• 
 Arrange insurance, if requested  
• 
 Present documents to your bank in a timely fashion to 
meet your payment terms  
• 
 Suggest or make on-the-spot packing adjustments, if 
needed  
• 
 Move the product from the factory door to the port of 
exit, either by common carrier or rail 

Exporting
345
• 
 Take responsibility for getting the cargo on the vessel in 
time to sail on schedule, thus enabling you to meet all the 
terms and conditions of your payment agreement 
• 
 Monitor the shipment from beginning to end and keep 
you informed  throughout  
• 
 See to it that the shipment arrives safely at the foreign 
port of entry and proceeds from there, depending on the 
delivery terms that you quoted to your customer  
 If you were to undertake the transit of goods yourself, you would probably 
be overwhelmed by all these logistics, and you would certainly not achieve 
the savings that forwarders can, given the networks of service providers that 
they have in place and the volume and frequency of shipping that they do. You 
can find freight forwarders by conducting a web search using the keywords 
“ Freight forwarders, international transportation  ” or you can check for list-
ings in trade magazines or other international directories. You should find 
hundreds of them. In some instances, they will be categorized by the geo-
graphic area they serve, the type of commodity in which they specialize, or 
the transport modes they offer, such as air or ocean—most forwarders offer 
both. Pick two or three that seem like a good fit for your product and shipping 
destination. Some may be located near  your office or by an airport or port 
facility that you expect to use often.  
 The Kings and Queens of International 
Shipping: UPS, FedEx, DHL, and TNT 
 Logistic experts  UPS, FedEx, DHL, and TNT  have long been considered the 
best in international shipping. Check with each of these companies in regard 
to their areas of expertise, including whether they not only ship worldwide, 
but also handle fulfillment needs and collecting payments from customers 
worldwide.  
• 
 UPS Global Trade :   http://www.international.ups.
com/  
• 
 FedEx Small Business Center :   https://smallbusiness.
fedex.com/international  
• 
 DHL :   http://www.dhl.com/en.html 
• 
 TNT :   http://www.tnt.com/express/en_us/site/home.
html   

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
346
 
■ Tip  The electronic filing of export information, formerly done with the Shipper’s Export 
Declaration (SED) form, is the system used by US companies to electronically declare exports 
with the US Census Bureau. The process, now called  electronic export information (EEI) , is done 
through what used to be AES Direct (  http://aesdirect.census.gov/ ), but has now been 
transitioned over to Automated Commercial Environment (ACE) (  https://www.cbp.gov/
trade/automated  ),  and becoming the single window for facilitating the importing and exporting 
of goods. The filing is required for items valued over $2,500 or on products requiring an export 
license. Most sophisticated carriers can take care of the electronic filing on your behalf for a small 
fee and provide options for you to self-file or provide your own company’s completed EEI. Check 
with each international carrier. Refer to Chapter   22  for more information. 
 Two Freight Startups To Watch For in the 
Internet Age 
 A freight forwarder’s work touches much of global trade, but what is miss-
ing is the integration of new technology, which enables online booking and 
tracking of cargo shipments. These startup companies are revolutionizing the 
freight  cargo  industry and are worth a watch.
 1.  Flexport :   http://www.flexport.com 
 2.  Freightos :   http://www.freightos.com 
 Third-Party Logistics and Fulfillment  Centers 
 Exporting  represents a significant opportunity for online small business 
retailers. Setting up an e-commerce site automatically puts you in front of 
a potential 3.4 billion online customers.  x To service even a fraction of those 
customers, you’ve got to get up to speed on how to package and ship your 
products internationally. 
 A third-party logistics  company (abbreviated 3PL) provides logistics services 
for part or all of your supply-chain-management functions. They can ware-
house, pack, and ship your products to customers all over the world, for 
example. Some will even produce or procure goods for you. Many of these 
services can be scaled and customized to your needs. 
 Further, 3PLs allow you to leverage their industry expertise, achieve volume dis-
counts, and realize other benefits (better carrier rates, for instance). To get up 
and running, many service providers require you to have a good technology pro-
gram developer on board to install appropriate applications. Prepare accordingly. 

Exporting
347
 
■ Note   Typically with a 3PL, you’ll need to integrate your e-commerce platform closely with that 
of the 3PL’s provider. Major carriers like UPS and FedEx, for example, offer tools or even application 
programming interfaces (APIs) that make it possible to calculate the landed cost and integrate 
shipping tools into your e-commerce platform. Consult with them on how to incorporate their APIs 
within your existing e-commerce platform. 
 In Chapter   8 , I discussed e- commerce  platform providers and challenged you 
to ask whether your provider can not only calculate the international ship-
ping costs on transactions, but handle the  fulfillment part on B-to-C transac-
tions as well. Decisions must be made on who will put your product in a box, 
label it, insert the appropriate commercial invoice (used as a customs declara-
tion form), calculate shipping charges (including tariffs, duties, and taxes), and 
ensure the product arrives to a customer’s final destination timely, economi-
cally, and safely. These are things a 3PL will do for you. It may be worth inves-
tigating one or more from the list we will look at to make the fulfillment part 
of e-commerce easier on yourself and your customers as well.  
 Third-Party Suppliers 
 Here is a short list of  third-party suppliers (3PLs)  who specialize in helping 
businesses ship internationally and deal with the customs, tariffs, and currency 
conversions worldwide. The whole point of using 3PLs is to enable you to 
reach customers globally and take on new customers by using existing tech-
nology systems—all without hiring extra employees. Shippers agree that 3PLs 
provide new and innovative ways to improve logistics effectiveness, and that 
they are sufficiently agile and flexible to accommodate future business needs 
and challenges.  xi 
 1.  Pitney Bowes : Global Ecommerce : (  http://www.pb.com/
ecommerce/  ). Pitney Bowes helps you extend your 
e-commerce all over the world by providing a seamless 
international checkout process (including the benefit of a 
landed price calculation on international shipments)—the 
last step in completing an online transaction and making 
a sale for your online retail environment. As of June 2015, 
they also own Borderfree (  http://shop.borderfree.
com  ). 

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
348
 2.  UPS : Order Management and Fulfillment : (  http://www.
ups.com/content/us/en/resources/techsupport/
alliances/application_order.html  ). With the help 
of UPS, you can select from a list of approved service 
providers who integrate UPS technology into their busi-
ness applications and software solutions. Note: Using 
these companies might require the assistance of a tech-
nology program developer to get the application installed 
and up and running. Note: UPS also owns cross-border 
e-commerce shipping specialist i-Parcel (  http://www.i-
parcel.com  ).  
 3.  Amazon Services : Fulfillment by Amazon : (  http://ser-
vices.amazon.com/fulfillment-by-amazon/ben-
efits.htm  ). With FBA, you can store your products 
in Amazon’s fulfillment centers and have them picked, 
packed, and shipped by the company. The company also 
provides customer service for your products.  
 4.  Shipwire : (  http://www.shipwire.com/ ). With ware-
houses in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, 
The Netherlands, Australia, and Hong Kong, Shipwire will 
work with your existing order-capture systems, including 
automating order submission, real-time shipping rates, and 
inventory status. Shipwire’s warehouses process and ship 
orders typically the same day and are strategically located 
to reach customers worldwide within a few days. When 
the company contacts a customer, it determines the best 
carrier, service, and packaging to get your product to its 
destination efficiently, while allowing you to control your 
order, inventory, and supply chain operations across its 
warehouses.  
 5.  Bongo International : (  http://www.bongous.com/ ). Bongo 
was established to enable consumers worldwide to pur-
chase and receive goods irrespective of their physical loca-
tion or payment method. The company was acquired by 
FedEx in 2014. So if customers want to buy something 
online and the store doesn’t accept their preferred inter-
national payment method, Bongo will. Membership is free. It 
focuses on enhancing your cross-border shopping experi-
ence and reducing the cost of international transportation. 
Not quite the supersize of UPS or Amazon, but growing, 
Bongo International currently services 200,000 interna-
tional consumers globally through their five distribution 
centers on each US coast, the UK, Belgium, and Peru.  

Exporting
349
 6.  Fulfillrite : (  http://www.fulfillrite.com/ ). Fulfillrite’s 
order fulfillment software directly integrates with all 
major e-commerce shopping carts, including but not lim-
ited to: Shopify, BigCommerce, Magento, 3DCart, eBay, 
Amazon, Paypal, and others. Similar to the other compa-
nies listed, upon receipt of your merchandise, Fulfillrite 
inspects and sorts it. It then enters your merchandise 
into its system, which you have access to via the web 
portal. It does the order picking and packing and ships to 
any international destination via a carrier of your choice: 
USPS, UPS, FedEx, or DHL Global (Fulfillrite’s software is 
compatible with each of theirs).  
 7.  Ingram Micro : (  http://www.ingrammicro.com/  ). IM is a 
large wholesale distributor that primarily handles tech-
nology and is a global leader in IT supply chain, mobile 
device services, and logistics solutions. I am including it in 
the list just so you can get a glimpse of who the giants—
Apple, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, Wal-Mart, Amazon, IBM, 
Lenovo, Microsoft, Samsung, among others—use to dis-
tribute and market their technology and mobile prod-
ucts. IM also claims to work with companies of all sizes, 
in more than 170 countries, that can’t afford to manage 
procurement and distribution.  
 8.  Speed Commerce : (  http://www.speedcommerce.com/ ). 
A recent partnership between Speed FC and Navarre, 
Speed Commerce provides distribution, third-party logis-
tics, supply chain management, and other related services 
for North American retailers and their suppliers. It does 
everything from distribution and sales, to supply chain 
management, to packaging services.  
 9.   Mercent : (  http://www.mercent.com/ ). The company 
designs e-commerce marketing software for retailers. 
It does this by providing compelling online e-commerce 
innovations and technology leadership.  
 10.  Ally Commerce : (  http://www.allycommerce.com  ). AC is a 
complete e-commerce outsourcing solution for branded 
manufacturers selling direct to consumers. The company 
provides web design, marketing, pricing, customer service 
and sales support, warehousing, inventory and order man-
agement, fulfillment, and returns management. UPS has an 
undisclosed amount of investment in AC.  

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
350
 
■ Tip  Some people shy away from putting all their eggs in one basket. In the case of selling, 
distributing, and marketing your products worldwide, you might want to consider a master 
logistics provider that does it all. That way, you develop a strong relationship and achieve efficient 
distribution with fewer touch points (meaning fewer people handling your product), letting you 
focus on perfecting your sales and marketing methods. 
 Simple Methods to Improve Logistics and 
Boost  Sales 
 There are a few  other factors to consider before getting started with inter-
national carriers or 3PLs. Here are some steps you can take to improve your 
international e-commerce results:
 1.  Comparison shop between carriers and the various carrier-
shipping-fulfillment options. Saving even pennies on each 
package you ship internationally can save you big bucks 
later on, and those savings can boost your bottom line. 
Use various online calculators (USPS, UPS, or FedEx, for 
instance) to get an idea of what it might cost to send your 
package to China as an example of the costs.  
 2.  Audit your shipping and fulfillments costs quarterly. See if 
you are making or losing money. If you are losing money, 
switch carriers or take an entirely new approach toward 
the product you are exporting, the market you are enter-
ing, and the carrier you are using.  
 3.  Scrutinize the rates of different carriers to decide whether to 
opt for a flat-rate price on each package or go by weight or 
measurement (whichever is greater) on the calculation. 
 4.  To ship free or not to ship free? That is the key question. 
Free shipping is a growing trend in e-commerce. The 
most popular offer is free shipping in exchange for a 
minimum order in dollars. Second to that is free ship-
ping for a limited time only, such as three weeks prior to 
a Valentine’s Day shipping deadline. I’ve always fallen for 
the free shipping offers, especially when I need a product 
and it’s coming from overseas, showing that it does have 
a positive psychological influence on consumers, resulting 
in increased sales. If you offer free shipping, make sure 
you don’t lose money on those sales!  

Exporting
351
 
■ Tip  To quickly determine how easy or troublesome it might be to export to a particular market, 
go to the  United States Postal Service ’s international Postage Price Calculator (  http://ircalc.
usps.gov/  ), click on the country you wish to export to, and select the type of package and 
weight (like “Package” and “Two pounds”). Then, click “Continue,” select the next option based 
on your preferred delivery date, and click “Customs Forms” and “Other Service” to get an idea of 
what documentation is required. Make a note on any prohibitions and restrictions for that country. 
Bottom line: if you see anything that raises a red flag, whether messy customs restrictions or 
lengthy paperwork filing, cross the country off your list for doing business. 
 5.  Consider an international mail consolidator service. As your 
shipping volume grows, you may wish to consider using this 
type of company to gather thousands of international mail 
packages from clients and deliver them directly to the postal 
system of each destination country. Depending on the ser-
vices you use, an international consolidator can speed your 
package processing and provide good postal rate discounts. 
To find consolidators, conduct a search using the keywords 
“International mail consolidators.” You will find dozens of 
companies that offer this service. Or a good listing of pro-
viders can be found on the “Shipping Consolidators” page 
of the USPS Web site at   https://www.usps.com/busi-
ness/shipping-consolidators.htm  .  
 
■ Caution   No customers on your e-commerce site? You might ask individuals to buy from 
the countries you’re targeting on your Web site on a test basis. Then, examine what could be 
preventing consumers from purchasing more from you online (e.g., language barrier, glitches, 
pricing too high, and so forth)—and then carefully address all the reasons behind their reluctance. 
All things being equal, if you think you are doing everything right, only your customers can tell you 
how you are not meeting or exceeding their expectations. 
 Summary 
 You now have some guidelines telling you what transport and fulfillment meth-
ods are available to get your product to your customer and how to make a 
cost-effective choice. As you move on to put together a price quotation for your 
customer, including price per unit, total transport, and incidental charges, you’ll 
see exactly how valuable working with a good global freight forwarder, logistics 
expert, or fulfillment company can be in making the sale and delivering the goods.  

Chapter 18 | Transport, Logistics, and Fulfillment Options
352
 Notes 
  i.   “Cisco Exec on Growth of Worldwide Ecommerce, 
Cultural Differences,” Practical Ecommerce, June 10, 2011,  
  http://www.practicalecommerce.com/articles/
2841-Cisco-Exec-on-Growth-of-Worldwide-
Ecommerce-Cultural-Differences  .  
  ii.   Marc Levinson,  The Box: How the Shipping Container Made 
the World Smaller and the World Economy Bigger (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2006) . 
 iii.   “The Role and Importance of International Shipping,” 
International Maritime Organization, accessed October 31, 
2013,   http://www.imo.org/KnowledgeCentre/Ships
A n d S h i p p i n g F a c t s A n d F i g u r e s /
TheRoleandImportanceofInternationalShipping/
P a g e s / T h e R o l e A n d I m p o r t a n c e O f
InternationalShipping.aspx  .  
 iv.   “The Whole World in Boxes,” Deautsche Welle, 
accessed 
May 
9, 
2016, 
  http://www.dw.com/en/
the-whole-world-in-boxes/g-19231681  . 
  v.   “JOC 
Economist: 
US 
Containerized 
Exports 
to 
Rebound 
in 
2016,” 
 Journal 
of 
Commerce , 
accessed 
May 
8, 
2016, 
  http://www.joc.com/
international-trade-news/trade-data/
united-states-trade-data/joc-economist-us-con-
tainerized-exports-rebound-2016_20151215.html  .  
 vi.  “The JOC Top 50 World Container Ports,”  Journal of 
Commerce , accessed May 6, 2016,    http://www.joc.
com/port-news/international-ports/joc-top-
50-world-container-ports_20150820.html  . 
 vii.    http://www.joc.com/port-news/interna-
tional-ports/joc-top-50-world-container-
ports_20150820.html  .  

Exporting
353
 viii.   “The Truck Driver Who Reinvented Shipping,” Anthony J. 
Mayo and Nitin Nohria, Harvard Business School: Working 
Knowledge; the Thinking That Leads, accessed October 3, 
2005,   http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/5026.html  .  
 ix.   Levinson,  The Box . 
 x.  “World Internet Usage and Population Statistics,” 
Internet World Stats: Usage and Population Statistics, 
page updated April 27, 2016, accessed May 8, 2016, 
  http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm . 
 xi.   “2014 Third-Party Logistics Study, John Langley, Jr., Ph.D., 
and Capgemini, accessed May 8, 2016,   https://www.
capgemini.com/resource-file-access/resource/
pdf/3pl_study_report_web_version.pdf  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_19
 C H A P T E R 
  Pricing and 
Preparing 
Quotations 
 A company’s job is to find the market’s acceptable price. 
 —J. Willard Marriott Jr., founder, Marriott International, and 
Robert G. Cross, chairman and chief executive of Aeronomics Inc.  i 
 What the customer pays for each piece of the product has to work out as 
Y dollars for us. But how the customer pays depends  on what makes the 
most sense to him. It depends on what the product does for the customer. 
It depends on what fits his reality. It depends on what the customer sees 
as ‘value.’ 
 —American management consultant, author, and educator, 
Peter F.   Drucker  ii 
 Pricing   a product or service for the export market, determining its landed 
costs (the total cost of a product once it has arrived at your buyer's door, 
for example), and presenting the costs in quotation form are critical steps in 
the international sales operation. Price determines revenue. Presenting the 
pricing and providing the quotes for your goods or services in the right way 
are both crucial for a successful and ongoing export business. Prices must be 
19

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
356
high enough to generate and sustain a reasonable profit, yet low enough to 
penetrate a market, gain market share, attract customers, and be competitive 
in export markets. 
 In this chapter, I’ll discuss several pricing strategies: how to establish an 
exporter’s markup; how to develop export pricing (which differs from the 
preceding strategy); and how to work with a freight forwarder, logistics spe-
cialist, or fulfillment operation to arrive at good shipping rates that will please 
your customers. I will also show you how to use these figures to put together 
a  pro forma invoice  , a key document in every export transaction. 
 There are differences in pricing a product when you are a manufacturer’s rep 
vs. when it’s your own manufactured product. There is also a difference in 
pricing a product vs. a service. Be sure to distinguish between each of these 
pricing tactics as you read through the following pages. 
 
■ Note  Selling products in a B-to-C transaction using e-commerce requires the same rigorous 
pricing strategy outlined in this chapter, but instead of preparing a pro forma invoice, as you would 
do in the case of large-volume orders or service export, the computation of the total price can 
be automated by a software service provider. (Refer to Chapter   18  for a listing of companies that 
provide this type of service.) Automated price computations simplify the process and guarantee 
that the customer receives an accurate calculation of the total landed price on a single item 
(including duties and taxes), and that she will not pay more than she is supposed to. Watch out 
for future growth of the automated landed-cost capability, especially in the B-to-B marketplace. 
 Pricing for Product Exports  
 Let’s look at the three areas of concern related to pricing for exporters. 
 Representing Exports for a Manufacturer: Product 
 Markup 
 In Chapter   11 , I talked about deciding to export a product that you cur-
rently manufacture. I also talked about finding a product and a manufacturer 
for export when you don’t have one of your own or see an opportunity to 
do so. When you represent exports for a manufacturer, you must determine 
your breakeven points, where your exporter’s commission on a product 
shipment covers your business operating costs. Theoretically, of course, if 
you have a customer, say Jane Doe Importing Wholesaler, willing to buy, you 
can price your product at almost any level, provided it doesn’t exceed what 
the customer is willing to pay or what the market will bear. This assumes the 

Exporting
357
manufacturer has granted you authorization to set any price. Just keep in 
mind that you don’t want to alienate the customer or make it easy for your 
competitors to undercut you! 
 Typically, exporters take between a 10 and 15 percent markup on top of the 
cost the manufacturer charges them for the product. In other words, if your 
supplier charges you $1 per unit for his product, you might mark it up to 
anywhere from $1.10 to $1.15 per unit. That markup becomes your profit or 
commission. Consider the following criteria to determine just how high or 
low you can go on your markup.   This also applies when you manufacture your 
own product for export, which I will cover later.
 1.  Uniqueness : If the product is a market “first,” you can 
afford to charge a higher price.  
 2.  Quality :   Is the product’s quality upscale? Or marginal? 
Price up or down accordingly.  
 3.  Your  cost : If the manufacturer has already priced the prod-
uct high, keep your markup low. If a major manufacturer 
(which are those that achieve considerable economies 
of scale in production) is able to give you a low offer-
ing price, then you can afford to set your commission 
slightly higher. Be careful here, as this scenario can be 
deceptive. If your cost is low to begin with, it might mean 
that the product is a mass commodity rather than a spe-
cialty offering, and that the market is already flooded with 
similar “me-too” items. If so, you have to keep your profit 
margin very tight.  
 4.   Newness :   Is the product already established or is it new 
to market? Sometimes you can price higher when a prod-
uct is new to market just because your customers need 
and want novel product offerings. But novelty also has 
its downsides. A new-to-market product doesn’t have the 
brand recognition, image, and popularity that overseas 
customers tend to look for when they want a product 
with surefire consumer appeal.  
 5.  Customer contact : Who’s calling the shots, you or the cus-
tomer? Did the customer ask you to find the product or 
did you approach the customer and offer it? This makes 
a difference. A customer who has asked you to source 
a product is usually more receptive to a slightly higher 
price because she really needs the item. Don’t lose your 
head here, though; never, ever get greedy. Your customer 
knows a rip-off when she sees one.  

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
358
 6.  Product positioning :   Positioning your product in the best pos-
sible light determines the price at which you will be able 
to sell it. Use the product’s pricing in the equivalent sector 
of the domestic market as a guide to your overseas profit 
margin. For example, if your price for a product is $1 and 
you are targeting the upscale specialty market overseas, 
the suggested retail price at a local upscale store could be 
$8.99, so you take a higher profit margin.  
 
■ Caution   Export and domestic pricing always differ due to a variety of factors. The difference in 
overseas market conditions, costs, volume, brand support, quoting formats, certification if required, 
and currencies all affect what you should charge for your products or services in a foreign market. 
 7.  Direct (includes e-commerce) or indirect sale :  If you are sell-
ing directly to an end user, you can afford a higher profit 
margin. If your product is handled by a series of interme-
diaries—say, an export trading company, an importer, and 
a wholesaler—before it gets to the retailer and end user, 
remember that each of these middlemen will tack on his 
due percentage, and most likely without your consent, 
which can jack up the price substantially. If you price high at 
the beginning, your product will be priced right out of the 
market by the time it gets to the end user. Nobody wins.  
 8.  How desperate are you for income? Are you in a mood to see 
what you can get away with? If this is the case, I won’t stop 
you. But realize you may be making a big mistake from 
which you won’t be able to recover—and thereby losing a 
customer altogether. You may really need income and feel 
you have nothing to lose, but don’t forget the priorities of a 
successful exporter: the customer relationship comes first.  
 9.  Competition :   Price your products to stay in the global 
game. If you’re up against unlimited competition, make 
sure you’re offering comparable prices along with some 
extra form of value for your customers. 
 10.  Government policies :  Government policies can have both 
direct and indirect impact on pricing policies. Examples 
of factors that have a direct impact are taxes and tariffs. 
Examples of factors with an indirect impact are coun-
try deficits (spurring high interest rates) and currency 
fluctuations.  

Exporting
359
 11.   Are you associated with an internationally known  celebrity? 
 That makes a world of difference! No matter what you 
are offering, fans will buy your product at any price just 
because star power is attached. Stars whose meteoric 
success has allowed them to launch successful enterprises 
(with the help of enterprising people like you) include 
Jennifer Lopez with her perfume and clothing line sold 
through Kohl’s, Jay Z with his Rocawear, and Jessica Alba 
with the Honest Co. The more popular your celeb is and 
the more difficult it is to get the product, the higher you 
can price it. Mainstream pop culture is the best marketing 
tool there is—look at Mickey Mouse and Andy Warhol! 
Consider yourself fortunate to be working with a celeb-
rity, and go for the higher price!  
 How Pricing Works: Example Where I Represented 
the Exporting of a  Chocolate Manufacturer  
 Here’s an example of how I set pricing when representing a chocolate manu-
facturer in Chicago: I looked at my American supplier’s pricing schedule and 
saw that a box of chocolates cost $3.00 wholesale (with a US retail price of 
$15.95 a box). I wanted to make a substantial profit right from the start.   
 First, I asked the supplier for a 25 percent discount off its standard domestic-
price schedule based on a minimum order of a thousand boxes (with twelve 
units to a box). Hence, the supplier (manufacturer) could achieve economies 
of scale in production (large production runs that reduce per-unit costs) 
whenever it produced our overseas orders. It agreed to the price discount. 
 Next, I conducted market research to determine what the market would bear 
(including a thorough assessment of competition). Because there was nothing 
like our chocolates that existed in the market we were entering—Dubai—I 
decided to keep it clean and simple and price the product 10 percent lower 
than the standard domestic wholesale pricing, or $2.70 per unit ($32.40 per 
case), even though we were actually getting a 25 percent discount from the 
supplier. That meant the price to the customer now included our 15 percent 
commission. 
 The price still could have been considered high, but the product had unique 
characteristics—the chocolate was of superb quality and would be available 
in an exotic flavor. Because I knew that most overseas consumers would love 
to try it, the packaging was beautifully done, and the retail price point was 
equally high here in the States, I was convinced that the product could be put 
into a luxury category. In addition, the product was ideally suited for special 
occasion celebrations and gift-giving seasons such as Christmas and Valentine’s 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
360
Day, or the equivalent in other parts of the world. All of these reasons assured 
me that upscale, affluent consumers overseas would be willing to buy such a 
product whatever it cost. The truth of the matter is that price is important, 
but it is not the only selling point in a deal. 
 
■ Tip  When you have a unique product or service, you can sell it at a high price. This is known 
as skimming. But you need to make sure what you are selling is unique, for otherwise you will price 
yourself right out of the market. 
 I contacted a freight forwarder and asked how much it would cost to ship a 
container-load of boxed chocolates (about a thousand cases) overseas. I was 
given an estimate of $3,600 (a refrigerated container would be needed during 
summer months, making the transport price higher than usual), plus another 
hundred dollars or so for transaction costs. I figured in these transportation 
costs along with the cost per box to the customer and realized the landed 
cost of the chocolates was now up to $3.44 per box or $41.24 per case. I’ll 
thoroughly cover how I arrived at this later on. 
 Then, I made an offer to my foreign customer on behalf of the manufacturer, 
and he agreed. I had a sale and was delighted that my research had paid off. 
Now, it was a matter of exceeding the customer’s expectations in all respects 
and developing a great relationship that would grow into other opportunities 
to export to the same customer in the future.  
 Going It Alone: Establishing Product Pricing and 
Markup for Your Manufactured Product for  Export  
 There’s a big difference  between  pricing a product as an export representative 
and pricing your own manufactured product for export. When you represent 
a company for export, the company has already factored in all its direct and 
indirect costs related to the production of the product. You merely add on 
your commission in order to offset your operational costs and generate a 
profit. However, when you price a product that you manufacture for export, 
you must take into consideration all of the above plus factor in middlemen and 
apply the following  accounting methods:  
• 
 Add in all the direct material, labor, and overhead costs 
involved in producing the goods. Isolate and allocate all 
the costs. 
• 
 Deduct all costs unrelated to an export order (marketing 
and legal or domestic advertising, for example).  

Exporting
361
• 
 Add in all of the out-of-pocket costs related to making 
the export sale happen (including but not limited to an 
export manager’s salary and benefits, travel, legal, mar-
ket research, promotional material, logistics fee, product 
modification, and translation costs).  
• 
 Set a slim margin (a minuscule percentage of the total 
costs) of error. Meaning, mistakes will happen when you 
are dealing in uncharted territory. Anticipate them by 
buffering your pricing to absorb fluctuations (such as 
higher shipping fees, currency fluctuations, fees for a pay-
ment method or early discount).  
 
■ Caution   Don’t forget to factor fluctuations in currency  into   the price. If you plan to sell in 
currencies other than US dollars, although the exchange rate percentage may be small for converting 
to US dollars, it can add up over multiple shipments on a regular basis and erode profit margins.  
• 
 Make money.   You are in the export business to grow and 
be profitable. Allow a reasonable markup and profit mar-
gin, but never lose sight of getting the best market pen-
etration as fast as possible (revisit point number nine in 
the “Exports for a Manufacturer” section).   
 
■ Tip  Many small business owners use what is called a cost-plus method of pricing.  That’s when 
you add up the total costs involved in producing a product, including all expenses related to getting 
export ready, and then add on a markup to cover an appropriate share of overhead costs plus a 
fair profit margin that will yield an adequate return on investment. This is usually expressed as a 
percentage of the cost. Other business owners use penetration pricing, which is based on standard 
domestic pricing with a slight discount predicated on the anticipation of volume purchases. When 
doing penetration pricing, be sure to state an expiration date on your price schedule and indicate 
that prices are subject to change due to market conditions and the final pricing proposal. In either 
scenario, monitor results after the fact to ensure you make money. 
 A good international accountant is always helpful in determining the type 
of accounting data that should be used in planning and implementing a pric-
ing strategy for the export activity of manufactured products. Your goal is to 
analyze and control costs to ensure you make a profit. The five  key drivers  in 
determining the best export price are: cost, demand (customers), distribution, 
competition, and government policies. 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
362
 Test your price out on one of your customers (just as I did with the chocolates) 
with whom you have cultivated a strong relationship and to whom you’ve pre-
sented your product’s positive sales attributes. See what reaction you get and 
then negotiate from there. If you priced the product with only a slim margin built 
in for yourself—so slim you cannot afford to go any lower—and your customer 
still balks at the price, consider renegotiating with your supplier. Oftentimes, if 
you explain that the only way to sell the product overseas is to price it more 
competitively, the supplier will agree to go back to the drawing board and see if 
it can rework the numbers. Don’t attempt this too often though, because if you 
continue to have price problems the supplier will sooner or later catch on that 
you haven’t properly checked out what the foreign market will bear.  
 Small business owner Caron Beesley, who also serves as the  community mod-
erator  for the Small Business Administration, says, “Not charging enough is a 
common problem for small businesses simply because they often don’t have 
the operational efficiencies of larger companies and frequently find that, what-
ever they sell, their costs are higher than they anticipated. Small businesses do 
have one advantage, though, and it’s one that justifies charging a higher price—
service!”  iii Keep this advice in mind as you price for export.  
 Complete Your Quotation with a  Competitive 
Shipping Rate  
 Let’s say you’ve given your product a markup of 15 cents on the $1 total cost 
per unit. By the time it lands at your customer’s port, it costs her $1.25 per 
unit. How does that happen? 
 Just as in a  domestic sale,   you will be billing your customer for the costs of 
shipping when exporting your product. To finish your price quotation, you 
must first contact a freight forwarder, which will provide you with a competi-
tive shipping rate. But before you contact the freight forwarder, collect the 
information in the sidebar and keep it right at your fingertips. If you don’t have 
this information when you call, e-mail, or submit your inquiry online (a capabil-
ity that most of them provide you), the company will require that you get it. 
 
FOURTEEN QUESTIONS YOU WILL BE ASKED BY 
A FREIGHT FORWARDER
 1. 
 What is your commodity? Is it perishable or nonperishable? 
 2. 
 What is your product’s commodity number? You can look this 
up in the appropriate directory at your local international Small 
Business Administration office. A  commodity number, generally 
known as an “HS/Schedule B product description,” allows for easy 

Exporting
363
classification by customs officials. It’s important to be as specific 
as possible in determining your product classification, because 
transportation rates vary widely, even among products you would 
expect to fall under the same category. For example, there’s a 
big difference between the transportation rates for computer 
hardware and computer software. If you are unable to determine 
the appropriate number, the freight forwarder will calculate an 
accurate shipping quote based on your product description. 
 If your product is already a standard export but you are sending it to 
a new market, a freight forwarder will take your commodity number 
and assign an appropriate tariff number. That number will then be filed 
as the industry standard for all subsequent exports of that commodity 
to that location. Every time you export that product to that country, 
you must use the assigned tariff number to ensure the same rate. 
 
■ Tip To get a leg up and determine your own tariff number, or tax at the border, that certain foreign 
countries will collect when your product crosses into their country, use the FTA Tariff Tool, which now 
includes the latest information on tariffs in TPP:   http://export.gov/fta/ftatarifftool/     
 3. 
 Are you shipping by air or by ocean? 
 4. 
 How many cartons do you plan to ship? 
 5. 
 What is the size of the  cartons?  This needs to be assessed both 
in linear dimensions (height, length, width) and in cubic meters. 
 6. 
 What are the net and gross weights of the cartons in kilograms? 
(The net weight is the weight of the product on its own; the gross 
weight adds the weight of the cartons to that of the product.)  
 7. 
 Do you plan to stack the cartons on pallets? If so, how many will 
be loaded on each pallet? Your freight forwarder should be able 
to guesstimate how much weight and cubic space each pallet 
will take up and calculate the total weight and volume of the 
shipment accordingly. 
 8. 
 Do you have enough product to fill a container?  Full loads of cargo 
are generally known as “ containers”  (see Chapter   18  ) and average 
between twenty and forty-eight cubic feet. Once you have your total 
number of cases and total weight calculated, your freight forwarder 
should be able to tell you if you have enough product to fill a 
container. If you do, it’s an advantage. Your product will be loaded into 
the container all by itself rather than being consolidated with other 
companies’ products in order to fill the container, and a seal will be 
put on the door of the container. This means that nobody else will 
have access to your goods when they arrive at the port of destination, 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
364
except your customer and his designated agent. This safety measure 
guards against potential theft, pilferage, and product tampering.  
 9. 
 From what location will the product be moved? Usually, this is the 
manufacturer’s factory door. 
 10. 
 To what port does your customer want the goods delivered? 
 11. 
 Will your shipment require an export license? (See Chapter   22  
for a complete discussion of export licensing.       To avoid shipping 
delays, it’s best to make this determination as soon as you know 
what kind of product you’ll be selling.)  
 12. 
 Are there any time constraints involved in getting the product to 
a customer? 
 13. 
 Is insurance required for the shipping of your product, and, if so, 
who will be responsible for it? 
 14. 
 Who will collect the payment on the transaction, and is there a 
preferred method? 
 Having given the company all this information, you can expect a bit of a wait for 
its response. Generally, an efficient freight forwarder can get back to you with 
a quote within a few hours. If it’s a large firm and a busy time, expect a callback 
or e-mail the next day. The forwarder should give you a very detailed analysis 
as to how it arrived at its rates. If there is anything you don’t understand, stop 
and ask about it. Also, ask for a rate confirmation number so that when you call 
back, whether in a week or several months, the company will have a record of 
the quote and a way to access it. And don’t forget to ask how long the rates are 
valid! After you’ve called a few forwarders, sit down and compare quotes. 
 
■ Tip  Many international shipping companies (UPS, for example) have a designated area on 
their site for calculating shipping costs and estimated delivery times to targeted countries. You will 
need to provide information about your shipment in required online fields, including destination, 
origin, shipment date and weight. 
 How Does the Freight Forwarder  Arrive at a Rate?  
 Besides the physical logistics of your actual shipment, here are some extraneous 
factors that will affect how your freight forwarder calculates your shipping rate:
 1.  The tariff on your product : Unless the company files a new 
rate for your product and destination, as discussed in the 
second item of the "Fourteen Questions YOU will be 
asked by a Freight Forwarder" sidebar, freight forwarders 
use rate books to determine the tariff.  

Exporting
365
 2.   The amount of traffic to and from your destination point . 
Competitive container port areas such as China and 
Singapore, for example, can create overcapacity situations 
in the container port sector, shipping delays, and higher 
prices on transportation. 
 3.  How the industry as a whole is performing : One factor the 
freight forwarder might look at is whether demand is 
exceeding available transportation services or the other 
way around. 
 4.  Exchange rates : These rates are a major factor in the 
transportation calculation. They will be reflected in your 
quote as the CAF, or currency adjustment factor. Let’s 
say a freight forwarder quotes you a rate of $1,800 for 
shipping a twenty-foot container-load from a West Coast 
port in the United States to Tokyo and lists the CAF as 57 
percent. That means you must add 57 percent onto the 
base rate to arrive at a total rate of U.S. $2,826. 
 Selecting the Best Freight Forwarder  for Your Needs 
 Once you’ve got a few quotes, you’ll need to compare more than the num-
bers to determine which freight forwarder offers the best value. Ask your 
customer which of the following should take priority:  
 1.  Low-cost transportation  
 2.   A timely delivery  
 3.   Safe handling of product  
 4.   Choice of transportation method  
 5.  All of the above  
 Try to select a couple of  forwarders   that offer the last choice, all of the above, 
are always pleasant to talk with, and are financially solvent—and then stick 
with these companies through thick and thin. You do want to double-check 
the company’s financial solvency, because if it goes out of business during the 
transit of one of your shipments, you are liable for the consequences. If, on the 
other hand, your customer needs a timely delivery to happen, then select the 
forwarder that specializes in speed, and so on. 
 Every time you have a customer who wants a quote, it pays to shop through 
your list, because you never know when the quality of service might change, 
the prices might go up, or the company might discontinue service to certain 
ports. Check and double-check on behalf of your customers. Always offer 
them the absolute best value you can find, because it makes them want to 
keep coming back.  

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
366
 Reading Your  Quotation  
 When your freight forwarder gives you a quote, the total charge will be bro-
ken down into line items, as shown in Figure  19-1 : 
 Figure 19-1.  Export quotation worksheet  
 Inland transport refers the cost to move the product from a factory door to a 
port of exit within the same country. Ocean transport is the cost to move the 
product from the port of exit to the port of entry of the country of destination. 
CAF stands for currency adjustment factor, which is the going rate of exchange 
from one currency to another; for example, from the US dollar to the Chinese 
yuan. Documentation represents the freight forwarder’s fee for handling all doc-
umentation associated with the shipment, including letters of credit. 
 Terms of Shipment 
 You should also familiarize yourself with the following  terms of shipment, 
 which are the ones that are the most commonly used. These are known as 
 Incoterms and, according to the  International Chamber of Commerce  , “have 
become an essential part of the daily language of trade.”  iv They have also been 
incorporated in contracts for the sale of goods worldwide. These terms of 
shipment will affect the final numbers on your export quotation as well as 
your financial responsibility for the shipment:  
 CIF 
 You are responsible for paying the  cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) costs   in 
 advance to a named overseas port. You will collect these later, at the point 
when you invoice your customer. Normal practice is to insure a shipment 
for 110 percent of its CIF value. Let’s say you are insuring a shipment to the 
Far East (Japan, Korea, Taiwan) at a rate of $0.6175 per $100 (which includes 
war risk insurance and “special perils” coverage). The details are shown in 
Figure  19-2 : 
 

Exporting
367
 Here’s how you arrive at the  CIF total:   Add the invoice value (cost of the 
product), freight charges (typically includes fees for both inland/ocean ship-
ping and CAF), and clearance/handling charges. Multiply this total by 110 
percent for the cost of the insurance, and then divide by 100. Take the result-
ing figure and multiply it by $0.6175, which will result in your insurance 
charge of $90.34. Add this to your previous total of $14,630 for a CIF total 
of $14,720.34. It’s good to know how this is done, but you won’t have to 
concern yourself with this calculation or the actual issuance of the certificate 
if you use a freight forwarder. All you have to do is ask the freight forwarder 
to quote you insurance coverage at the 110 percent CIF rate.  
 CFR  
 The CFR, or the more widely used  CNF term,   refers to the cost and freight. 
The exporter is responsible for paying the freight costs to the named port of 
destination and collecting the charge from the customer later on. 
 
■ Note   An import duty is payable based on CIF prices, or what is considered the transaction 
value of invoice. For further clarification, check with the “Technical Information on Customs 
Valuation” page on the World Trade Organization’s Web site (  http://www.wto.org/english/
tratop_e/cusval_e/cusval_info_e.htm  ). 
 FAS 
 FAS, or free alongside  ship  , refers to getting the goods shipside and ready to 
be loaded,  all of the costs of which are the exporter’s responsibility. The costs 
of loading the goods into transport vessels at the specified place and all other 
costs from that moment onward are the customer’s responsibility.  
 Figure 19-2.  Calculating CIF (cost, insurance, and freight) totals  
 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
368
 FOB 
 The   exporter must take care of all paperwork and/or expenses necessary to 
collect the goods from the supplier and place them on an international carrier. 
The buyer is responsible for all costs from the moment the goods are placed 
on board the vessel and onward, which is known as FOB, or free on board.  
 Ex- 
 Terms beginning with “ex,” such as   ex-factory  or  ex-dock , indicate that the price 
quoted to your customer applies only at the specified point of origin (either 
your own location, your supplier’s factory, or a dock at the export point). This 
term means that you agree to place the goods at the disposal of the customer 
at the specified place within a fixed period of time. As the seller, you do not 
need to load the goods on any collecting vehicle. That is also the responsibility 
of the buyer. 
 In order to accommodate the ever-increasing use of the electronic data inter-
change (EDI), Incoterms have been revised to reflect new shipping methods, 
such as free carrier (FCA), carrier paid to (CPT), carriage and insurance paid 
to (CIP), delivered at terminal (DAT), delivered at place (DAP), and delivered 
duty paid (DDP). Be sure to ask your freight forwarder how each of these 
terms of the transaction affect the ultimate price of the shipment as well as 
the logistics of shipping or contact the International Chamber of Commerce 
(ICC) for additional guidance.  
 Preparing the Cost Analysis  and Pro Forma Invoice 
 Your next step is to add the itemized charges that appear on your invoice 
form, which becomes a pro forma invoice. A pro forma invoice is considered 
a pre-advice document and serves as a guide to action on what the expecta-
tions are on an export sale. It sets the stage for the negotiation process. 
 Here are some ways in which a pro forma invoice is helpful:
• 
 Serves as a legal, binding agreement  
• 
 Minimizes errors  
• 
 Outlines all relevant information pertaining to the export 
transaction  
• 
 Is a widely accepted form of a sales document structure 
in the export industry  
• 
 Enables banks to establish a payment method on behalf 
of the importer 

Exporting
369
 Your document will have all the familiar components of an ordinary domestic 
invoice: a description of the product, an itemized listing of charges, and sales 
terms. Let’s say you want to get your customer a landed-price quote for a 
shipment of candy to her port of entry, in this case “CFR Tokyo.”  
 If you have one hundred cases of candy, packed twelve units to a case, and each 
case is priced at $120, or $10 per unit, the total cost for the order would be 
$12,000. Figure  19-3 shows the invoice you would make up:  
 Figure 19-3.  Pro forma invoice for a shipment of candy to  Tokyo  
 The selling price is your cost to buy the product from the manufacturer 
plus your markup. Add to that figure the total shipping costs and divide that 
amount by the number of cases of candy. That gets you your landed price per 
case. Then, divide that figure by the number of units in a case. This will give you 
your landed price per unit. 
 So, if the total landed price for shipment were $15,875 (CFR Tokyo as shown 
above), and you divided this amount by one hundred cases of candy, you’d 
come up with $158.75 as the landed price per case. You’d then divide that 
price by the number of units in a case (twelve) to come up with $13.23 as 
the landed price per unit. Remember, the selling price is your cost to buy the 
product from the manufacturer plus your markup.  
 You have now finalized your price quotation and created a pro forma invoice. 
Don’t forget to specify a precise time period during which your quote is valid 
 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
370
(by including, “This quote expires on __/__/__,” for example), and to add the 
freight forwarder’s quote reference number. 
 Three additional critical steps on the pro forma invoice are: (1) Make a state-
ment certifying that the pro forma invoice is true and correct, (2) make a 
statement that indicates the country of origin of the goods, and (3) mark your 
invoice clearly with the words “Pro forma invoice.” 
 Once your customer approves the pro forma invoice, it will become your 
actual invoice for the order. The customer will also use the pro forma invoice 
to obtain any necessary funding (payment) or import licenses. Your customer 
should communicate acceptance (usually via fax or e-mail) in a short written 
sentence or two with a signature, as is done in the following: “We accept your 
pro forma invoice No. 1234 against our Purchase Order number ABCD.” You 
will then respond: “We acknowledge and confirm your P.O. number ABCD 
against our pro forma invoice number 1234.” 
 
■ Tip  Regardless of whether it has been requested or not, it is wise to prepare a pro forma invoice 
showing the cost of getting the product to the overseas buyer for any international quotation. Use 
the Incoterms correctly when quoting. You don’t want to get stuck absorbing shipping costs only 
because you didn’t understand how to use the sales terms correctly. 
 Pricing for  Service Exports  
 Now, at this point, you might be saying, “That’s all well and good, but I’m 
exporting services.” Selling a service successfully requires even more people 
power than does product sales. Pricing a service, such as one that is profes-
sional, technical, financial, or franchise or insurance oriented, entails a some-
what different approach because a service requires direct interaction with 
your customer, not just initially but for the duration of the service contract. 
And for some services, the quality of your interaction with your customer is 
exactly what they’re paying for.  
 Whether pricing a product or a service for export, the fundamentals remain 
the same: you need to first conduct market research on the competition, the 
ease of entering a new market, the maturity of the industry, the uniqueness of 
the offering, and so forth. 
 But let’s not get ahead of ourselves. Here’s a look at the other factors that are 
important to consider concerning pricing a service export:  
• 
 You need to differentiate your service offering from 
existing offerings or convince a prospective customer to 
hire you to do something that’s never been done before.  

Exporting
371
• 
 Make sure you look at all costs associated with the 
service offering, including taxes, establishing a foreign 
branch office, sales visits, translation, IP protection, and 
so forth.  
• 
 Examine and factor in the amount of time that will be 
spent on the proposal (presales effort) and allocate your 
schedule accordingly.  
• 
 Pay close attention to cultural business practices spe-
cific to a country. Will you be pricing your service per 
hour, on a fixed-project basis, or in some other nego-
tiated format that fits the protocol of the country’s 
standards?  
• 
 Make sure to determine how you will account for after-
sales nurturing and follow-up costs.  
• 
 You’ll need to comply with applicable international stan-
dards. Learn the tax and legal implications for providing 
your service in an overseas market well in advance of 
submitting a proposal to a client.  
• 
 Make sure you factor in any promotional costs associated 
with supporting your services in the overseas market.  
• 
 Determine what the impact on your domestic business 
will be in terms of hiring additional staff, whether it be on 
the ground in the country in which you wish to conduct 
business or locally to support the new business.  
• 
 Select barrier-free markets for your service export. The 
Trade in Services Agreement ( TISA ;   https://servic-
escoalition.org/negotiations/trade-in-ser-
vices-agreement  ) has the potential to create trading 
conditions that enable services industries to achieve their 
full export potential.  
 
■ Tip  Set a benchmark price that reflects your brand and its values and capabilities. Tuck away 
a slim margin that can be used later for negotiating purposes if need be (offering a new client a 
one-time courtesy discount, for example). Bear in mind you might be competing against more well-
known and well-heeled competitors, but if your offering is unique, you’ve got as good a chance as 
anyone to land the business. 

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
372
 Pricing Model for a Service Export 
 I’ve said it before,   but I’ll say it again: consult with your international accoun-
tant to determine your best service export pricing strategy, especially one 
that favors healthy profits and minimal tax exposure. 
 
■ Tip  There are other pricing methods, such as variable cost pricing, skimming (as mentioned 
earlier), and penetration (also touched upon earlier). The decision of which pricing model to use is 
largely based on the level of competition, innovation, market conditions, and available resources. 
Consult with your international accountant and also conduct a web search to learn more about 
each method. 
 Calculating “cost plus” pricing  requires a complete understanding of your 
total costs (hence, the consultation with your accountant) for delivering your 
service into a target overseas market. To do that you must:
 1.  Know all costs, margins, and expenses to get the service export 
out the door . Don’t forget to allocate for the after-sales 
service part of the contract.  
 2.  Realize you might not be competitive in all markets . (Adjust 
your pricing accordingly, but if you find you can’t be prof-
itable, go someplace else where you can be).  
 3.  Align your service export price with its perceived benefits in 
the target market . This holds true whether you are pricing 
a product or a service.  
 Once you establish the cost, add a margin (return on your investment) to 
cover profits and to reflect a price that is in line with your perceived market 
position (think along the lines of Apple providing a technology-export-service 
proposal vs. ABC Tech House doing so. Apple’s pricing will be higher due to 
its prestige in the marketplace, and ABC Tech House’s will be lower due to its 
unknown name and desire to get a foot in the door.) It is important that you 
have an understanding of the average margin in the export market for your 
industry and that you price your service offering competitively to guarantee 
two things—that someone will purchase the product or service you are offer-
ing and that you make money. 
 Just as on a product export, you need to finalize your pricing by prepar-
ing a pro forma invoice. You don’t, however, have to concern yourself with 
Incoterms because you are not shipping products, nor do you have to estab-
lish a harmonized code to categorize your service, or prepare documentation 
for customs purposes. The pro forma invoice will come in handy later when 
you discuss with your client how you will get paid (refer to Chapter   20 ). 

Exporting
373
 Last Thoughts on Market Differences 
 Here are a few final thoughts on export pricing. Calculating a different price 
for each overseas market and segment of a market can be a seemingly daunt-
ing experience, but it might be necessary because:   
• 
 Customers vary . In Ireland, for example, you might be sell-
ing to distributors that sell to end users, while on your 
e-commerce site you sell directly to end users. In Dubai, 
you might sell to small independent retailers and a hand-
ful of big box retailers directly. Each of these examples 
calls for developing specially tailored pricing that meets 
the needs of the marketplace and provides profits for 
your business.  
• 
 Markets vary .  Some countries have a five-step distribution 
method (where the product changes hands five times 
before an end user purchases it) and others might only 
have a door-to-door sales concept.  
• 
 Competitors vary . Tracking your competitors is not only 
prudent; it’s beneficial for determining just how high or 
low you can set your pricing.  
 The bottom line is: you need to adapt and adjust. 
 In the export marketplace, you can never compete on price alone. While price 
is important, it is seldom the only factor in the buying decision. You need to 
compete on several different levels. The majority of customers worldwide 
take into account a combination of factors and look for the whole package 
before making a purchasing decision. Do your homework. Because the whole 
purpose of an export business is to gain new business, you need to have 
the winning combination in overlooked and unlikely market spaces and make 
money. Use pricing  strategy   as a spark to enhance export performance, and 
don’t forget to charge what your products are worth. 
 Summary 
 You have learned how to coordinate a sale. You are now ready to enter the 
export business. From this point on, no additional changes should be made 
to the transaction by you or your customer until after the expiry date given 
on the pro forma invoice. Before you release the order for your product or 
the contract for your service, though, you and your customer must negotiate 
terms of payment. Read on for an overview of the most common—and the 
most secure—methods of arranging a payment for export goods and services 
as well as an array of export financing sources.  

Chapter 19 | Pricing and Preparing Quotations
374
 Notes 
  i.   Peter Krass,  The Book of Management Wisdom . New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2000.  
  ii.   Peter F. Drucker,  The Essential Drucker . New York: 
HarperCollins, 2001.  
 iii.   “How to Price Your Small Business’ Products and Services,” 
Caron Beesley, SBA.gov, accessed May 15, 2016, last modi-
fied May 10, 2016,     http://www.sba.gov/community/
blogs/how-price-your-small-business%E2%80%99-
products-and-services  .  
 iv.   “The Incoterms® Rules,” International Chamber of 
Commerce: The World Business Organization, accessed 
May 15, 2016,    http://www.iccwbo.org/products-and-
services/trade-facilitation/incoterms-2010/
the-incoterms-rules/  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_20
 C H A P T E R 
 Getting Paid 
 Terms, Conditions, and Other  Financing Options  , 
Including  Mobile Payments 
 Since 2009, the Export-Import Bank [of the United States] has financed 
$235 billion worth of export deals for American companies, including 
more than 5,000 small businesses. 
 —The Business Journals  i 
 The most important thing to negotiate before closing on an export sale is 
how payment will be made. In this chapter, I outline several strategies so that 
you can get  paid in full and on time while minimizing risks. I also offer a 
brief overview of other nontraditional ways to finance an export transaction, 
 should you find yourself unable to work out a standard method of payment. 
 Traditional  Payment Methods  
 Remember the two types of customers I talked about in Chapter  16   ? The 
first was the distributor, overseas agent, wholesaler, or retailer—the big-
volume purchasers—who will use the more traditional payment methods I 
am going to talk about in this section. The other type of customer is your 
Everyday Joe—the overseas end user—who buys your product from an 
e-commerce site or mobile  device   or through an app, which I will explain in 
greater detail later. 
20

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
376
 Let’s start with the large-volume customer. To make a point fast, I want to 
share an experience I had when trying to establish a payment method with a 
new customer. It went like this. 
 In an early stage of my business, I had been communicating with a customer 
in Japan for several weeks. His company was large and established and had a 
solid reputation in the food industry. He was interested in our line of cookies 
and he placed a $21,000 order. 
 I responded to his inquiries with a pro forma invoice showing all the pertinent 
data. In addition, I stated that payment was to be made by a confirmed irrevo-
cable letter of credit  ii (L/C)   opened in favor of AB Cookie Kingdom Company 
(real name withheld for confidentiality reasons) through JP Morgan Chase. A 
few days later, the company gave the go-ahead to start producing the order. 
I assumed that it had accepted and approved our pro forma invoice and was 
about to open the L/C as requested. 
 A few more days went by. 
 I scheduled the production of the order. I faxed (that’s how we communicated 
back then!) the company again with the production details and an inquiry as 
to when I would see a copy of the L/C. 
 No response. More days went by. Finally, I started to wonder about the cus-
tomer. I sent another fax asking him exactly what was causing the delay on 
the L/C. The company finally replied that it had opened the L/C a week ago 
and that I should be receiving it any day. I phoned the bank and talked to a key 
contact in the international division. I asked that it keep a special lookout for 
an L/C coming in from Tokyo. 
 Still more days went by. The order was produced. The manufacturer invoiced 
me immediately. The balance was due in full thirty days from the invoice date. 
 My contact at the bank called me up and reported that he had received an 
L/C  from   AB Cookie Kingdom Company with the account number at the 
top. The bank couldn’t understand a word of it, though. It was in Japanese. 
Note: This had happened to us more than once. We had a similar situation 
with a customer in Germany on a smaller transaction amount, so pay atten-
tion to the lesson we learned the hard way to ensure you don’t make the 
same mistake! 
 I faxed my customer and asked that the company forward an English-language 
copy of the L/C so we could make sure we were complying with the terms 
and conditions. 
 The customer faxed us another copy of the L/C in Japanese. The inexplica-
ble confusion persisted for several weeks. After we finally received the L/C 
in English, we found that a condition had been included in the text, stating 
that the shipper could not consolidate our product with other products to 

Exporting
377
make up a full container-load. This left us with a wide-open payment risk, since 
shipping companies don’t want to sail with a half-empty cargo hold, and our 
chances of meeting this condition were slim. 
 We faxed the customer again and asked him to amend the L/C (costing us 
money, I might add). The company responded by saying that we had instructed 
it on what to do and it had done that. We tried to tell the people there nicely 
that they had erred by including the clause prohibiting consolidated shipments. 
 More time went by. Our manufacturer was calling repeatedly and asking us 
when we were going to release the cargo. We didn’t want to release it without 
secured payment from the customer. 
 The customer finally faxed again and requested that we ship “open account,” 
whereby payment is not required until the goods are manufactured and deliv-
ered. By then, we were exhausted and desperate (a position you never want 
to put yourself in!) because we had produced goods that were sitting in a 
plant waiting to be released—and overwhelmed with frustration at having 
spent several weeks trying to accommodate our customer with a payment 
method when what was wanted all along was an open-account status. 
 We shipped open account. You should most emphatically  not do that. Why? 
Many months later, and even then only with the help of the Embassy of the 
United States in Tokyo, we collected payment. 
 I learned a great deal from this transaction. Agree on the terms of payment in 
advance, and never ever sell on open account to a brand new customer. No 
ifs, ands, or buts. Just don’t.  
 Red  Flags 
 While reading the above account,  you probably realized early on that I wasn’t 
dealing with a customer. I was dealing with a noncustomer pretending to be 
a customer. This story is fortunately not typical, but it does highlight what can 
go wrong in setting up terms and conditions for an export sale. I caution you 
to beware of overseas contacts who:
• 
 Fall off the face of the earth for long periods of time . A good 
customer communicates often and conscientiously. If a 
customer doesn’t or can’t communicate in an honest and 
responsible manner, he is not a customer.  
• 
 Ignore instructions . Get approval and acceptance of your 
terms and conditions in the form of a signature from a 
top executive—preferably the owner—of the company 
with which you are about to do business. If she’s reputa-
ble, she’ll be willing to be held accountable for the terms 
of the sale.  

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
378
• 
 Force you to become lax on your terms and conditions . A cus-
tomer who pretends to be a special case, for some con-
trived and dubious reason, isn’t. Don’t fall for it.  
• 
 Slip in new terms or information at the latest point in the 
negotiations without advance discussion . This is, quite bluntly, 
the tactic of a con artist. Steer clear.  
• 
 Make you feel desperate (as the Tokyo customer had done 
with us) or as if you have lost control of your own business . 
Let this customer go with a clear conscience. It’s better 
to find one good customer than a hundred bad ones.  
 These characteristics define what a customer should not be. But once you have 
found a good customer and have worked your way through the pro forma 
phase, you can arrange a form of payment that is satisfactory to both parties. In 
the following section, I will discuss the most common methods of export financ-
ing: payment in advance, payment by L/C, and the risky open account.  
 Choosing a Payment Method—Factors to 
Consider 
 Many circumstances  and priorities will influence your choice of payment 
method. A lot will depend on how much you know about financing a sale and 
how willing your customer is to accept your terms and conditions. Other  fac-
tors include: 
• 
 Your cash flow needs  
• 
 Your relationship with your customer  
• 
 The political and economic conditions in the country to 
which you are exporting 
• 
 Interest rates and currency adjustment factors  
• 
 The type of product (stock or custom)  
• 
 Your customer’s creditworthiness  
• 
 Your customer’s reputation  
• 
 The terms your competitors are offering  
• 
 The availability of other buyers and sellers  
• 
 Your supplier’s demands  
• 
 The physical location of buyer and seller  
• 
 The urgency of the transaction, whether you are under 
time constraints, and the size of the  transaction  

Exporting
379
 Whatever terms of payment you negotiate, you must always (1) make sure 
they are understood by all parties and (2) have your customer sign a docu-
ment that indicates acceptance, such as the pro forma invoice that I talked 
about earlier. This prevents some unpleasant surprises later on and reduces 
your shipment liability exposure. 
 To minimize risk with an overseas customer, you should consider which pay-
ment method in Figure  20-1 is mutually advantageous for you as the exporter, 
and your customer.  
 Figure 20-1.  Payment risk diagram  iii  
 Payment in Advance  
 Payment in advance is  obviously   the best of all payment methods for an 
exporter (seller) since you can prevent possible collection problems and 
you have immediate use of the money. I use the advance payment method 
when I know absolutely nothing about the customer, when the speed of 
handling will make or break the sale, and when the transaction is less than 
$5,000. The only difficult part of this financing method is actually making 
it happen.  
 When your customer agrees to this arrangement, he accepts the full risk of 
the financial transfer. If he does accept it, ask him to make a wire transfer 
from his bank account to yours or issue a certified check made payable to 
you in US dollars, preferably sent by courier. It’s reasonable to ask for half 
of the total sale in advance, with the balance to be paid thirty days from 
the bill-of-lading date. This reduces your customer’s risk, thus helping to 
maintain goodwill. Make sure, though, that the advance amount covers your 
out-of-pocket costs.   
 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
380
 
■ Note  Never accept cash for a high-value transaction. This poses a risk and could send a red 
flag to export regulatory officials. 
 
■ Tip  To get cash in advance, you must ask. Let’s say a customer in Yugoslavia wants to import a 
thousand of your flash drives. So, you prepare a detailed pricing proposal showing all costs involved. 
Within the proposal you state in bold letters: “Method of Payment: Wire transfer in advance for full 
amount of order and payable in US dollars.” Your customer wire transfers the full cost of the transaction 
plus your profits, paying a small wire transfer fee. In effect, you not only fronted the funding on the 
production of goods, but you also built in a healthy profit margin to use for funding future growth.  
 Letters of Credit—Security with  Flexibility  
 After payment in advance,  securing payment   with a letter of credit (L/C)  is 
the next best option. It’s a more expensive and complicated arrangement, but 
it’s worth it. An L/C is a commercial document issued by a bank at your cus-
tomer’s request in your favor and is based on the seller’s instructions outlining 
desired terms and conditions. It guarantees you’ll get paid, as long as the terms 
stated in it are fulfilled. 
 
■ Tip  To supplement this chapter (and expand your export resource data bank at the same 
time), I recommend that you contact a few banks, beginning with your own, and see if it will e-mail 
you its international banking directory at no charge. Nearly every large bank publishes one. For 
example, Bank of America Merrill Lynch publishes “Solutions for Exporters” (  https://gems-pp.
bankofamerica.com/documents/16303/74434/exporter.pdf  .) It’s usually a slim volume 
but as good as a fat encyclopedia for showing you every imaginable way to finance an export 
sale. Such a directory can be very useful for reference should your customer ask you a technical 
question about how her financing will work. 
 The Letter of Credit Process 
 There are four participants in an L/C transaction—two businesspeople and 
two banks:
 1.  The buyer :   That’s your customer. He opens the L/C.  
 2.   The  opening bank : The bank normally issues the L/C, so it 
is sometimes referred to as the “issuing bank.” It assumes 
responsibility for the payment on behalf of the buyer. The 
opening bank can contact a corresponding bank near the 

Exporting
381
seller in the United States to advise it on the opening of 
the L/C. If the L/C is confirmed (the buyer must make this 
request when submitting the application for the L/C; this 
is a request and not a requirement, for the advising bank 
may decline for whatever reason), the US correspondent 
bank can confirm and pay on behalf of the buyer provided 
exact documents required for the L/C are provided and 
match up.  
 3.  The  paying bank :  This is the bank under which the drafts 
or bills of exchange are drawn under the credit.  
 4.  The seller :  That’s you—the global marketer, exporter, ship-
per, beneficiary—to whom the credit is issued.  
 
■ Note   There can be other parties and roles in the L/C process: Examining, confirming, 
reimbursing and negotiating bank but the above are the most common. 
 To summarize the process: Once you and your customer agree on payment by 
L/C, it is the customer’s responsibility to take your pro forma invoice  to   her 
bank or to complete the process of setting up the L/C online, with the invoice 
attached to the application, and opening the L/C in your favor. Once the  open-
ing bank  has all the appropriate information from the customer, it advises you, 
the seller, that the L/C has been opened. Oftentimes this will be done by wire 
to the paying bank. Your bank then forwards that information to you. The L/C 
is final and subject to correction only for errors in transmission. 
 Although we live in an era when rapid data transmission by fax or e-mail or in 
the  cloud   has become the norm for business communications, some opening 
banks still prefer to wire advice of an opened L/C and then notify you by tele-
phone (if you have a good international banking officer), e-mail, or snail mail, 
of its arrival. When you are expecting an L/C to be opened in your favor, it’s 
prudent to call your bank to notify it to be on the lookout for the L/C or to 
check the status of it. However the information gets into your hands, review 
it immediately by checking the terms and conditions against your pro forma 
invoice.  
 It is not unusual to find differences between the L/C and the pro forma 
invoice, such as incorrect product descriptions or reference numbers or an 
impossibly early shipment date. Once you have confirmed that your invoice is 
correct, you can try to preempt some of these errors by e-mailing the buyer 
what is called an L/C template (see   http://www.key.com/pdf/sampleloc.
pdf  ) to show him what the completed version should look like. You may find 
that he ignores it and opens the L/C in the standard format he uses. If that 
happens and you notice substantive discrepancies, bring them to your bank 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
382
officer’s attention at once. If you find that you cannot make adjustments to 
accommodate the customer, you must request an amendment to the L/C. 
This, unfortunately, costs money. Your bank officer can request that the open-
ing bank contact your customer about the amendment or you can bypass the 
banks and contact your customer directly. Bypassing the bank will save your 
customer the charges for the amendment but doesn’t always provide the 
safety you still need to maintain the security of the transaction. 
 If you do communicate directly with your customer, you will need him to 
acknowledge the discrepancy and state whether or not he will take action to 
modify the L/C.  Buyers   generally accomplish this by alerting their bank to the 
discrepancy when the documents are presented by the bank for approval and 
then formally waiving that discrepancy. If the customer cannot be relied upon 
to do this, you get stuck! So always consult with your banker before attempt-
ing any informal deals like this. 
 Accuracy in all details of your L/C is critically important. One of the most 
exasperating delays I’ve ever experienced was caused by a discrepancy our 
bank found between our company name and address on the L/C that I had 
just presented. It looked like this:
 GLOBAL TRADESOURCE LTD 
 6807 N LAKEWOOD, UNIT LL 
 CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 60626 
 UNITED STATES OF AMERICA  
 On our  commercial invoice,   we had given our address as follows:
 Global TradeSource, Ltd. 
 6807 N. Lakewood, Suite LL 
 Chicago, IL 60626 
 United States of America  
 Would you believe that, from the bank’s standpoint, the differences in upper/
lower letters, spacing and punctuation were sufficient to indicate a different 
beneficiary altogether? The bank said it could not present our documents 
unless we corrected the errors and made everything exactly the same as in 
the L/C. What choice did we have? We fixed it. We even went so far as to put 
everything in capitals the way the issuing bank had. Pay attention to the details 
so nothing will stand in the way of your getting paid! 
 This synopsis ought to give you some idea of the typical steps taken—and the 
typical delays—in the L/C process. Don’t be surprised at what seems like an 
unreasonably long turnaround time. 

Exporting
383
 Types of Letters of  Credit 
 There are a number of different types of L/C; two are important enough to 
distinguish up-front and the others offer more payment flexibility. 
 Irrevocable Letter of  Credit 
 An irrevocable L/ C is a commercial document that the customer requests 
a bank to issue in your favor. Once issued, it cannot be modified without 
both parties’ consent. In this case, “irrevocable” means that the bank must pay 
you even if your customer defaults, provided the documents presented are 
“clean.” Clean documents are in complete compliance with the language of 
the L/C and are presented to the bank prior to the expiration date. It’s the 
most secure method of payment and one that I suggest you use as often as 
possible. You can also request that the L/C be confirmed by any US office of 
the issuing bank prior to submission. This arrangement provides the greatest 
degree of protection because the bank must pay you even if your customer’s 
bank defaults. If the L/C is unconfirmed, the US bank must wait until it receives 
funds from the foreign bank before it will credit your account. 
 Banks usually charge about one-eighth of 1 percent (based on the bank’s 
policy and the relationship between the exporter and the bank) of the total 
transaction cost as a processing fee. Although many exporters complain about 
this expense, I am convinced that the payment security this document offers 
far outweighs the negligible fee. 
 Unless otherwise stipulated in the L/C, all banking charges, including charges 
outside the buyer’s country, are for the account of the applicant. If any of 
these charges are for the beneficiary’s account, they are normally deducted 
from the face amount of the drawing at the time of payment. Upon receipt 
of an L/C, read through it carefully because fees such as pre-advice, advising, 
confirmation, amendment, document examination or negotiation, disrepancy, 
reimbursement, and even cancellation, to name just a few, can all add up.  
 Revocable Letter of Credit 
 A revocable L/ C is a commercial document that your customer requests a 
bank to issue in your favor that can be modified without both  parties’   consent 
at any given point in time. Once this L/C has been issued, you have the fol-
lowing assurances as the beneficiary: the bank can assure you that, yes, your 
customer has arranged for the bank to pay you such an amount, and, yes, your 
customer is known and respected, and has been banking with the bank for 
decades. Unfortunately, you cannot rely on this type of L/C since the bank is 
under no obligation to cover it if your customer defaults. You may as well just 
run a credit check on the customer and ship using an open account. It’s almost 
the same risk. 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
384
 A letter of credit may be modified or restricted in a variety of ways. The most 
common arrangements are outlined briefly here. If you get stuck negotiat-
ing payment terms with your customer, check this section to see if you can 
find a mutually agreeable option. If you still can’t resolve the matter, turn to 
your international banking advisor for guidance—that’s what she’s there for. 
Be creative and cooperative in investigating payment arrangements that will 
accommodate your customer, but always make sure  you end up with a secure 
and timely payment.  
 Payment  Timetables  
 You may extend varying payment terms within your L/C, ranging from a 
demand for payment on sight to an allowance of up to 180 days before pay-
ment is due. Let’s look at each term. 
 Sight-Draft  Payment 
 The time required  to  receive funds under an L/C drawing depends on the 
terms and the location of the paying bank. A sight draft is a payment instru-
ment that requires your customer to pay the amount in full upon receipt of 
the documents—that is, “on sight”—before title to the goods can be trans-
ferred to him. A sight draft is not guaranteed by a bank, so it is vital to get 
payment before releasing cargo. This payment method is of obvious advantage 
to you.   
 Time-Draft  Payment 
 If an L/C calls  for   a time draft, it is handled by a bank somewhat like a 
sight draft at the time payment is due; however, a time draft allows your 
customer some time, usually 30, 60, 90, or even up to 180 days, to pay the 
amount in full after title to the goods is transferred to her. Customers 
generally prefer this payment method, but obviously it can compromise 
your cash flow.  
 Banker’s Acceptance  
 Once a time draft has been accepted by a bank,  it becomes a “banker’s accep-
tance.” Since this acceptance is now the bank’s liability, it holds payment in 
safekeeping until maturity and then pays you automatically. Banker’s accep-
tances can also be used to obtain financing by selling the acceptance to the 
bank at a discount, although this practice is fairly rare.  

Exporting
385
 Special Types and Uses of Letters of Credit 
 These are some specialized L/Cs that might gain you additional flexibility and 
security in financing your export transactions:
 1.   Transferable L/Cs : These L/ Cs  permit you to transfer your 
rights in part or in full to another party. They are typi-
cally used when the original beneficiary (you) acts as a 
middleman between the supplier of the merchandise and 
the buyer. The supplier is thus assured of payment for the 
goods even though it is not dealing directly with your cus-
tomer. Keep in mind that no credit line is needed here 
since you are using your L/C as collateral. Once you trans-
fer an L/C, there will be a nominal transaction fee involved.  
 2.  Assignment of proceeds : This is very similar to a transfer-
able L/C. The difference is that whether or not an L/C is 
issued in transferable form, you may request the paying 
bank to pay the proceeds guaranteed under the letter of 
credit to a third party. Again, no credit line is needed in 
this transaction, but you will be charged a nominal trans-
action fee. The assignment of proceeds, on the other hand, 
has no monetary value to the third-party assignee until 
the proceeds (the actual payment by the bank) become 
available. Therefore, if you neglect to ship merchandise as 
ordered or fail to submit proper documentation, no pay-
ment will be made to the assignee even if he can present 
the letter of assignment.  
 3.  Revolving L/Cs :   If you have a customer who intends to give 
you ongoing business, you may wish to open a revolving 
letter of credit. You can ask your banker for this, but you 
may not get it. Banks need to book the entire transaction 
amount, and for a revolving account, they have no idea 
what that amount will be. If you are fortunate enough to 
be extended this lenient credit arrangement, the amount 
of the L/C is automatically reinstated after a drawing of 
funds or after a specified period of time. The purpose of 
a revolving L/C is to limit shipments of merchandise, and 
consequently drawings under the L/C, to limited quan-
tities within a certain period of time. A revolving L/C 
has the effect of renewing the original set of payment 
terms and conditions so you don’t have to renegotiate 
each time. Revolving letters of credit are set up differ-
ently depending on the particular requirements of each 
transaction, so always consult with your banker.  

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
386
 4.   Back-to-back L/Cs:   This setup is used fairly often by trad-
ing houses or middlemen that do not have the funds 
necessary to purchase the merchandise or the capital 
resources needed to obtain an unsecured loan from 
the bank. Its purpose is to extend indirectly the com-
mitment of the issuing bank beyond the beneficiary to 
another party, usually the supplier of the merchandise. 
A back-to-back L/C is quite different from a transferable 
L/C or an assignment of proceeds in that it is an entirely 
separate transaction from the original or the master L/C. 
All parties involved must therefore rely on the successful 
completion of the original letter of credit. Since this is a 
more complex form of credit, a consultation with your 
banker is suggested. 
 5.   Standby L/Cs :   These serve as assurance that your customer 
will fulfill her obligations under a contract. In other words, 
you draw funds under the standby L/C only when your 
customer fails to meet his obligations. This type of L/C is 
generally used to repay money borrowed or advanced. It 
often works well to assure payment of invoices for sales 
made on open account. Standby L/Cs can cover financial, 
performance, or trade-related transactions.  
 Special Payment Structures 
 Even though I personally have never had occasion to use any of these special 
payment structures for an L/C, it is important to let you know that they’re 
available. Consult your banker to find out how they might work for you and 
your customer.
• 
 “ Red clause” :   Under a red-clause L/C, you are able to 
obtain advances against the credit in order to purchase 
and process merchandise. The red clause within the letter 
of credit outlines a specific payment arrangement over a 
specific period of time.  
• 
 Installment payments :   Under an installment L/C, you can 
draw a portion of the credited amount by presenting a 
sight draft, accompanied by shipping documents and a 
promissory note for the full credited amount.  
• 
 Progress payments : A progress-payment L/C allows for you 
to draw funds against the L/C for amounts proportionate 
to the progress being made in the production of goods. 
Proof of progress can be in the form of an inspection 

Exporting
387
certificate issued by you, your customer, or an indepen-
dent party. This type of L/C is usually used to finance 
large, long-term projects, such as an economic and real 
estate development or sales of costly goods, such as large 
machinery. The balance of the credit becomes available 
to you once compliance with the terms of the L/C is 
complete.  
• 
 Advance payments :   This arrangement for the L/C allows 
for the exporter to receive funds in advance that might 
be necessary to purchase or process merchandise for the 
buyer.  
• 
 Deferred payments :   This arrangement calls for sight drafts 
specifying that the draft is payable at a later date. These 
payments can be confirmed or unconfirmed.  
• 
 Discounted payments :   This structure allows you to boost 
profits for your business with an L/C while satisfying 
your customer’s payment preference. (I am elaborating 
on this method here because although it is rarely known 
or practiced, it can be an effective cash flow accelerator 
for your business.) You can elect to receive payment at 
sight provided the provisions of the letter of credit are 
met against an L/C to boost cash receivables and profits. 
However, this method hurts your customer’s pocketbook 
because he has not, at this point, had a chance to sell the 
goods you just sold to him. As such, it can be a fairly big 
cash outlay for him. Alternatively, you can elect to receive 
a deferred payment (as previously noted), say after 180 
days, to allow your buyer a grace period for payment. 
In that case, there’s no boost to your profits or bank 
account until six months have passed, but your customer 
will be happy that you’ve given him more time. 
• 
 There is another  option in the way of discounted pay-
ments that can benefit both the seller and buyer. In this 
arrangement, once the bank that opens the L/C has 
accepted the documents and drafts you present, it may 
discount the amount it owes you and pay you, the benefi-
ciary of the L/C, in advance of the maturity date (a fixed 
or determinable future date) provided that you indicate 
that you want this to be done in the agreement. What 
that means is this: you can allow your customer 180 days 
after the sight of the original bill of lading to pay her bank, 
but you collect the money involved in the transaction 
immediately. 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
388
• 
 The interest rate on discounted payments for early pay-
ment varies anywhere between 6 and 18 percent of the 
total transaction bill. It is your responsibility as the seller 
to absorb it, but it is generally based on the annual rate 
of interest on a loan, the risk of the country in which 
the bank opening the L/C is located, and the reputation 
of the bank. The end result is that you get cash fast from 
the export sale and your customer gets the 180 days she 
needs to pay.  
• 
 Mixed drawings : Sight and time drafts may be specified 
under the same L/C. For example, the L/C may call for 
payment of 50 percent at sight, 25 percent sixty days 
thereafter, and 25 percent ninety from then. The bank 
oversees and pays the procedural duties when they are 
due.  
 The Worst Method of Export Financing:  Open 
Account  
 An  open account transaction means   that payment is not required until the 
goods are manufactured and delivered. Documentation covering the shipment 
of goods is handled outside of the typical banking channels. This method of 
payment is fine if your customer is easily accessible. However, in the inter-
national business arena, where your customer can be fifteen thousand miles 
away, this method of payment cannot be used safely unless you are 100 per-
cent certain that the buyer is creditworthy, and unless the country of des-
tination is politically and economically stable. Otherwise, it’s a huge risk to 
the seller (as I pointed out earlier with my Tokyo noncustomer). This is why 
I keep pushing for the L/C method. Or, at the very least, back up your open 
account terms with a standby L/C. You might also consider export-receivable 
insurance, which costs about the same as opening an L/C—about 1 percent 
of the transaction—but gives you the option of offering your customer open-
account terms and retaining some protection. Your banker can assist you here.  
 But even the most compelling reasons for granting an open account are short-
sighted at best. Many books on international sales propound the doctrine that 
export wannabes should always consider shipping on an open account basis, 
especially when you’re first starting out and a major recognized company 
is interested in purchasing your products. For example, let’s say an  interna-
tional conglomerate   called Big Cheese LLC e-mails you a request for $25,000 
worth of bicycle parts to be shipped immediately by air. How could a small 
shop like you, Little Cheese Export Enterprises, resist the chance to win an 
account like Big Cheese LLC? But we’ve all heard stories of what can happen 
to small, growing suppliers who deal with the big players. Conglomerates like 

Exporting
389
our hypothetical Big Cheese LLC have been known to give high-volume busi-
ness to small firms, enabling them to grow like mad. Then, virtually overnight, 
they switch vendors—and poof! Poor Little Cheese Export Enterprises bites 
the dust. It wouldn’t be only the loss of the account that would do your 
company in, but also the delayed payment on the last order. In fact, some of 
my own worst payment experiences have been with huge companies that 
thought they were entitled to pay whenever their accounting department 
decided they should. I’d find myself waiting two months, three, six. Eventually 
they’d pay up, but was it worth it? Only if I had a good cash flow and a sup-
plier that was willing to work with me. If you find yourself in circumstances 
in which you can afford to sweat out  big-ticket deficits  and you feel certain 
that somewhere down the line you’ll get your money, then go ahead. But how 
many small-business owners—or beginning exporters—can comfortably 
operate this way? Take stock of your own situation and proceed accordingly. 
 If you find yourself in a position where none of these arrangements are pos-
sible and you cannot close a sale, you might explore a few of the following 
financing alternatives. Keep in mind that each industry has its own special gov-
ernment financing programs, so check with your industry associations at both 
the local and national level to see what they have to offer.  
 Noteworthy Export Noncash Payment 
 Considerations   
 Consider the following additional ways to finance an export deal when other 
means are unavailable:  
• 
 Countertrade : In countertrade transactions, which involve 
trading in goods and services as opposed to money, cash 
does not change hands. Some business owners elect to 
use this payment method when there is a shortage of 
hard currency, surplus activity, lack of experience, or 
lack of credit. The benefits include but are not limited to: 
entering into difficult markets, increasing sales, overcom-
ing credit problems, and gaining a competitive advantage. 
The downside is that it can be time-consuming and com-
plex to negotiate.  
• 
 Bartering  (a type of countertrade) :  This involves a direct 
exchange between two parties of goods or services that 
have an equivalent value without using a cash transaction. 
In simple terms: it’s a swap of one product for another 
product without the use of any money. The parties 
involved still must value the goods or services exchanged 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
390
in the transaction as if they were cash. Doing so will be 
necessary for tax and customs purposes, so you need to 
be sure to comply with governmental requirements and 
accurately complete and file appropriate forms. Barter 
houses are often called on to assist companies of all sizes 
to convert what they have into what they need without 
any cash changing hands (conduct a web search to find 
ones that specialize in your industry and in a particular 
overseas market). Barter houses provide information and 
find potential buyers for goods received. They are par-
ticularly useful to the small exporter.  
• 
 Consignment :   This involves an exporter (the seller) selling 
to a consignee (customer #1) but maintaining ownership 
of the goods and the consignee only taking possession 
of the goods in a foreign country. The consignee markets 
the goods and, when she makes a sale, the title transfers 
simultaneously from the exporter to customer #1 and 
customer #2 (the consignee’s customer). It’s only when 
the goods are sold—meaning that customer #2 pays 
customer #1, who in turn, pays the exporter—that the 
exporter gets paid. The exporter has the main role and 
is responsible for getting the product to the consignee. 
Consult with your international attorney to discuss 
the best terms and conditions for this type of contract 
arrangement for export sales.  
 
■ Caution   Transacting business in multiple currencies spanning several countries might be 
beneficial to a big operation interested in hedging against currency fluctuations, but for a small 
business, if not managed well, it can hurt the bottom line. It’s best to negotiate terms in your own 
country’s currency (US dollars, for example). This transfers the risk to the other party—the customer.  
 Regardless of payment method, it’s important to try to keep the international 
payment process simple.   
 Export Financing   Assistance  
 There are several federal agencies that offer financial assistance to exporters. 
These are just a few of the programs and types of assistance that are available 
to small businesses. Contact your bank to see if it is approved to underwrite 
any of these programs.

Exporting
391
• 
 Small Business Investment Companies :  (  http://www.sba.
gov/content/sbic-program  ). These privately owned 
companies provide financing, equity capital, and long-term 
loans to small businesses.  
• 
 International Trade Loan Program : (  http://www.sba.gov/
content/international-trade-loan  ).  This program 
offers loan financing of up to $5 million for fixed assets 
and working capital for small businesses in a position to 
either expand existing export markets or develop new 
markets. These loans are also available if your small busi-
ness has been adversely affected by import competition 
and you can demonstrate that the loan proceeds will 
improve your global-competitive position.  
• 
 Export Working Capital Program : (  http://www.sba.gov/
content/export-working-capital-program  ).  This pro-
gram provides advances up to $5 million to fund export 
transactions. You can use the loan proceeds to finance sup-
pliers, for work in process, or for production of export 
goods and services.  
• 
 Export Express Loan Program : (  https://www.sba.gov/
loans-grants/see-what-sba-offers/sba-loan-
programs/general-small-business-loans-7a/spe-
cial-types-7a-loans/sba-export-loan-programs/
export-express-loan-program  ).  Considered the sim-
plest export loan program, SBA Export Express offers 
financing up to $500,000, either as a term loan or a 
revolving line of credit. To qualify, you must have oper-
ated your business for at least twelve months (there are 
exceptions, so be sure to ask) and must demonstrate that 
the loan proceeds will be used to support export activity. 
You can use the loan proceeds to finance export orders, 
expand your production facility, purchase equipment, par-
ticipate in overseas trade shows, or translate marketing 
material for foreign markets.  
• 
 7(a) Regular Business Loan Program : (  http://www.sba.gov/
category/navigation-structure/loans-grants/
small-business-loans/sba-loan-programs/7a-
loan-program  ).   The Small Business Administration offers 
this long-term loan with a guarantee for small businesses 
that might not have been able to secure funding through 
normal lending channels.  

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
392
 
■ Tip  Find more SBA export lenders:   https://www.sba.gov/managing-business/
exporting/export-loans/export-lenders  . 
• 
 Foreign Agricultural Service : (  http://www.fas.usda.gov/
topics/export-financing  ). Run by the US Department 
of Agriculture,  this service provides financial support 
to food exporters. Check with your state or regional 
department. 
• 
 Overseas Private Investment   Corporation : (  http://www.opic.
gov/  ).  OPIC educates small businesses about the benefits 
of expanding into developing markets and offers a number 
of products (political risk insurance, for example) and ser-
vices to address their specific needs. OPIC’s Small Business 
Center offers qualified small businesses with annual rev-
enues less than $35 million the opportunity to utilize the 
organization’s streamlined loan approval process.  
• 
 Minority Business Development  Agency : (  http://www.
mbda.gov/  ).   MBDA operates more than forty business 
centers throughout the United States. These organiza-
tions, in turn, provide business consulting, procurement 
matching, and financial assistance (relative to exporting) 
to minority-owned firms.  
 
■ Tip  Consult the  Trade Finance Guide : A Quick Reference for U.S. Exporters (  http://
export.gov/TradeFinanceGuide/  ) in English or in Spanish (  http://export.gov/
tradefinanceguide/eg_main_063270.asp  ). It’s very useful. And if you are trying to raise 
instead of obtain flexible financing for your export-driven company, you might consider TradeUp 
Fund (  http://www.tradeupfund.com ), which allows you to access critical gap capital to 
export and expand in international markets. 
• 
 United States Trade and Development  Agency : (  http://
www.ustda.gov/  ).   USTDA links US businesses to export 
opportunities by funding project planning activities, pilot 
projects, and reverse trade missions. USTDA is an inde-
pendent US government foreign assistance agency that is 
funded by Congress. 

Exporting
393
 Export-Import Bank of the United  States  
 The Export-Import Bank of the United  States  (Ex-Im Bank;   http://www.
exim.gov/smallbusiness/  ) is responsible for assisting the export financing 
of US goods and services through a variety of loan guarantees and insurance 
programs. The goals of this agency are to offer superior service and to make a 
difference by providing exporters with needed support and providing taxpay-
ers with enhanced value. The bank also assists exporters by serving as a liaison 
between US and foreign banks. 
 In 2015, Ex-Im Bank supported 109,000 American jobs, $17 billion in exports 
at no cost to American taxpayers, and more than $3.1 billion of exports from 
U.S. small businesses, of which nearly 90 percent directly supported U.S. small 
businesses.  iv 
 Ex-Im Bank’s top five eligibility requirements for small business exporters to 
receive a loan are that they:  
• 
 Be located in the United States  
• 
 Have at least one year of operating history along with a 
positive net worth  
• 
 Have services that are performed by US-based employees  
• 
 Ship products from the United States to a foreign buyer  
• 
 Export products with more than 50 percent US-made 
content based on all direct and indirect costs  
 The following list describes just a few of the many programs and products 
offered by the Ex-Im Bank to exporters. Be sure to inquire further.
• 
 Working Capital Guarantee : (  http://www.exim.gov/
smallbusiness/smallbusprod/Working-Capital-
Guarantee.cfm  ).   This is a 90 percent loan-backing guar-
antee offered to commercial lenders to facilitate small 
exporting businesses securing the crucial working capital 
they need to fund their export activities.  
• 
 Global Credit Express : (  http://www.exim.gov/sites/
default/files/managed-documents/fly-wcg_03_
global_credit_express_exporters_05nov2013.
pdf  ).   This program delivers short-term working-capital 
loans directly to creditworthy small-business exporters. 
It adds liquidity to the US small-business export market 
by financing the business of exporting rather than specific 
export transactions.  

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
394
• 
 Letter of Interest : (  http://www.exim.gov/tools-
for-exporters/applications-forms/letter-of-
interest  ).   This letter states Ex-Im Bank’s willingness to 
consider financing for an export transaction and serves 
to help small businesses secure financing and make the 
online application process fast, simple, affordable, and 
secure prior to export. 
• 
 Small Business Multi-Buyer Export Credit Insurance : (  http://
www.exim.gov/products/exportcreditinsurance/  ). 
 This credit insurance can be purchased from Ex-Im Bank, 
either through an insurance broker or directly from the 
bank, to reduce foreign risk. It offers a variety of poli-
cies tailored to cover particular risks and situations; for 
example, extend credit terms to foreign customers, the 
failure of an overseas customer to pay his credit obliga-
tion, and competitive payment terms.  
• 
 Express Insurance : (  http://www.exim.gov/what-we-do/
export-credit-insurance/express-insurance  ). An 
easy and fast-to-get product which helps small business 
exporters insure their receivables. This product improves 
the chance of getting bank financing because the business 
owner borrows against their insured receivables.  
• 
 Single Buyer Insurance : (  http://www.exim.gov/what-
we-do/export-credit-insurance/single-buyer-
insurance  ).  This policy “specifically covers payment for 
products or services that are delivered/rendered on 
open terms to approved buyers. The insurable loss events 
are insolvency/bankruptcy of the buyer or slow payment. 
A claim is filed when either of these events occur,”  v says 
David Barrett, a sales agent for Euler Hermes North 
America, a leading provider of trade-related insurance 
solutions.  
• 
 Working Capital Loans and Guarantees : (  http://www.
exim.gov/smallbusiness/moreinfo/Working-
Capital-Loans-and-Guarantees.cfm  ). These loans 
and guarantees of commercial financing are available to 
overseas buyers of US capital goods and related services. 
They offer a low interest rate, cover up to 85 percent of 
the export value, and generally give repayment terms of 
one year or more. In addition, they provide repayment 
protection to creditworthy buyers of US capital goods 
and related services for private-sector loans.  

Exporting
395
 Since it is impossible to list all the programs offered by Ex-Im Bank, I suggest 
calling the regional export finance center closest to you (  http://www.exim.
gov/contact/headquarters  ) or visiting a center in person (  http://www.
exim.gov/contact/regional-export-finance-centers  ). Its purpose is to 
help expand local support to small businesses. Use it! 
 
■ Tip  Escrow services allow both exporters and importers to protect a transaction by placing 
funds in the hands of a trusted third party until a specified set of conditions is met. Shipments are 
tracked to ensure the seller shipped and the buyer received the merchandise. This is a variation on 
cash in advance and can be a beneficial method of payment on international trade transactions but 
like any transaction, there are risks involved. It can, however, fill the gap between open account 
trade and cash in advance and is generally less expensive than an L/C. Escrow.com (  https://
www.escrow.com/why-escrowcom/security.aspx  ), for example, offers this type of service. 
 Online Payment Methods:  E-Commerce and 
M-Commerce 
 We’ve already talked about payment options to use with large-volume cus-
tomers; now let’s look at the ones to use for Everyday Joe who only buys 
online. How will you collect money from him, especially if, for instance, he 
lives in Brazil? It depends. From this point on, proceed cautiously, because 
no online payment—whether through a Web site, mobile device, or mobile 
app—will work effectively unless the country you’re dealing with accepts it! 
It’s vital to keep that at the top of your mind along with everything else you 
are about to read. It’s also important to take consumers’ online preferences 
into consideration before integrating a payment plan into your e-commerce 
and m-commerce platforms 
 
■ Note   By the time you read this, many banks will have launched a mobile payment service 
that could potentially grow to rival those of credit card companies, especially if these payment 
methods receive financial institution backing. If these efforts are successful, it could challenge the 
business model for credit card companies such as Visa, American Express, and MasterCard, which 
rely on customers to use their branded credit cards for online payments. Watch closely for how this 
develops and how it might impact your business, because the expanding digital payment arena, 
including wearable devices that make mobile payments, is just beginning to take off. We’re living 
in fast-changing, ultra-tech-savvy times. 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
396
 Credit, Debit, Global Prepaid Cards, and Third-Party 
Providers 
 The majority of  online payment  is done with credit or debit cards, and a high 
penetration of people use PayPal in conjunction with their own banks. That 
said, payment methods still can vary from country to country. How do you 
know which countries accept which payment method? You can find out by 
doing the following:
 1.  Check with your international banker.  
 2.  Inquire with someone who lives in the country with 
which you desire to transact business.  
 3.  Conduct an online search using the keywords “Preferred 
online payment methods, ___________ [country].” Your 
search entry might look like this: “Preferred online pay-
ment methods Norway.” As of January 2014, the results 
would show that 67 percent of online buyers in Norway 
prefer to make debit or credit card payment, 14 percent 
prefer using invoices, 14 percent prefer PayPal, 3 percent 
go with online bank payment, and 2 percent fall into the 
category of other/unsure/don’t know.  vi 
 4.  Check About-Payment’s “All Popular Online Payment 
Methods” 
(  https://www.about-payments.com/
knowledge-base/methods  ).  
 Credit Cards  
 Most US companies offer credit card payment options online because they 
offer the capability to conduct business throughout the world. Among the 
credit cards accepted are American Express, VISA, Mastercard, and Discover. 
All of these work for online transactions, provided the banking system within 
the country accepts them and they are secure. Many credit card companies 
charge anywhere from a 1.95 to 3.5 percent service fee on the total transac-
tion price. If a country does not accept a particular credit card, find a com-
parable service used by the country to fill in the gaps. The greater the global 
reach for a card, the easier it will be on you for collecting payments. 
 In addition, several credit card companies now offer country-specific credit 
cards and other payment services, made possible by special payment features 
that collect “regional” global payments. These include Maestro, offered by 
Mastercard for use in multiple countries; Dankort, offered by Visa in Denmark; 
Visa’s Carte Bleue, used in France; Skrill, which facilitates global e-commerce; 
and debit cards for use in China, to name just a few. 

Exporting
397
 Here is a list of the more popular and commonly used mobile payment meth-
ods used in this country:
• 
 Mastercard PayPass : (  https://www.paypass.com/ ).  
PayPass lets you accept everyday purchases quickly and 
safely through a MasterCard or Maestro-enabled card or 
device. Buyers can search worldwide for merchants—
like you—who accept MasterCard PayPass. Note: Before 
implementing PayPass, check first with the card’s bank to 
see which countries accept it as a payment method.  
• 
 Visa payWave for Mobile : (  https://developer.visa.
com/paywavemobile  ). This is a mobile  payment  system 
available for Visa issuers, mobile network operators, 
mobile device manufacturers, and third-party wallet 
providers looking to develop proprietary applications. 
According to Visa Developers, PayWave “enables Visa 
cardholders to simply wave their card or mobile device 
in front of a contactless payment terminal to make a 
payment.”  vii Buyers can make payments, including credit, 
debit, and prepaid products, for both online and offline 
contactless transactions.  
• 
 Square : (  https://squareup.com  ). This online service 
allows you to start accepting credit cards in a heartbeat 
at 2.75 percent per swipe.   Once you sign up, Square mails 
you a free Square card reader.  
• 
 PayAnywhere : (  http://www.payanywhere.com ). This 
credit card reader and free app lets people pay anywhere 
using Visa, Mastercard, American Express, Discover, and 
debit cards. You can download it at the App Store, Google 
Play, and Blackberry App World.  PayAnywhere   was cre-
ated by the multibillion-dollar credit-card-processing 
company North American Bancard, which has more than 
two decades of merchant-payment-processing experi-
ence. The processing fees are competitive: 2.69 percent 
per swiped transaction. However, for a keyed-in trans-
action where you type the credit card number, the rate 
shifts to 3.49 percent plus a $0.19 transaction fee. There 
is no monthly fee, minimum required, or cancellation fee. 
PayAnywhere is compatible with iPhone, iPad, iPod touch, 
most Android phones or tablets, and Blackberry smart 
phones, and the company offers 24/7 live customer sup-
port through a toll-free number. 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
398
• 
 China UnionPay : (  http://en.unionpay.com/ ). The 
leading banking-card association in China is the third 
largest payment network by value of transactions pro-
cessed, after Visa and MasterCard. The cards can be 
used in 150 countries and regions outside China. The 
company gives Chinese shoppers with UnionPay cards 
the option to make online purchases at the Web sites 
of participating Discover Merchants. What that means 
is that UnionPay cardholders have a safe and secure 
way to make purchases online around the world. In 
addition, China UnionPay provides access to Discover’s 
services at all ATMs and electronic-payment merchants 
in Mainland China. 
• 
 And there’s more. UnionPay recently partnered with 
PayPal to allow card members in China to use PayPal to 
shop online. That represents a phenomenal new oppor-
tunity for international retailers to sell to a larger base of 
Chinese customers.  viii 
 Debit Cards  
 Debit cards,  where accepted, can be used instead of cash when making 
purchases. In some cases, they can be assigned exclusively for use on the 
Internet. 
 
■ Caution   The development of debit cards, unlike credit cards, has generally been country 
specific, resulting in a number of different systems around the world. Be sure to check what type 
of payment system a country uses or prefers to use before establishing an online payment method. 
You’ll also want to consider the fees associated with every payment option. 
 Global Prepaid  Cards 
 Inasmuch as U.S. banking credit cards are used widely, not all countries accept 
them. That is why  global prepaid cards   are increasingly important for global 
commerce and are quickly gaining popularity among the millennial genera-
tion (Generation Y). Global prepaid cards allow users to preload money and 
later make purchases and complete payments via American Express, Discover, 
MasterCard, and Visa cards, ATM networks, private networks, and the Internet. 
For travelers, prepaid cards are a more secure alternative to the once-popular 
traveler's checks or large sums of cash.  

Exporting
399
 Payment-Processing Methods Offered by Third-Party 
Providers 
 We will look at the payment-processing methods offered by different  third-
party providers  in this section. The companies’ methods will guide you through 
the payment implementation process for e-commerce and m-commerce 
transactions. (Some are specific to e-commerce and others require a mobile 
app, so be sure to double check what they can and can’t do). Most charge a 
service fee ranging from zero to 2.9 percent, some tack on an additional per-
transaction fee (thirty cents, for example), and others charge a monthly fee. 
Review their terms carefully. 
 Before you enter into an agreement with any company, find out which coun-
tries it services, the fees it charges on each transaction, how it handles dis-
putes, what happens on charge-backs (the process where the cardholder’s 
issuing bank requests a reversal of charges on behalf of the cardholder), what 
verification system it uses to minimize fraudulent activities, and how to termi-
nate a plan, if need be. 
 There are many ways to get paid via third-party m-commerce and e-com-
merce companies. A few payment options offered by companies are given in 
the following list. There is also some information on the lesser-known pay-
ment options. Before making a decision, check reviews and chat rooms about 
these payment services to learn what users are saying.
• 
 ACH Payments : (  http://www.achpaymentsolutions.
com/  ). ACH payments are  electronic  transfers made from 
one account to another. ACH processing allows you to 
use the Automated Clearing House (ACH) network to 
collect payments. Many large banks offer these payments. 
Bank of America Merrill Lynch is one. PNC, Chase, and 
Citibank also offer them. Check with your bank.  
• 
 Amazon Payments : (  https://payments.amazon.com/ ). 
This service operates through your web browser, allow-
ing other Amazon customers to e-mail you money and 
you to receive it using the accept-payment information 
in your Amazon.com account. On sales up to $2,999.99, 
fees are 2.9 percent plus $0.30 per transaction or less. 
On transactions of $3,000.00–$9,999.99, fees drop to 2.5 
percent plus $0.30 per transaction and so on. Volume dis-
counts apply. Inquire.  
• 
 PayPal : (  http://www.paypal.com ).  PayPal allows you to 
set up a merchant account, through which you can make 
an online payment to or receive money from any person 
with an e-mail address. You can use it via the Internet or 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
400
a mobile device, or in store. The company charges a 2.9 
percent transaction fee on the total sale amount plus a 
$0.30 fee per transaction. The international charge is 3.9 
percent transaction fee plus a fixed fee based on the cur-
rency received.  ix When you buy something, it is free of a 
service fee. Transferring money is free, too. PayPal’s big 
advantage is its reach—it is in 200 markets and allows 
customers to get paid in more than 100 countries, with-
draw funds to their bank accounts in 57 currencies and 
hold balances in their PayPal accounts in 26 currencies.  x 
• 
 Bill Me Later : (  https://www.billmelater.com/index.
xhtml  ). A PayPal service,  Bill Me Later  offers buyers the 
option of buying now and paying later. It is available as 
a method of payment at many online stores, and once 
added to your PayPal account, it can be used almost 
everywhere PayPal is accepted. It’s essentially a reus-
able credit line without the plastic. BML works well for 
larger-ticket items where providing financing for a cer-
tain period of time, such as six months, will enable a sale. 
Interest charges apply and accumulate at an APR of 19.99 
percent starting from the date of purchase, a significant 
rate that is important to keep in mind when selling or 
buying using BML. PayPal tracks purchases and payments 
done with BML, and provides you an online statement 
showing all charges.  
• 
 CyberSource : (  http://www.cybersource.com/  ). Offered 
by Visa,  CyberSource  is an online payment service that 
accepts many payment types preferred in local markets 
(including Bill Me Later and PayPal), transacts payments 
in more than 190 countries, and funds in more than forty 
currencies. It can be integrated into most major com-
merce platforms with the help of a savvy tech program-
mer. In addition, it provides real-time tax calculation for 
sales originating worldwide so you can provide accurate 
totals for your customers at checkout. Costs (not listed 
on site) include set-up and implementation fees based on 
your specific billing requirements. A monthly usage fee 
will be charged based on either transaction or revenue 
volumes 
• 
 Dwolla : (  https://www.dwolla.com/ ). This payment net-
work allows anyone in the U.S. to send and receive money 
at no cost. Setting up the account is free, and there are no 
per transaction fees. The site offers a variety of options, 

Exporting
401
from a Plus, Premium or Custom account, with prices 
ranging from $25 to $1,500 a month based on the solu-
tion you need.  
• 
 Intuit Payment Network : (  https://ipn.intuit.com ). 
From the makers of QuickBooks,   Intuit Payment 
Network allows users to send and receive payments 
over the Internet. As the payer, it’s free to send money, 
and your financial information is never shared. The catch? 
The receiver’s bank shells out $0.50 per transaction. One 
advantage of IPN is that QuickBook users can include a 
payment link on invoices so customers can pay conve-
niently online. The site also provides the option to add 
pay buttons with fixed or variable amounts on your exist-
ing web or e-commerce site. And since it is integrated 
with QuickBooks, if you are already a QuickBooks cli-
ent, the ability to streamline your financial management 
system might make it worth considering. Check reviews 
online before signing up to gauge its effectiveness.  
• 
 Adyen : (  http://www.adyen.com ). Adyen is a global 
provider of online, mobile and point-of-sale payment 
solutions. They have a presence on six continents and 
currently provide advanced payment solutions to more 
than 4,500 customers, including Facebook, Dropbox, and 
Airbnb. Adyen charges a setup and subscription fee, which 
varies based on volume. Inquire.  
• 
 WorldPay : (  http://www.worldpay.com ) . WorldPay oper-
ates across 146 countries and is considered a world 
leader in payments processing technology and solutions 
for merchant customers. On a typical day, WorldPay “pro-
cesses 31 million mobile, online and in-store transactions 
– that’s about 360 a second.”  xi The organization offers a 
pay-as-you-go plan, monthly subscription service, or vol-
ume pricing model. Inquire.  
• 
 Global Payments : (  https://www.globalpaymentsinc.
com/en/us/  ). Operating in more than 29 countries 
throughout North America, Europe, the Asia-Pacific 
region, and Brazil, and with more than eleven billion trans-
actions processed, Global Payments, a registered ISO of 
Wells Fargo, is a worldwide provider of payment technol-
ogy services. The fixed fee per credit card transaction is 
$0.19, with a gateway transaction fee of $0.29.   

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
402
• 
 Google Wallet : (  http://www.google.com/wallet ). “With 
the  Google Wallet mobile app,   you can make your phone 
your wallet.” That’s the claim Google makes about Google 
Wallet, a free digital wallet that securely stores credit 
cards, debit cards, offers, and more. With GW, your cus-
tomers can buy in your store and online, and send money. 
Transactions are fast. There is no setup fee. Receiving 
money is always free. The fee for sending money using a 
credit or debit card is not prominently noted on Google’s 
site, other than “There is a small transaction fee.”  
 
■ Note  Google’s Android Pay (  https://www.android.com/pay/  ), launched in September 
2015, has been adopted by Wells Fargo, Citibank, and Bank of America. The U.K. became the first 
country outside the United States to support the mobile payment system, but others are likely to 
follow. Apple Pay (  http://www.apple.com/apple-pay/where-to-use-apple-pay/ ), on 
the other hand, is already used in many countries. Banks are expected to carry the burden of the 
service—so the more major banks that support Apple, the more global Apple will become. Like 
Google’s Android, consider Apple Pay’s international roll-out ongoing. 
• 
 Authorize.Net : 
(  http://www.authorize.net/ ). 
A 
CyberSource solution and a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Visa, Authorize.Net enables Internet merchants to 
authorize and accept online payments via credit card and 
e-check. The site manages the routing of transactions in a 
similar way to the traditional credit card swipe machine 
you find in brick-and-mortar stores. However, instead 
of using a phone line, it processes the charges over the 
Internet. Retail merchants can integrate Authorize.Net’s 
payment service via a third-party POS (point-of-sale) 
payment solution. In addition, the site provides a free 
Authorize.Net Verified Merchant Seal that can be added 
to a merchant’s Web site to establish trust and build con-
sumer confidence. 
 Authorize.Net   has been providing payment-gateway ser-
vices since 1996, and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Visa, 
its reliable reputation makes the company a good choice, 
but at a price.  
• 
 Stripe : (  https://stripe.com/ ). San Francisco-based 
Stripe makes it easy for  developers  in particular to 
accept credit cards on the web. The key differentiator? 

Exporting
403
You don’t need a merchant account or gateway to set 
up, but you do need a bank account. Stripe stores cards, 
subscriptions, and direct payouts to your bank account. 
The fees range from 2.9 percent per transaction plus a 
$0.30 per transaction fee. The firm also accepts ACH and 
Bitcoin payments, which are capped at $5—payments 
above $625 cost $5. An interesting tidbit: the company 
is backed by PayPal founders Peter Thiel, Elon Musk, 
and Max Levchin. Stripe currently supports the United 
States, Canada, and seven other countries. Check to 
see if your country is supported or if it is in open beta 
mode: 
  https://support.stripe.com/questions/
what-countries-does-stripe-support  . 
 At the bottom of their website, it states: “We’re actively 
working on adding support for other countries. You can 
sign up to be notified when Stripe is available (  https://
stripe.com/global   ) in your country.”  
• 
 Braintree, a PayPal Company : (  https://www.brain-
treepayments.com/  ). This company, founded in 2007, 
offers  another   way to accept payments online (includ-
ing foreign currency) and on mobile apps. It provides a 
merchant account, a payment gateway, recurring billing, 
and credit card storage. Your first $50K in card process-
ing is fee-free. After that, fees are 2.9 percent of each 
transaction plus a $0.30 per transaction fee. The company 
accepts PayPal, Apply Pay, Android Pay, Venmo, Bitcoin, and 
whatever’s next. There are no additional fees and no mini-
mums. Braintree works with most of the leading e-com-
merce and billing platforms. Check to make sure yours is 
covered.   
 As a result of PayPal’s acquisition of Braintree in 2013, 
the world is your oyster in terms of accepting payments 
from buyers almost everywhere. Get a better under-
standing of what might be available to you if you choose 
to set up and accept payments from any of the regions 
Braintree services:   https://www.braintreepayments.
com/products-and-features/global  . 
 
■ Caution   Fraudulent activity is a pervasive issue when it comes to online payment activity. 
Be vigilant. Consult with your bank or credit card company to determine the best practice for 
preventing and managing online payment fraud. 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
404
• 
 Simply Commerce : (  https://www.simplify.com/com-
merce/  ). Owned by MasterCard, Simply Commerce 
( MSC)   accepts e-commerce and mobile-commerce 
payments regardless of the payment brand (mean-
ing, it doesn’t just work with MasterCard) in a matter 
of minutes. It’s developer friendly, in that it gives mer-
chants, especially small businesses, the code instructions 
for accepting electronic payments. MSC serves as both 
a merchant account and payment gateway in a single, 
secure package deal. Fees range from 2.85 percent for 
each transaction plus a $0.30 per transaction fee. There 
are no setup or monthly fees. MSC also works with most 
of the leading e-commerce (Magento, for example) and 
billing platforms (OpenCart, for example). 
 The biggest benefit of  MSC is the MasterCard name, which 
projects security and reliability. Note: As discussed earlier, 
MasterCard also has PayPass (  http://www.mastercard.
com/sea/consumer/paypass.html  ), a payment method 
that lets you use your phone as your wallet to make 
everyday purchases without having to swipe the magnetic 
strip on your credit card or provide your signature.  
 Many third-party logistics and fulfillment suppliers ( 3PLs  ), discussed in Chapter 
  18 , specialize in helping businesses ship internationally and collecting payment. 
Inquire. 
 
■ Final note  The information that I have shared in this chapter regarding online payment 
methods is just the tip of the iceberg. Watch for tremendous strides and breakthroughs in 
e-commerce and m-commerce payment methods for smart phones and tablets during the coming 
months—not years—which will bring new options to consumers worldwide. 
 Summary 
 Remember what I said earlier: The most important thing to negotiate before 
closing on an export sale is how payment will be made. Knowing that these 
solutions exist will allow you to fund, grow, and succeed in the export 
marketplace. 
 When you have wrapped up your export sale, either by finalizing secure pay-
ment terms or arranging a creative-financing package that satisfies both you 

Exporting
405
and your customer, it’s time to move your cargo. After a final review of every-
thing you have put into place thus far, you’re ready for the export wrap-up: 
booking, packing, marking, and insuring your shipment to make sure it arrives 
in the best condition for your customer and preparing export documentation. 
The following chapter will outline the most essential documents as well as the 
less common types you might be required to present. After a final thorough 
review of terms of payment and documentation, your export goods will be 
on their way! 
 Notes 
  i.   “Export-Import Bank Fred Hochberg says exporters need 
Senate to give his trade credit agency a quorum,” Kent 
Hoover, The Business Journals, accessed May 15, 2016, 
updated April 8, 2016,    http://www.bizjournals.com/
bizjournals/washingtonbureau/2016/04/export-
import-bank-back-in-business-but-not-for.html  . 
  ii.   An irrevocable letter of credit is a commercial docu-
ment that your customer requests your bank to issue 
in your favor. Once issued, it cannot be modified with-
out both parties’ consent. “Irrevocable” means that 
the bank must pay you even if your customer defaults, 
provided the documents presented are “clean,” mean-
ing that they are in complete compliance with the lan-
guage of the L/C and are presented to the bank prior 
to the expiration date. I discuss L/Cs in depth later in 
the chapter.  
  iii.   “Trade Finance Guide: A Quick Reference for U.S. 
Exporters,” Export.gov, accessed May 15, 2016,   http://
www.export.gov/tradefinanceguide/  . 
 iv.   “EXIM Bank Releases its FY 2015 Annual Report,” 
January 14, 2016, accessed May 22, 2016,   http://www.
exim.gov/news/exim-bank-releases-its-fy-
2015-annual-report  .  
  v.   “International Trade Credit Insurance,” Laurel Delaney, 
About.com: Import & Export, accessed October 30, 
2013,    http://importexport.about.com/od/Financing/a/
International-Trade-Credit-Insurance.htm   . 

Chapter 20 | Getting Paid
406
 vi.  “Digital Buyers in the Nordic Countries Differ on 
Preferred Payment Methods,” eMarketer, August 15, 
2014, accessed May 22, 2016,   http://www.emarketer.
com/Article/Digital-Buyers-Nordic-Countries-
Differ-on-Preferred-Payment-Methods/1011126  . 
 vii.   “Visa PayWave for Mobile,” Visa Developers, accessed 
October 30, 2013,   https://developer.visa.com/pay
wavemobile  
 viii.   “PayPal Announces Partnership With UnionPay, Launches 
Its New China Connect Service,” Kapron Asia, June 8, 
2015, accessed May 22, 2016,   http://www.kapronasia.
com/china-payments-research/paypal-announces-
partnership-with-unionpay-launches-its-new-
china-connect-service.html  .  
 ix.   “PayPal Fees For Purchases, Getting Paid and Personal 
Transfers,” accessed May 22, 2016,   https://www.pay-
pal.com/us/webapps/mpp/paypal-fees  . 
 x.   “About PayPal,” accessed May 22, 2016,   https://www.
paypal-media.com/about  .  
 xi.    http://www.worldpay.com/uk/about/company-
overview  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_21
 C H A P T E R 
 Booking, 
Marking, 
Labeling, 
and Insuring 
 Beware of little expenses. A small leak will sink a great ship. 
 —Benjamin Franklin  
 Many US companies lose more business in moving products overseas than in 
any other phase of the export process. In this chapter, I’ll explain what the 
reason for this is and take you through the final steps of sending off your large-
volume shipment. I’ll also show you how to book your order with a global 
freight forwarder and how to pack, mark, and insure your cargo for a safe and 
timely delivery to your customer. 
 As I discussed in Chapter   18 , an experienced global freight forwarder is worth 
its weight in gold because it will spare you the need to master all the com-
plexities required to send off a shipment. Further, an experienced freight for-
warder will let you work “on your export business” (thinking beyond what 
21

Chapter 21 | Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring 
408
the day-to-day reality of your business calls you to do)  i as opposed to working 
“in your business”—a classic line by Michael E. Gerber, who wrote  The E-Myth 
Revisited .  ii In other words, you don’t want to get buried in minutiae that some-
one else with experience can easily handle; instead, you can spend your time 
working on getting more export business. Too many details can make you 
crazy, so my intent here is not to overwhelm you. Rather, it’s to provide 
you with the fundamentals of moving products overseas. After that, it’s up to 
you to use the information as a guide while you work with transport experts 
to export your products. 
 A quick note: This section is not about the Everyday Joe who buys a single 
product online. In this chapter, I will cover big customers—those who buy 
from a couple of cases to thousands of cases at a time. 
 Ready? Let’s move it! 
 Booking Your Order 
 Once you have a  legitimate order   and finalized terms of payment, it is time to 
call your freight forwarder and give it the go-ahead to book your shipment. 
The company should pull up your quote reference number and reconfirm the 
quote first. Once it books your shipment, it will give you a booking confirma-
tion number.  Write it down or track it somewhere safe (Evernote.com, for 
example), because if there’s ever a problem later on, you will need to refer to 
that number constantly. 
 By now, after my warnings about the necessity of negotiating payment terms 
to minimize your risk, you’re probably a bit nervous about sending off the 
shipment. What do you do if the payment terms you set up with your cus-
tomer fall through at the last minute? You do have a means of escape, but it’ll 
cost you. All the way up until it gets loaded onto the vessel, you can ask your 
forwarder to hold your shipment, but remember, you are liable for all freight 
costs even if the shipment never leaves port. If your cargo leaves port and you 
still don’t have a guaranteed payment method from your customer, request 
that the cargo not be released to your customer when it arrives at the port of 
destination. Normally, it wouldn’t be released anyway because your customer 
needs to produce certain documents in order to clear it—which he won’t 
have received unless payment has been settled—but you never know. When in 
doubt, always take extra precautionary measures to reduce your risks. 
 
■ Caution   The scenario where a shipment leaves port and you still have not secured payment 
illustrates how an export can go wrong. Secure your payment term upfront to ensure you are not 
left holding the bag. 

Exporting
409
 Let’s say you have been assigned the booking number FAN 31063.   (The book-
ing number enables the steamship line or freight forwarder to keep track of 
your shipment from the point of origin to the final destination.) The freight 
forwarder then gives you sailing information that looks like this: “Dresden 
Express, V14E30; sailing out of Oakland on 8/19 with ETA Hamburg, Germany 
9/20.” The forwarder will also tell you the absolute latest you can have your 
goods ready at your factory door in time to meet the sailing date. You must 
prepare the necessary shipping documents before then. Pay careful attention 
to that date, because it’s critical information, especially if you are shipping 
against a  letter of credit (L/C)   that has an unreasonable expiration date—in 
this case, September 20. If you miss that August 19 sailing date, you miss meet-
ing one of the conditions of your L/C. When that happens, you lose your 
guarantee of payment from your customer! Naturally, you want to avoid this 
at all costs. 
 
■ Tip  You can find global sailing schedules at JOC Sailings (  http://www.jocsailings.
com/  ). There, you can filter search results by port locations, carrier, vessel type (break-bulk or 
container, for instance), departure and arrival dates, and so forth. I use it to do a fast check on 
transit times to port destinations worldwide. If I were to receive a client’s order on July 19, as in the 
previous example, I would know that I have less than a month to produce goods in time to meet the 
sailing date out of Oakland. It works the same if a customer says she wants goods delivered to her 
port of entry by the middle of November. You can check the schedule to see when you need to get 
goods produced in time to meet the sailing date. 
 One of the first documents your freight forwarder needs is an Electronic 
Export  Information data  , formerly known as Shipper’s Export  Declaration  
Form 7525-V, which now must be filed electronically (EEI;   http://export.
gov/logistics/aes/index.asp  ). An EEI  is  required anytime you use a 
freight forwarder or export directly using a steamship line or air carrier. This 
document specifies your product’s commodity number, reaffirms what you 
have already communicated to the freight forwarder, and formally instructs 
the company to carry out the shipment. The freight forwarder will refer to 
the EEI to verify that the ocean bill of lading is prepared exactly as your cus-
tomer specified in the originally accepted pro forma invoice and to confirm 
the method of payment. The document also helps customs to keep track of 
exports and to monitor the type of license being used to cover each shipment. 
It is also used by the Census Bureau to compile statistics on US trade patterns 
and for export control purposes. It must be prepared prior to shipment and 
presented to the carrier. 

Chapter 21 | Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring 
410
 Whoever is handling your shipment will be able to provide the online link to 
the form and, in some cases, can even prepare the document on your behalf 
provided you authorize the company to do so with a power of attorney form 
(transport companies typically have this form template online for easy access). 
If the company does not provide it to you, the  EEI  can be electronically filed 
at the new Automated Commercial Environment (ACE)   https://www.cbp.
gov/trade/automated  . Ask your freight forwarder or shipper how to pre-
pare the form if you are unsure and the company will walk you through the 
process. 
 
■ Tip  When in doubt about anything, ask. Be fearless about getting answers. When you see 
a required field on the EEI, Port of Export code (where your shipment is leaving the country), for 
example, be sure to consult with your freight forwarder, because this field can easily generate 
errors, penalties and delays in your export shipment if filed incorrectly. In fact, according to U.S. 
Customs Border Patrol (CBP), it is considered one of the top mistakes they issue penalties for! 
 Details, Details, Details: Preparing Goods for 
Overseas  Shipment  
 Let’s say you’re an exporter specializing in handcrafted figurines and you’re 
all set to move a carton of porcelain angels to your customer in Argentina. 
Piece of cake, right? Think again! Here are some of the logistics you will have 
to attend to before this shipment can get out the door:
 1.  How sturdy is the carton? Tip: a new box is recommended.  
 2.  How secure is the seal that holds the carton together?  
 3.  Is the inside packing strong enough to keep the porcelain 
undamaged if the box is thrown into a truck?  
 4.  What is the weight of the carton?  
 5.  Is your product a temperature-sensitive export (ice 
cream, chocolates, or fresh fruit, for example)?  
 6.  What markings should you show on the outside of the 
carton?  
 7.  Is it important that the package arrives at your custom-
er’s doorstep by a certain date?  
 8.  Is any special documentation required to accompany the 
package?  

Exporting
411
 9.  Is it acceptable to leave the shipment outside your cus-
tomer’s factory door should he not be there when it 
arrives? 
  10.  Do you require that your customer be notified one way 
or several different ways prior to delivery?  
  11.  Do you require a confirmation of that delivery?  
  12.  What about insurance? If the package gets lost or is dam-
aged in transit, then what?  
 
■ Caution   I once had a client in Chicago who was shipping cookies to Japan in early September 
in a regular twenty-foot container. The weather is typically cool in Chicago around that time of year, 
but as it turned out, the temperature abruptly went up to 90°F the week the shipment was leaving. 
Although warned about the unsuitable weather conditions, the client decided to stay with the 
regular twenty-foot container to save money instead of using a refrigerated one. When the cookies 
arrived in Japan, they were a mushy mess due to the unusual heat during transit. It took us weeks 
to figure out how to correct the situation, a tricky issue since the client had also elected not to 
insure the shipment. Needless to say, we did come up with a solution, but not without experiencing 
a lot of stress, needless aggravation, and delays. This illustrates two more examples of what can 
go wrong on an export shipment—those being the wrong choice on the mode of transport and a 
bad decision on insurance coverage! 
 Fortunately, not all products will be as much of a headache as porcelain figu-
rines can be. But every export shipment calls for appropriate attention to 
the packing and shipping process so that your customers will receive their 
goods in perfect order. You need to pack your goods carefully so that they 
will survive the trip undamaged and mark your packages liberally with all the 
information necessary to ensure proper handling and tracking. You also need 
to envision the route step by step, from the time it leaves the factory door to 
the time it gets to your customer, and provide for all contingencies.  
 Carton Markings  for Export 
 To pack your product effectively for  export , you must provide complete, 
appropriate, and accurate package markings. There are several considerations 
that govern your shipment marking. First, you must make sure that whatever 
markings you put on the outside of a carton can easily be read by anyone, any-
where in the world. Second, you must meet shipping regulations and ensure 
the proper handling of your goods. Finally, you must know when it is appropri-
ate to mark the outside of your cartons with what is truly in the inside—there 

Chapter 21 | Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring 
412
are times when that’s the last thing you should do. Your customer should be 
your best advisor as to how to mark your cartons for export, but if she seems 
ill informed or cannot be reached for consultation, the following guidelines 
ought to cover most situations. 
 If you are shipping a container-load or more, simple identification of your 
cargo should be enough, but take extra precaution so that reading your pack-
age is easy on the cargo handlers. Pretend the lights are out and your flash-
light is dead—and you have to read your cartons. If you were in a  gloomy 
warehouse  trying to identify the contents of a stack of cartons, what would 
you hope for? That whoever prepared the cartons for shipment would have 
given some thought to making sure their goods could be identified even in the 
worst-case scenario and marked them accordingly. Mark your cartons with 
big, bold letters that can be read even at a distance and in poor light. Think 
about moisture; think about dust; think about accidental grease splattering 
all over your cartons. Use waterproof markers or waterproof labeling with 
durable adhesive. The more aggressive and durable your markings, the better 
your chances of avoiding misunderstandings and delays in shipping.  
 If you are shipping a smaller quantity of goods, such as a single carton or sev-
eral cartons to be placed on a pallet, you also need to provide much more 
detailed identification on the outside of the carton, including the following:
 1.  A  shipping address label :   Your consignee’s (customer’s) 
name, address, and key contact person, and preferably 
also a telephone number, e-mail address, and fax number 
should be placed on your shipping label, along with the 
customer purchase or order number. As an extra added 
measure of security to your packaging process, put an 
extra label inside each carton. Then, if the outer label can-
not be read or becomes detached, your information will 
be intact. 
 2.  A  return address label :   Your company name, address, key 
contact person, and communications numbers (tele-
phone, fax, and/or e-mail) should be placed on each 
carton, so that if a problem arises en route you can be 
notified immediately.  
 3.  The country of origin : Your return address label should show 
your country in which you do business,   which may not be 
the actual origin or place where the goods are manufac-
tured. Check with your customer, transport company, or 
local consulate to see how the country of origin should 
be represented on the carton. This marking supports all 
your documentation and streamlines processing at the 
port of destination.  

Exporting
413
 4.   A description of the contents :   What’s included in the package 
should be marked on the outside—unless you’re shipping 
a product in high demand. If you’re shipping a low-price 
product that you consider a commodity item—canned 
peas, for example—you might think it’s all right to mark 
the outside of your carton “Canned Peas,” right? Not 
always! If the demand for the product in the importing 
country is phenomenal and the country can’t keep up 
with it locally, you could be asking for theft or hijack-
ing. Talk to your customer about substituting a different 
product identification on your carton to make your goods 
less tempting. For example, if Malaysian consumers love 
peas and hate green beans, you and your customer can 
agree ahead of time that, for purposes of your shipment, 
“Canned Green Beans” means “Canned Peas.” This prac-
tice, sometimes referred to as blind marking, is simple but 
effective. However, you and your customer must change 
your code names every so often or else you’ll attract the 
notice of the smarter and more organized thieves who 
keep track of what is moving in and out of the ports. More 
obvious high-value products, such as cameras, computers, 
or televisions, can also be shipped under blind markings. 
In all other cases, of course, it’s best to mark the outside 
of your carton with exactly what’s inside. That minimizes 
confusion for customs, your customers, and intermediary 
handlers at every stage of the shipment.  
 5.  Markings that are in English : Unless notified otherwise, 
everything you write on the outside of your package 
should be  in English.  Your customer or your transporta-
tion company should be able to tell you whether it is 
required to provide any carton markings in the language 
of the importing country as well. If such markings are 
required, call up a local translator and have the necessary 
language rendered appropriately. Better yet, contact the 
country’s local consulate to help you—they are always 
eager to facilitate trade, and it may even provide the ser-
vice at no charge. But be sure to get your translation 
approved by your customer. You don’t want to be too 
eager to finish up the  labeling  chore, only to find that your 
translation is inaccurate, ambiguous, or even offensive! 
Note: Foreign law might dictate the need for a translation 
in the foreign country’s language, especially if the item is a 
hazardous substance. Be sure to check.  

Chapter 21 | Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring 
414
 6.  Phrases and symbols for immediate identification of packages 
needing special handling :   There are numerous standard inter-
national phrases that signal the need for careful handling of 
hazardous or breakable products, such as “This side up,” 
“Fragile—Handle with care,” “Flammable,” and “Keep dry.” 
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
provides a set of graphical symbols to help overcome 
language and other barriers (refer to “ The International 
Language of ISO Graphical Symbols  ,”   http://www.iso.
org/iso/graphical-symbols_booklet.pdf  ). In addi-
tion, you might also conduct a keyword search for “ship-
ping marks and symbols” to find additional information on 
material handling in the context of shipping marks,  labels  , 
and symbols. Be sure to also find out which international 
symbols apply to your product. When in doubt, label your 
cartons with both words and standard symbols.  
 7.  An identification of the number of cartons you are shipping : 
 This should be written on each carton. For example, 
number each of the respective cartons “One of three,” 
“Two of three,” and “Three of three.” This ensures that all 
of the cartons in your shipment will arrive—together—
at the port of destination.  
 8.  A marking on all sides of the package : If possible, have your 
cartons marked on five sides—that is, on all four sides 
and the top. Stay away from seams and folds. If your plant 
or transport company cannot do all sides, have markings 
placed on at least two of them—the long and short ends. 
But, again, the ideal strategy is to mark five sides. That 
way, no matter how your cartons are positioned, they 
can easily be read from any direction. Also, don’t forget 
to remove any old markings. You do not want to create 
confusion for the receiver of your package.  
 9.  Weight and measurement markings :  Make sure that your 
container is marked with the net and gross weight and 
measurements (dimensions) on the outside and in the 
appropriate system of measurement, which is generally 
accepted to be metric.  
 
■ Caution   A lot can go wrong on a shipment when you are in a hurry, because the focus generally 
tends to be on the quality of the product and how excited the customer will be when he receives it. There’s 
more to getting an export shipment from Point A to Point B. To minimize risks, always take your time and 
do your homework to avoid awkward surprises that can cause delays, nonpayment, or a customer refusal. 

Exporting
415
 Insure, Insure, Insure! 
 Insurance is as vital to your product delivery plans as safe vehicles and good 
sturdy cartons.  When you ship important cargo many miles away and it is 
completely out of your control, you do not want to take any chances on your 
vessel foundering in a massive midocean storm or your airline simply losing 
track of your cargo altogether. If situations like these occur, you must be com-
pensated for your cargo’s value. 
 Insurance coverage   for export shipments is traditionally provided either 
through your airline or freight forwarder or by an insurance company spe-
cializing in ocean and air cargo. There are three types of coverage commonly 
provided for export  shipments : perils, broad-named perils, and all-risks. Since 
most transport companies offer an all-risks plan and few, if any, shippers are 
likely to want to skimp on coverage, I will concentrate on this type of cover-
age here. 
 An  all-risks policy   covers  all physical loss or damage incurred by any external 
occurrence, excluding loss or damage caused by an extenuating circumstance 
such as war, riots, strikes, or civil disobedience. This type of policy gener-
ally costs between 1 and 2 percent of the declared value of your shipment. 
Coverage varies according to your product type and your destination point—
you can get coverage for a portside-to-portside shipment or from the factory 
door to the customer’s door, for example—so be sure to ask your policy pro-
vider which type best suits your needs and those of your customer. Keep in 
mind, though, that no insurance coverage protects you against your customer 
refusing your cargo or against her failure to secure a required import license 
delaying shipment clearance, so plan accordingly. 
 Here are four points to consider when securing air or  marine insurance:  
 1.  Get enough coverage . Talk to your transportation company 
about what amount of  insurance coverage   you will need 
should your cargo get lost or destroyed. Many people 
ask for coverage of 110 percent of their transaction 
value, including freight costs and the insurance. The extra 
10 percent is to compensate for your lost time, profits, 
and any legal or other expenses you might incur from 
the ordeal. You do not want to find out later (insurance 
claims typically take anywhere from one to six months to 
settle) that you are only covered for 20 percent of your 
transaction value!  
 2.  Decide who will secure the insurance . How much control 
do you want as the exporter (seller) should something 
go wrong with your shipment? Your terms of sale usually 
determine this. Your liability ends at the point at which 

Chapter 21 | Booking, Marking, Labeling, and Insuring 
416
the title to the goods changes from seller to buyer. If you 
are guaranteed payment for your shipment regardless 
of its condition upon arrival, you might be more easy-
going about letting your customer handle insurance. In 
addition, if you are shipping open account, I recommend 
that you not only secure the insurance yourself, but also 
do so through a US company to see that any claims will 
be settled expeditiously. Don’t forget: Your customer is 
usually the first to  discover damage or loss of cargo.  He 
must take all reasonable measures to minimize the loss 
or damage and to keep the merchandise as evidence for 
claim settlement.  
 3.   Decide who pays for it . Sometimes your customers will 
request the insurance and offer to pay for it, and some-
times they won’t. How you and your customer assign 
 financial responsibility   for insurance depends on the cost 
of the coverage and how the expense will affect each 
party’s bottom line. Negotiate the point to achieve a win-
win situation.  
 4.   Leave a paper trail . No matter who arranges and pays for 
the insurance,   there are specific documents you must be 
prepared to present in the event of filing a claim. These 
include a letter of claim along with a copy of the bill of 
lading covering the shipment; a copy of an insurance cer-
tificate (prepared by your transport company or if you 
purchased insurance through an independent carrier, by 
you); and a survey report issued by a claim agent, plus an 
invoice showing the amount of damage or loss. Timeliness 
is of the essence—do not miss filing deadlines.  
 One export shipment that doesn’t reach your customer’s door is one too 
many! You could sustain severe financial loss as a consequence; maybe even 
the collapse of your enterprise. So, protect your business, your cargo, and your 
customer’s interests before releasing merchandise by securing the appropri-
ate insurance coverage.  
 Summary 
 At this stage, you will be able to sit back and congratulate yourself because 
your export goods are on their way! But don’t get too comfortable. Within a 
week, you’ll need to prepare all necessary export documentation to ensure 
that you get paid and that your customer receives the cargo without undue 
delay. In the next chapter, I will cover the most essential documents as well as 

Exporting
417
the less common ones you might be required to present. In addition, I will talk 
about the two types of export licenses, when a license is required, and how to 
procure it. After a final review of terms of payment and documentation, your 
export transaction will be complete.  
 Notes 
  i.   “Michael E. Gerber Companies,” accessed May 27, 2016, 
  http://michaelegerbercompanies.com/megcompan
ies13/  .  
  ii.   Michael E. Gerber,  The E-Myth Revisited: Why Most Small 
Businesses Don’t Work and What to Do About It (New York: 
Collins Business, 2005).  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_22
 C H A P T E R 
  Documentation, 
Export Licensing, 
and Other 
Procedures  
 One day there will be no borders, no boundaries, no flags, and no countries 
and the only passport will be the heart. 
 —Attributed to Mexican-American musician Carlos Santana 
 Export Enforcement is committed to working with industry to help identify 
threats, facilitate licensing decisions and party screening, and mitigate 
penalties where companies have taken the appropriate actions to manage 
export compliance. 
 —Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Enforcement 
David W. Mills  i 
22

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
420
 In these past several chapters, I’ve walked you through the somewhat-complex 
process of getting your  export   shipment together with the help of your global 
freight forwarder. In this chapter, I’ll go over  another  set of painstaking but 
critical details—the preparation of shipping documentation to coincide with 
your transport and payment methods. I will also address the often anxiety-
producing (but needlessly so!) issue of the exporter’s licensing responsibilities. 
Finally, I will provide a checklist for a final inspection of your documentation 
to make sure everything’s letter perfect. 
 Export Documentation  
 The first step in preparing export documentation is to carefully list the shipping 
arrangements you have just made for your customer. You want your export 
sale to be a complete success, and this is a critical phase. The documentation 
for an export follows the same pattern as that for a domestic sale. When you 
sell your widgets to your customers across town, you invoice them, right? 
That’s where you start with your overseas customers as well. Where your 
local customer sometimes has special requirements for the order, such as a 
packing list or specified outside markings on each case shipped, your export 
transaction will have special documentation requirements, too. These will vary 
according to the country of destination and the type of goods shipped. 
 If you’ve selected a freight forwarder that has a history of shipping your type 
of product, the company should be right on the ball about the current docu-
mentation requirements and also offer you the option to process most if not 
all documentation online. Take the initiative, though, and ask a lot of questions. 
Use the company’s expertise to your advantage. 
 Nine times out of ten, you will need the following basic documents to com-
plete an export sale:
 1.   A  commercial invoice  
 2.   A  packing list  
 3.  A certificate of origin (where applicable)  
 4.  Three original ocean or air bills of lading and copies of 
 them 
 5.  A  payment instrument  
 Other important documents required for some destinations and some 
 commodities  :
• 
 A  quality-inspection certificate  
• 
 A  consular invoice  
• 
 An import or export  license  

Exporting
421
• 
 An  insurance certificate  
• 
 Dock and warehouse receipts  
• 
 A  health inspection certificate  
• 
 An IATA (International Air Transport Association) ship-
per’s certificate for restricted or dangerous  products  
 I will review each document thoroughly so you will feel comfortable pre-
paring it. Be aware, too, that there are software programs available that will 
execute your export documents online efficiently— Unz & Co  . offers one 
(  http://www.unzco.com/software/unzexpdoc.htm ). As your business 
grows, you might consider installing one of these programs. Most freight 
forwarders provide these documents online as well. Whenever you need to 
review a document to see what it looks like, just conduct an online search 
to pull one up. 
 
■ Tip  The exports I talk about in this chapter are all ongoing, but that won’t always be the case. 
If you have temporary exports, say if you are exhibiting at a trade show (look back at Chapter   16  ) 
in a foreign market and need to send cases of product samples for display, you might consider 
getting a  Carnet. A Carnet is an international customs and export document that is used to clear 
customs without the need to pay any duties and taxes on merchandise that will be used for trade 
shows and sales solicitations to prospects. You can learn more at  Boomerang Carnets :   http://
www.atacarnet.com/  . 
 Commercial Invoice 
 A  commercial invoice  (for an example, see   http://www.unzco.com/forms/
commercialinvoices.htm  and the commercial export combination   http://
www.unzco.com/forms/commercialinvoices.htm#cec  ) usually describes 
what you are exporting and references important transaction numbers. Your 
invoice must be prepared exactly as you and your customer agreed upon in 
your pro forma invoice. If both of you agreed on a change in the sale terms 
later on, record that change on your invoice. In addition, always include the 
following information, even if it isn’t asked for:
 1.   The names of the buyer and seller. If consigned to some-
one else, the names of the shipper and receiver  
 2.  The description of merchandise–the more information 
you provide, the better, including the name of the prod-
uct, brand, symbol and numbers that identify the product 
being imported  

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
422
 3.  The customer-reference purchase order number for the 
pro forma invoice  
 4.  The method of payment, including any and all reference 
numbers pertaining to it  
 5.  The shipping terms from your price quotation (for exam-
ple, cost and freight [CNF] Tokyo, free alongside ship 
[FAS] Seattle, free on board [FOB] New York)  
 6.  The currency in which the transaction will be made (US 
dollars, Japanese yen, French francs, etc.) and the pur-
chase price for each item sold  
 7.  The country of origin  
 8.  The bill of lading number  
 9.  The container number, if shipped by container  
  10.  The quantities in weights and measures–if you fail to dis-
close the weight and measure of the goods necessary 
to assign duties, the importer of record pays expenses 
incurred to obtain this information in advance of release 
of the merchandise from Customs Border Patrol custody  
  11.  The ports of exit and entry  
  12.  Marine or air transit instructions: the name of vessel or 
aircraft, voyage or airway bill number, date of departure, 
and date of arrival at destination  
  13.   The invoice and all related documents must be in  English  
 Packing List 
 A  packing list (for an example, see   http://www.unzco.com/forms/pack-
ing_envelopes.htm#packinglist  ) is used to inform transportation compa-
nies about what they are moving as well as to allow the customer and others 
involved in the transaction to check what has been shipped against the pro 
forma invoice. It’s a good safeguard against shipping incorrect cargo! To pre-
pare your packing list, delete all the prices on the invoice and double-check to 
see that the number of cases; weight (net, gross, metric); and measurements 
appear on the invoice. Then rename the document “Packing list,” and write it 
in big, bold letters, and you’re all set. 
 An export packing list should be clearly marked “Packing List Enclosed.” 
Shippers and forwarding agents determine the total weight and volume of the 
shipment, and whether the correct cargo as indicated is being shipped—all 
based on the packing list. 

Exporting
423
 Your freight forwarder, bank, and customer should indicate how many cop-
ies they will need and where each copy will need to be attached (outside of 
each shipping container in a waterproof envelope, for one) and distributed 
to the appropriate parties to the transaction (along with your other original 
documents in line with the terms and condition of the sale), some weeks in 
advance of when the shipment takes place. I always make three to four extra 
 copies   for my file just in case.  
 Certificate of Origin 
 Not all export  shipments   require a separate certificate of origin (for an example, 
see   http://www.unzco.com/forms/certoforigin.htm#General ). Often, 
merely stating the country of origin on your commercial invoice is sufficient. 
When a certificate is required, it’s usually because the country to which you 
are exporting allows some preferential treatment for shipments like yours, 
such as a lower duty rate under a trade agreement with the United States, 
which must be detailed in a separate document. (For example, Mexico, Israel, 
and Canada have preferential arrangements with the United States if a ship-
ment is intended to be duty-free.) The certificate also protects customers 
from unknowingly bringing in goods from countries with which trade is pro-
hibited by embargoes, cartels, or other political or economic factors. 
 Composing the document is utterly simple. Just type up your own sample 
form for the certificate claiming that your goods are of a certain origin. It 
would look like this:
 We hereby certify that the goods reflected in our Invoice No. 
________ dated _______ were produced and manufactured in 
the United States of America on _________, 20__. 
 XYZ Export Co. 
 _____________________________ 
 Ms. Betsy MacDonald, President  
 Bear in mind that there are two components to determining the country of 
origin: (1) the goods must be shipped from that country, and (2) a substantial 
percentage of the value of the product must be added in that  country  . 
 Your customer might request that you have this document certified by your 
local Chamber of Commerce. To have this done, send the Chamber your pre-
pared certificate along with a letter requesting the certification and three cop-
ies of your commercial invoice. If you email the documents, be sure to indicate 
which documents you would like to be certified. The Chamber will take the 
statement that you provide, retype it verbatim on Chamber letterhead and cer-
tify it with notary seal and signature. Most Chambers charge a flat fee ranging 

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
424
from $15 to $25 for this certification. If you are a member, the fee might be 
waived or reduced. Be sure to read the fine lines of your customer’s terms 
and conditions to determine whether or not you need to have this done. 
Turnaround time can be as short as twenty-four hours, but you may want to 
call in advance if you are setting up a shipment in a hurry. 
 Certificates of origin for goods that are manufactured in the United States, 
as well as abroad, can also be obtained by contacting  eCertify  :   http://www.
ecertify.com  . 
 
■ Tip  For more information on a Certificate of Origin, read, “What Is a Country of Origin 
Certificate?: 
  http://importexport.about.com/b/2011/03/31/why-is-a-country-
of-origin-certificate-important.htm  . 
 NAFTA Certificate of  Origin  
 Check with your carrier to find out if  your  product qualifies for a reduc-
tion or elimination of duty under the  North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) . For information regarding eligibility, contact your local US Customs 
and Border Protection (CBP) office (  http://www.cbp.gov/trade/nafta ). 
If it qualifies, the NAFTA Certificate of Origin form (for an example, see 
  http://www.unzco.com/forms/certoforigin.htm#CBP434 ) should be 
used to receive the benefits of reduced duty, which will be passed along to 
your customer. Sample forms can be found at the CBP site (  http://www.
cbp.gov/trade/nafta/certificate-origin  ).  
 
■ Tip  Transactions valued less than $1,000 do not require the NAFTA Certificate of Origin, but 
you will still be required to make a statement on your commercial invoice to the effect of: “I 
certify that the goods referenced in this invoice comply with the origin requirements specified for 
these goods in the North American Free Trade Agreement, and that further processing or assembly 
outside the territories of the parties has not occurred subsequent to processing or assembly in the 
NAFTA region.” The statement should be handwritten, stamped, and typed on or attached to the 
commercial invoice. If you do regular shipments of the same group of commodities to the same 
destination over the course of the year, you can ask your freight forwarder or transport specialist if 
you can complete a blanket NAFTA Certificate of Origin so as not to have to complete the form for 
each and every shipment. My theory is, whenever you find something is a royal pain in the #%@, 
ask how to simplify the process!  

Exporting
425
 Bills of Lading 
 Depending upon how fast you want to get cargo to your customer and how much 
she is willing to spend, you will either ship by ocean or by air. Accordingly, there are 
two types of bills of lading, the ocean bill of lading (for an example, see   http://
www.unzco.com/forms/billsoflading.htm  ) and the  airway  bill (see   http://
www.ups.com/aircargo/using/services/supplies/airwaybill.html  ). 
 An ocean bill of lading serves both as a receipt for the cargo and as a contract 
for transportation between you, the exporter, and the carrier. It also symbol-
izes ownership; accordingly, if it is in negotiable form, it can be bought, sold, or 
traded while the goods are in transit. 
 When you use air freight, an airway bill is issued in lieu of a bill of lading. It 
serves as a through bill of lading, which covers domestic and international 
flights moving cargo to a specific destination. Your air transportation car-
rier will advise you of the house airway bill number (shipper’s document of 
receipt) and the master airway bill number (freight forwarder’s document of 
receipt) assigned to your shipment. You must be sure to communicate these 
to your customer along with other transportation details. Airway bills of lad-
ing serve functions similar to those of ocean bills, but they are only issued in 
non-negotiable form. This means that you and your bank have less protection 
because you lose title to the goods once shipment commences. Be sure to 
refer back to Chapter   18 if you are shipping hazardous goods. Special forms 
are required. 
 I will describe ocean bills of lading in further detail because ocean freight 
is the most economical—and therefore the most frequently used—method 
of export shipment. To have one made up, you must prepare and submit a 
Shipper’s Letter of Instructions form to your freight forwarder so that it can 
issue it accurately. This form indicates if the transaction is being made against 
a letter of credit (L/C), whether insurance is required, where to send docu-
ments, and so forth. Once you’ve finalized terms of payment with your cus-
tomer, you need to furnish these facts to your freight forwarder. Most bills of 
lading are issued with three originals and several copies. 
 There are numerous different types of ocean bills of lading, but you will find 
that the following are the most  commonly  used:
• 
 Straight (non-negotiable) : This type of bill of lading provides 
for delivery to the person whose name appears on it. 
It must be marked “Non-negotiable.” Only the person 
named can claim the goods upon arrival. A straight bill 
of lading is usually used for goods shipped on an open-
account payment basis in cases where the exporter is 
not concerned about the importer receiving the goods 
without payment.  

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
426
• 
 Shipper’s order (negotiable) : This type of bill is used when 
you want to impose conditions on the delivery of the 
goods, such as requiring an acceptance of a draft. This 
type works well when payment has been secured by a 
L/C because you can make sure that the terms of the let-
ter of credit are met before  the  goods are released.  
• 
 Clean : This  type   of bill is issued when the shipment is 
received in good order. If there is any damage or a short-
age of product is found, a clean bill of lading will not be 
issued.  
• 
 Onboard : This type is issued when the cargo has been 
placed aboard the named vessel. It is signed and certi-
fied by the master of the vessel. For a L/C transaction, 
an onboard bill of lading is required in order for you, the 
exporter, to get paid. 
 Most of my customers ask for a shipper’s order bill of lading, which authorizes 
their bank to take title of the goods should they default on payment. The bank 
does not release title of the goods to the buyer until payment is received. The 
bank will also not release these funds to you, the exporter, until all conditions 
of the sale have been fulfilled at your end.  
 Payment Instruments  
 As I discussed in Chapter   20 , getting paid is an essential part of the export 
transaction. Numerous criteria are applied by businesses when determining 
which payment instrument to offer as a term of sale. A payment instrument in 
this case refers to documentary collections such as a sight or time draft, which 
is widely used in international trade. A documentary collection is the collec-
tion by a bank of funds due from a buyer against the delivery of specific docu-
ments relating to an export sale. The seller (exporter) sends a draft or other 
demand for payment with the related shipping documents to the buyer's bank. 
Compared to open account sales, the documentary collection offers more 
security to the seller (exporter), but less than a letter of  credit  . 
 Other Important Documents 
 Over the years, I have found that the following documents have also been 
required from time to time. This is not a complete listing, but it will give you 
an idea of what to expect in the way of special documentation requirements. 
Note: I am providing a more comprehensive approach to the Import and 
Export License section to resolve any potential confusion or questions you 
might have on this topic. 

Exporting
427
 Quality-Inspection Certificate  
 When shipping high-value products or when you are dealing with a very con-
scientious customer, an inspection certificate might be requested. An inspec-
tion certificate provides proof that what you are shipping is, in fact, what the 
customer ordered and is also of good quality. If a customer requests this 
document, agree to it—but see that he covers the administrative and inspec-
tion fees. Also, ask him to recommend an independent inspection agency to 
perform the review at your end. If he doesn’t have one, ask your export 
resource bank for a suitable contact. 
 
■ Tip  I once had a customer in Tokyo who asked to have an inspection of his goods done 
prior to their leaving the factory in Chicago. He requested that his close friend, living in Chicago, 
conduct the inspection. When the goods were ready for dispatch, my customer’s friend arrived at 
the plant and opened a few cartons here and there to ensure that we were not shipping inferior 
merchandise. Then, she eyeballed all the cartons to see that they were marked on the outside in 
the way her friend had requested. Finding everything in order, she signed the inspection certificate 
and copies we had prepared in advance. In this case, the inspection didn’t cost the customer a 
cent, everything was certified as A-OK, and we were all happy! 
 Consular Invoices 
 A few countries still require  consular invoices  , which are special forms that 
must be legalized by a consulate of the country to which you are exporting. 
If required, copies are available from the destination country’s embassy or 
consulate in the United States. This procedure prevents under- or overpricing 
and also helps the consulates pull in a little extra revenue. Be sure to discuss 
with your buyer who will bear the costs of the expense. 
 Import and Export Licenses  
 Recently, I received an e-mail from a woman who works at a small manufac-
turing company. She explained that her company had recently exhibited at a 
jewelry show in the United States and a German man had expressed interest 
in a product at her booth. He had said he would buy ten thousand of her 
pierced-earring backings if she could ship to the port of Hamburg within sixty 
days. He had a big fair coming up and knew he could preview the holders to 
his customers and garner much interest. 
 She was thinking through the details but was very apprehensive about getting 
involved in exporting because people had told her that it’s hard to get an export-
ing license. “What is this ‘license’?” she asked. I could tell by her message that 

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
428
this single issue was worrying her more than any other aspect of the export 
transaction requirements I’ve covered thus far. And, to tell you the truth, I didn’t 
have an answer for her, so I said I would check with the  Export Administration 
Regulations (EAR)  and get back to her. 
 We all fear the unknown, and government bureaucracy is especially scary. 
Most of us don’t want to add more phases to a business process, like export-
ing, that’s already complex enough—especially ones that might slow the proj-
ect down indefinitely. But don’t let an obstacle like this cause you to give up 
on a good overseas lead! You can find your way  ar ound export licensing with 
less trouble than you think. Let me show you how. As for the woman with 
the pierced-earring backing holders, it turns out she did not need a license 
because most exports from the United States do not require a license, and 
may be exported under the designation No License Required (NLR). 
 First of all, don’t worry—just because you have to apply for a license does 
not mean that there is a possibility that your application will be automatically 
denied and you’ll be barred from exporting your shipment. The licensing pro-
cess is undertaken for specific governmental purposes, primarily to monitor 
outbound shipping traffic. There are two types of export licenses: a general 
license (GL) and a validated license (VL). A general export license is a standing 
permission given by the government to export a certain category of products. 
Individual exporters do not need to apply for one. A validated export license, 
on the other hand, is assigned to a specific exporter for a specific product, 
either for a designated period of time or for a single transaction. Exporters 
should know that failure to comply with the regulations surrounding  either 
 type of license carries both civil and criminal penalties, so pay close attention.  
 Determining Which License You  Need  —General 
or  Validated  
 The  Bureau of Export Administration (BXA)  maintains the EAR, which includes 
the “Commerce Control List” (CCL)  . The CCL includes items such as soft-
ware, commodities, and technology, which are subject to the export licensing 
authority of the BXA. Once you know what you are exporting, where it is 
going, who will receive your item, and what your item will be used for, you can 
consult these materials to determine which export license you need and find 
out whether any restrictionsapply. 
 
■ Note  The “Export Administration  Regulations ” page on the US Bureau of Industry and Security 
Web site includes downloadable files on everything mentioned in this section—from the “Table of 
Contents” for the EAR, to the “Index,” to the “Commerce Control List,” to “License Exceptions.” Bookmark 
it for future reference:   http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-
administration-regulations-ear  . 

Exporting
429
 When you export any good valued (the value, for example, designated on the 
export license that corresponds to the commodity being exported) at over 
$2,500 (or requiring a license), you must submit information on the shipment 
to the   Automated Export System (AES)   . You can get help on filing AES and 
classifying merchandise, regulations, and trade data by calling 1-800-549-0595. 
 Some sections of the EAR (  http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regula-
tions/export-administration-regulations-ear  ) to check out include:
 Part 732, Table of Contents : “Steps for Using the Ear” 
is a step-by-step guide to general license obligations.  
 Parts 738 and 774 : “Commerce Control List Overview 
and the Country Chart,” Part 738, and the “Commerce 
Control List,” Part 774, will tell you which country 
group your export destination falls into. Don’t let the 
numbers and abbreviations scare you. Once you’re 
looking at the EAR, getting to the right section isn’t 
terribly difficult.  
 Supplement No. 1 to Part 738 : This supplement to the 
country chart offers comprehensive instructions 
on using the chart along with a detailed example. If 
your country of destination is not listed here, you do 
not need a validated license unless your commodity 
meets one of the technical exceptions noted within 
the export commodity control number (ECCN; an 
item that may be subject to a short supply control, 
for example).  
 Part 774, in reference to the country destinations that 
require a validated license : In addition to listing your 
country grouping, the “Commerce Control List” in 
Part 774 also lists country export destinations that 
require a license. If your product is on the list, an “X” 
appears next to the country you intend to export 
to. The next step in the export process is to apply 
for an appropriate license electronically through the 
Simplified Network Application Process Redesign 
(SNAP-R). Everything you want to know about 
SNAP-R can be found at   http://www.bis.doc.gov/
snap/  and   https://snapr.bis.doc.gov/snapr/
docs/snaprFAQ.htm  . Before applying for a license, 
check with your customer on what documentation 
is required.  

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
430
 Part 748 : The “Application Classification Advisory and 
License,” featured in this part, allows you to find the 
ECCN assigned to your type of product yourself if 
the Department of Commerce can’t help you. For 
items subject to the EAR but not listed on the CCL, 
the proper classification is EAR99. This number, which 
appears at the end of each category in the CCL, is 
a “melting pot” classification for items not specified 
under any CCL entry.  
 New, Web-Based Tools for Exporters 
 In conjunction with the government’s ongoing Export Control Reform 
Initiative, The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS) at the Department of 
Commerce offers some new and useful web-based tools for exporters to 
determine if their products are subject to EAR regulations. This list is by 
no means comprehensive. It only highlights some of the most important 
regulation changes that have taken place via the Export Control Reform 
(ECR).  
• 
 Simplified Network Application Process Redesign 
(SNAP-R) :   https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/
licensing/simplified-network-application-pro-
cess-redesign-snap-r  . SNAP-R allows users to submit 
export license applications via the Internet. It also allows 
you to obtain a Company Identification Number (CIN) 
and user account. 
• 
 System 
for Tracking Your 
Export 
License 
Application (STELA) :   https://www.bis.doc.gov/
index.php/licensing/track-your-application-
stela  . You can check the status of your export/re-export 
license applications and classification requests.  
• 
 Commerce Control List  Classification :   https://
www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/licensing/com-
merce-control-list-classification  
and 
under 
that is the  Export Control Classification Interactive 
Tool  :   http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/export-
control-classification-interactive-tool  . 
The 
CCL determines whether or not authorization is 
required to export a specific good. The Export Control 
Classification Interactive Tool helps you identify the 
steps to follow when reviewing the CCL in Supplement 
No. 1 to part 774.  

Exporting
431
• 
 Guidance  on  re-exports:   https://www.bis.doc.
gov/index.php/licensing/commerce-control-
list-classification  . If you are outside the United 
States and want to re-export or transfer (in-country) a 
good that is of US origin, this section guides on determin-
ing whether your good is subject to the EAR.  
 To determine if your item is specially designed or not, including how the 
review of the term relates to the larger CCL (see Supplement No. 4 to Part 
774 of the EAR—Commerce Control List Order of Review) visit:   http://
www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/specially-designed-tool  . 
 Never use these tools as substitutes for carefully reading the EAR regulations 
and seeking advice from your freight forwarder or international attorney who 
is knowledgeable of regulations and knows how to deal with government 
agencies when there is something that you do not understand. Review the 
Export Reform Control (ERC) FAQs:   http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.
php/2012-03-30-17-54-11/ecr-faqs  . 
 You can contact the Office of Exporter Services at your local department 
of commerce (DOC) by phone or e-mail to go over these steps. If it can’t 
help you, do the research on your own and then visit one of the DOC coun-
selors to confirm your findings. Check with your international attorney on 
specific export transactions, because the EAR is complicated; the index to the 
“Commerce Control List” alone is seventy-five pages. 
 A brief alert: Various requirements of the EAR depend upon your knowledge 
of the end use, end user, ultimate destination, or other details of the export 
transaction. If you can discuss your transaction in good conscience with DOC 
counselors and with complete confidence, then there should not be any cause 
for an agency intervention. But, as mentioned earlier, if you cannot explain 
whom you are selling your product to, why the customer is buying it in the 
first place, or what she will do with it once it is purchased, you’ve got a prob-
lem. If this is the case, you should refrain from pursuing the transaction, advise 
the BXA, and wait. The BXA is there to help you, not hurt you. Its role is to 
prevent exports and re-exports that go against the national security and for-
eign policy interests of the United States. It is good to consider it our duty 
as citizens to work in partnership with the agency to maintain the highest 
standards of protection for our country.  
 
■ Caution   To comply with export law, map out an export-compliance strategy. This is vital. But 
keep it simple and easy to understand, because you don’t want to accidentally end up exporting a 
product that will be used for other wrongful purposes later on. US export controls help protect our 
country by keeping products and technologies away from countries of concern, persons who might 
use the products against us, or terrorists. Violations of this nature can result in both criminal and 

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
432
administrative penalties. Assigning one person to track the complete export process carefully and 
always address the how, what, when, where, why, and originating party of every export is a start 
to meeting US exporting regulations and keeping our country safe. For more information, visit the 
US Bureau of Industry and Security (  http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/compliance-
a-training/export-administration-regulations-training  ). 
 Must You Obtain the Import License for the Destination Country, Too? 
 Obtaining an  import license  is not your responsibility. It is your customer’s. If 
you have secured payment with him, for example, with an Irrevocable Letter 
of Credit, it is up to your customer to take the appropriate measures to 
determine whether he needs an import license. If he does need a license and 
neglects to apply for it, and you ship against the L/C, you are still entitled to 
payment because you took care of things at your end. The customer, however, 
will not be able to clear the product at the port of entry until he clears up 
the licensing problem. If he fails to get an import license and you ship on open 
account, you may not get paid until weeks or months later. That said, it is a 
good idea to find out from your customer if an import license is needed, even 
though it is not your responsibility to arrange it. Whether or not the license 
is needed, be sure to secure payment.  
 Other  Port-of-Destination Requirements  
 It’s important to be aware of the standards and regulations of the importing 
country. Ideally, your customer will be knowledgeable about possible barriers 
to entry, but it helps to be aware of shipping restrictions and documenta-
tion requirements yourself. For example, if you are exporting food, medical, 
or electrical goods, your customer may not be able to import these items 
until she conducts an inspection to see that the goods meet local standards. 
Most developed nations have organizations comparable to the US Food & 
Drug Administration that monitor product safety. So, before your customer 
imports so much as a cheese sandwich, she will have to check with the organi-
zation that is equivalent to the FDA in her country to make sure the product 
can be imported. Once you’ve made sure that there is no reason why your 
product should be barred from entry, you may be ready to ship.  
 Shipping Under a  General License  
 If you’ve checked the EAR and confirmed with your department of commerce 
that you do  not need a validated license (VL), you can proceed with your shipment 
under a general license without having to apply for a formal license. The good 
news is that the majority of products exported are covered by a general license. 

Exporting
433
You should still check to see, however, if your shipment requires Electronic Export 
Information ( EEI , formerly  Shipper’s Export Declaration (SED)  , which helps US 
customs to monitor shipment licensing.  
 Shipping Under a  Validated License  
 On the other hand, you might have found out that the country you want to 
export to requires a VL for your product. Usually, the following types of prod-
ucts are subject to export controls and will require a VL:
1.  Goods that pose potential harm to your own country’s 
security  
2.  Goods that cause a shortage of supply in your own 
country 
3.  Goods that affect your country’s foreign policy  
 To ensure a smooth license application process, tell the truth (full disclosure 
is best), know your customer,  ii and determine well in advance of filing whether 
there are any red flags.  iii Should you make a mistake (e.g., failure to register; 
unauthorized shipment), own up to it, take corrective action, and come up 
with a solution to the problem. And above all else, learn from your mistakes 
so you avoid repeating offenses.  
 Applying For An Export License 
 If an export license is required, you may submit an export license application 
through the online Simplified Network Application Process Redesign (SNAP-R). 
Visit the  SNAP-R  section of the BIS website for more information on signing up 
to be a SNAP-R user:   https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/licensing/
simplified-network-application-process-redesign-snap-r  . 
 In the SNAP-R system, you, as the exporter, may prepare a commodity clas-
sification request or application for export or reexport. Part 748 of the EAR 
details requirements for submitting a license application. 
 BIS conducts a complete analysis of the license application along with all docu-
mentation submitted in support of the application. You may check for the 
status of your pending export or re-export license application by visiting their 
System for Tracking Export License Applications ( STELA  ) at:   https://www.
bis.doc.gov/index.php/licensing/track-your-application-stela  . 
 If your license is approved, you will receive a license number and expiration 
date to use on your export documents. A BIS-issued license is usually valid 
for 24 months. 

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
434
 I recommend that you inquire with your international attorney, your local 
DOC, and your local  EAC for further ins and outs of licensing and also to get 
some hands-on experience in using the reference materials discussed here. 
 
■ Tip  There are license exemptions or exceptions that authorize you to export or re-export items 
subject to the EAR (see Part 740), under stated conditions, where they would otherwise require a 
license. Check with the Bureau of Industry and Security at the U.S. Department of Commerce at 
  https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/forms-documents/doc_view/986-740 . 
 
■ Caution   EAR license exception can be a painstaking exercise, and if you run afoul of the 
exception requirements, then an EAR export control violation may occur. Monitor your export-
control compliance efforts carefully to maintain a compliance rate as close to 100% as possible. 
 Insurance Certificate 
 If the customer requests that you provide insurance, then you must issue 
an insurance certificate evidencing the type and amount of coverage for 
the cargo being shipped (refer to Chapter   21 ). Be aware, though, that some 
countries prohibit insurance coverage issued in the United States, so check 
in advance with your freight forwarder before making any insurance com-
mitment to your customer. The forwarder will  quote   you insurance cover-
age at the 110 percent CIF (cost of goods, insurance, and freight) value 
and prepare the certificate for you. The company probably knows that the 
certificate should be made in negotiable form and must be endorsed before 
it is submitted to the bank. 
 In some instances, an airway bill can serve as an insurance certificate for a 
shipment by air. Be sure to check with your shipping company.  
 Dock and Warehouse Receipts 
 The dock receipt is issued once the export product has been moved by 
the domestic carrier to a port of exit and left with the next responsible 
carrier, which will then take it from the port of exit to the overseas desti-
nation. The receipt proves that a transfer has been made from one carrier 
to another. The warehouse receipt lists the goods received for storage at 
 a  warehouse.  

Exporting
435
 Health Inspection Certificate 
 It is important to know about the destination  country’s  health and sanitary 
regulations that pertain to the product you are about to export. The best 
way to find out about these regulations is to contact officials in the Office 
of Food Safety and Technical Services (OFSTS) at the Foreign Agricultural 
Service (FAS) located in Washington, DC. This office is largely responsible for 
overseeing manufacturing, production, and shipping practices that affect food 
safety, such as food additives, product standards, and packaging. 
 If you are exporting an agricultural product, you might need a Phytosanitary 
Certificate detailing inspection. This certificate is issued by the US Department 
of Agriculture (USDA) to satisfy import regulations for foreign countries. 
It indicates that a US shipment has been inspected and is free from toxic 
plant and pest diseases. In addition to the Phytosanitary Certificate, the 
USDA issues the Export Certificate for Processed Plant Products and the 
Certificate of Quality and Condition. If a processed plant product cannot 
be given a Phytosanitary Certificate but has been denied entry to one or 
more countries for lack of a health certification, an Export Certificate can be 
issued. Some products in this category are bulk nuts that are salted, roasted, 
or vacuum packed (in or out of their shells); soy-fortified products; and meal 
extracted from seeds by solvent. The Certificate of Quality and Condition is 
offered by the USDA’s Processed Products Branch following official inspec-
tion and grading of canned, frozen, and dehydrated fruits and vegetables and 
related products. This certificate is available on a fee basis and can be tailored 
to meet your  specific   export needs. 
 Some countries require that health certificates be notarized or certified by a 
chamber and legalized by a consulate.  
 International Air Transport Association (IATA)  Shipper’s 
Certificate 
 An IATA shipper’s certificate for restricted or dangerous products is required 
for all dangerous goods shipments transported by air carriers and air- freight 
 forwarders (  http://www.unzco.com/forms/interndangergooddec.htm#I
ATAdec  ). The exporter (shipper) is responsible for accurately completing the 
information on the form per the instructions of IATA (  http://www.unzco.
com/forms/instructions/DG_IATA.pdf  ) and ensuring that all requirements 
have been met through IATA’s Dangerous Goods Regulations (  http://www.
iata.org/publications/dgr/Pages/index.aspx  ). Compliance measures 
include, but are not limited to, packaging (shipping carton is adequate, for 
example), marking (the product exported is identified correctly), and required 
information related to the product exported.  

Chapter 22 | Documentation, Export Licensing, and Other Procedures
436
 Get It Right the First Time, So That It Is the 
Only Time 
 Even a  minor documentation   problem can cost you and your customer time 
and trouble. Once, a very upset Greek customer faxed me about a docu-
mentation problem on a shipment he had just received. He complained that 
I should have prepared the commercial invoice to match up exactly with the 
pro forma—yes, I know I’ve just been lecturing you on the importance of 
doing that, but back then I didn’t realize just how important it really was. My 
customer told me that the local customs officials would not allow clearance 
of the goods because of that particular discrepancy. Although I was a little 
confused by the extra data they wanted included on the commercial invoice, 
I reissued it within minutes, not just in one new version but in three, just in 
case the first one didn’t suit the people at customs. As it turned out, all three 
of them worked, so they settled on the one that best suited their needs and 
cleared their shipment. 
 Fortunately for me, that mistake was easily resolved. In fact, to this day—
twenty years later—the customer still brings up this story because he never 
had a supplier go to such great lengths to get it right the second time! Now, 
my guiding principle is to go to great lengths to get it right the first time so 
that it is the only time. It should be yours, too. 
 
■ Tip  Most transport companies can alert you to documentation problems and take care of 
them on your behalf. The only thing that might be required is your approval on a reissuance of a 
document and perhaps a signature (online or offline). 
 Summary 
 Hopefully this chapter has alleviated any concerns you might have relative to 
what is essential when preparing shipping documentation to coincide with 
your transport and payment methods. You’re well on your way to becoming a 
successful exporter. 
 I have emphasized again and again that the world of international business is 
driven by relationships. If you want to succeed in building your own network 
of relationships, you may need to rethink the way you do business and make 
a comprehensive commitment to customer service. I will talk about estab-
lishing exceptional export service and the strategies that work to make suc-
cess happen in the next chapter. Much of this has to do with communicating 
regularly, following up to ensure satisfaction, following through on promises, 
and becoming a valued participant in your customer’s business and profes-
sional growth. 

Exporting
437
 Once you’ve got the basics down, I will introduce you to cross-cultural 
learning, making a point to express points of cultural intelligence that will 
help you to further establish your competence and trustworthiness. This 
will set you apart from your competitors and make you memorable—both 
of which will strengthen your global network and help keep export business 
coming your way!  
 Notes 
  i.    http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/forms-docu-
ments/doc_view/1005-don-t-let-this-happen-to-
you-071814  .  
  ii.   “Know Your Customer Guidance,” Bureau of Industry and 
Security, accessed May 29, 2016,   http://www.bis.doc.
gov/index.php/enforcement/oee/23-compliance-
a-training/47-know-your-customer-guidance  . 
 iii.   “Red Flag Indicators, Bureau of Industry and Security, 
accessed May 29, 2016,   http://www.bis.doc.gov/
index.php/enforcement/oee/23-compliance-a-
training/51-red-flag-indicators  . 

P A R T
 Keep Building 
Your Business 
 
VI

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_23
 C H A P T E R 
 In Pursuit of 
Exceptional 
Export Service 
 Strategies for Success  
 The “value added” for most any company, tiny or enormous, comes from 
the… Quality of Experience provided. 
 — Tom Peters  , author, Re-Imagine!  i 
 Give customers what they want—and a little more. Let them know you 
appreciate them. Make good on all your mistakes, and don’t make excuses, 
apologize. Stand behind everything you do. 
 — Sam Walton  , founder of Walmart  ii 
 The relationship between you and your overseas customer shouldn’t end when 
a sale is made. If anything, it requires even more attention. Once you’ve com-
pleted the initial export transaction, you must expect to provide a broad spec-
trum of “free” or “value-add” services in order to encourage repeat business. 
It’s the kind of follow-up I refer to as the “care and feeding” of customers and 
suppliers, which is done to keep them coming back, the premise of this chapter. 
23

Chapter 23 | In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service
442
 Thanks to the Internet, customers have more say so, limitless options, and 
higher expectations on product quality. They also take responsive service into 
account when considering a purchase. The challenge for exporters is to capi-
talize on this by increasing value for the customer without sacrificing profits. 
 So, why deliver  good   customer service?   Repeat business; fans raving about 
you to others; employees, your biggest resource, feeling inspired because they 
work at a caring company; and growth. These are just a few of the many ways a 
business benefits by providing exceptional customer service. Good customer 
service is smart marketing—something to be proud of when delivered well. 
You might have the greatest product or service for export, but if you don’t 
treat customers like they are gold, they will go elsewhere. Good customer 
service can make or break a business. People do business with people they 
like, can trust, and can grow with. 
 Exceptional  Export Service  Philosophies  
 This chapter is devoted to a list of fifteen strategies I’ve come up with 
that have helped my business and my clients’ businesses achieve successful 
employee, customer, vendor, and colleague relationships the world over. To 
achieve exceptional export service, you must plan for it and then act on it. 
Consider the following tips your “commonsense blueprint” when developing 
your own in-house set of principles for great customer service. As you will 
see, many of these actions should be taken both before and after a sale. Note: 
These traits apply to both your Everyday Joe and big-buying customers. 
 
■ Tip  Remember how I emphasized getting the right people on the export bus in Chapter   4 ? 
I explained how best to serve customers and suggested firing people who are not on board with 
your values. Life is too short to waste one second with Debbie Downers or Dave Disruptors (unruly 
people who have the capability, if given sufficient attention, to take the organization down due to 
their rogue behavior). 
 Communicate  with Your Customer 
 The relationship truly begins after the sale. It is important to reach out to 
the customer once the sales transaction has been completed because your 
first ambition is to serve them. Customers like approachable and easy-to-find 
exporters, knowledgeable follow-up, and a show of heart. Expand the relation-
ship in a way that lets additional possibilities fall into place. Ask how everything 
went and what more you can do for them. Follow up with them in a week or 
two with a list of new ideas designed to foster the relationship. These might 

Exporting
443
concern how the product they imported can be used for other purposes or 
how showing the product in action via a YouTube video might increase sales. 
Growth is vital to sustaining a long-term relationship, and it also creates the 
conditions for superior results.  
 You need to find out how your customer feels about you and your company 
after he buys your product. Only then can you determine if a customer is sat-
isfied or if you can fix a problem. Start asking today or set up an online survey 
(using SurveyMonkey or MailChimp, for example) that allows customers to 
weigh in and evaluate the experience they had with your company. They will 
see that you are trying to improve your service. 
 Resolve to practice a “no surprises” policy with your customers. Surprises are 
seldom good. Nobody likes to hear bad news (more on this later) via a grape-
vine, so make sure you communicate with your customer on any important 
information that will impact your relationship. 
 Stay away from canned responses via social media channels when it is obvious 
a customer is angry. A canned response might be: “Thank you for choosing 
ABC Company for your stay. We appreciate your business!” And this could 
be after a firm or a person wrote: “Your accommodations were deplorable. I 
will never stay at your facility again, ever.” To build the relationship and learn 
as much as you can, strive for personal interactions with your customers to 
ensure each customer is treated as a priority and taken care of in the way she 
expects. Remind each employee that part of their job is to serve as a “brand 
ambassador” for the firm.   
 Care About and Support Your Customers 
 Take a humanistic approach to handling all inquiries. Show some love. And if 
you can’t fix the thing that made the  customer  unhappy, refer him to someone 
else who can. Remember, based on the type of product or service you export, 
you might need on-the-ground support in the overseas market to help your 
customers better understand how to sell your offering to their own custom-
ers. Always let your customers know that this extra value is available. 
 And listen to both what’s said and what’s not said. I once had a client whose 
only child had gone off to college, and I could tell it impacted him by the delays 
in our communications and short responses when he did reply. After asking 
how he was doing and how his son was coming along, he poured out to me 
in an e-mail what it was like to send your only child off to school and have an 
empty nest at home. Sometimes putting the elephant on the table or opening 
up a discussion with your customer about what’s going on in each other’s lives 
can be both cathartic and an emotional bonding opportunity that strengthens 
a relationship. It also shows heart and support in a time of need.  

Chapter 23 | In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service
444
 Pay Attention to  Details  Pertaining to Your 
Customers 
 What might seem mundane to you can make a world of difference to your 
customer. 
 Your customer likes jazz? The next time she visits you at your home office, 
take her to a jazz experience like no other. To you, it might seem basic or 
mundane, but she will be thoroughly impressed that you remembered and 
cared enough to do something special for her. Or maybe you have an overseas 
customer who loves San Francisco. When he returns to his homeland, send 
him off with a beautiful picture-book of San Francisco showing all the great 
places along with a historical perspective.  
 Get Everyone on the Same Page About Your 
Customers 
 The  customer service  mentality should permeate your entire organization. 
What is your commitment to customers? Does everybody in the company 
understand this commitment inside and out? Do you provide exemplary ser-
vice? Friendly service? Accessible service? The service goal of online retailer 
Zappos is “Delivering happiness.”  iii Define yours and carry through on it every 
step of the way. Ask yourself these questions to frame it:
 1.   What is our customer service plan (what do we stand for)?  
 2.   Why is it important?  
 3.   Who is responsible for it?  
 4.   How will it get done?  
 5.  How will it be measured?  
 6.  How will we celebrate our customer service successes?  
 Tape the following motto to your wall or use it as a sign-off on your e-mails: 
“Everything we do is to help our customers compete more effectively and win 
in their marketplace.” Also, create your own statement about what you want 
to make happen for your customers and then offer some extra-value or even 
“free” perks related to it. Based on the statement “I want to allow distributors 
to win an all-expense-paid trip to the company’s home base if they bring us X 
amount of business in a quarter,” you could sign the distributors up for your 
company newsletter, feature them on your blog, produce a video offering tips 
on how to use your product or service in ways they didn’t think of, and direct 
them to where they should go for reorders. 

Exporting
445
 
■ Tip  Use your existing customers to gain new ones. The shortcut to achieving that type of 
growth is to  ask. If you’ve done a good job with your service, a customer will be more likely to 
give you leads on new customers. Referrals are potent opportunities to move fast on getting new 
customers, provided you do everything just right as outlined here. 
 Set Up a Mother Ship Service Counter for Your 
Customers 
 All customers need a home base to revert to in good  times  and bad. Set up a 
“mother ship” center for handling them. It can be one person in the company 
who holds down the fort or it can be a hundred-person effort. Train all of your 
employees to anticipate and respond to customer inquiries with care and to 
 take  every inquiry seriously. Make them responsible for handling e-mail inqui-
ries, phone calls, social media inquiries, and so forth. 
 
■ Tip  Should any of your employees ever make a mistake with a customer, have her admit it to 
the customer, apologize, correct it, promise it won’t happen again, and do something special as a 
courtesy (highlight him on your blog, for example), and then move on. 
 Treat Your Customers like Your Partner or Spouse 
 Ever hear the expression “How a man treats his mother is how he will treat 
his wife”?   The same theory applies to business owners and their employees. 
How a business owner treats her employees is an indication of how she will 
treat her customers. If treated well, employees will be more likely to go the 
extra mile in their work with customers. If treated badly, they’ll be less likely 
to put forth great care and work ethic. 
 Let’s take a time where a customer visited me in Chicago and asked me to 
accompany him on a tour of a supplier’s facilities in Boston—on a day’s notice. 
It’s standard procedure to accompany your customer to the supplier’s plant, 
so I immediately got on the phone to book the flight. Lo and behold, there 
were no seats. My customer said it was not a problem and that he would make 
the trip alone. Then I checked another airline and found that it had a red eye at 
4 a.m. I booked the flight but decided not to tell the customer. I arrived at the 
plant much, much earlier than his appointment time. You should have seen the 
look on his face when he showed up and saw me there! He thought it had to 
be too good to be true. My point: I treated this customer as if I were meeting 
my spouse at an important event—and I did so without hesitation.  

Chapter 23 | In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service
446
 Create an Experience for Your  Customer  
 When you buy a cup of coffee at  Starbucks  , it’s not just about the coffee; it’s 
about the experience—who you might see, who might see you, what work you 
might do on your laptop, what music might be playing, or what news is circulat-
ing in the neighborhood. Or maybe you want  to   have private, unrushed time 
all for yourself. Yes, the coffee tastes good, but if everything else were terrible, 
would you go back for that great cup of coffee? According to Dori Jones Yang 
and Starbucks Chairman and CEO Howard Schultz, “The underlying foundation 
of this company [Starbucks] is not about growth. It is about the passionate, soul-
ful connection we have with our people, our customers, and our shareholders.”  iv  
The spirited human connection, sanctuary-type experience, and great cup of 
coffee are what keep customers coming back to Starbucks. 
 You are not exporting a product or service. You are exporting an experience 
for your customer that comes in a bundle that includes access to and interac-
tion with you. Eliminate or reduce one part of the bundle and the customer will 
leave you and take his business elsewhere. I strongly believe, as Tom Peters says, 
that a “quality” customer experience correlates to customer loyalty, so get it 
right! You can run your export business as a “transaction-based experience” 
where you just get the deal done or you can run it as an “experienced-based 
brand” where every touch point relates to the superiority of your product or 
service. If it’s the latter, what will that entail? 
 Think back to  Vosges Haut Chocolate  that I talked about earlier in the book. 
With a slogan of “Vosges Haut-Chocolat invites you to travel the world 
through chocolate,” a mission of “Peace, love and chocolate,” and the invita-
tion “Ring our chocolate concierge” all posted in the “Contact Us” area of the 
site, Vosges is most definitely an “experienced-based brand” offering excep-
tional service at every point of interaction with the company.  
 
■ Caution   Over time, as customers gain familiarity with a product or service, they might find an 
exporter’s support program to be of declining value. Their buying decisions then become more price 
sensitive. You can shop for more inexperienced customers or you can kick it up a notch with the 
experienced customers by providing stronger marketing, improved account-management resources, 
and additional value by helping to develop new applications for existing product or service offerings.   
 Create a High Standard for Your Customer Service 
 Raise your own expectations of what you believe your customer should get 
from you. Set up a high standard involving a heightened set of expectations for 
customer service and then meet them effectively. Give your employees ways 
to reward customers and show them how much you care. 

Exporting
447
 Maybe your customer needs delivery within a month. Reduce the time it takes 
for her to get the product to three weeks and maintain that on future orders. 
Or maybe your customer needs a special loading configuration where the 
product is delivered in a container. Follow her instructions and do the ship-
ment to her  liking  .  
 Give Time to Your Customers 
 One of the most undervalued benefits that we can give a customer is our 
time. Set aside a certain amount of time each day, week, or month to devote 
to your customers. Ensure that their needs are being met personally and 
promptly. Your time is valuable.   They know that. When you give your time, you 
show customers they are worth it.   
 My general rule for responding to customer communications is to do so 
within twenty-four hours. What’s yours? When customers want to see you, 
get an e-mail from you, or speak with you, devote time to providing them the 
service they require. It’s a valuable commodity to customers.  
 Stay Away from the  Status Quo  with Your 
Customers 
 Once a good customer relationship has been established, it’s easy to get comfort-
able. As the exporter, you might rely on the status quo (which equals doing noth-
ing) with your customer after the sale, but his needs will change over time. Check 
in with him. Silence isn’t always golden and it can’t hurt to get a status update 
more often than not to find out what your customer may or may not need. 
 
■ Tip  Every once in a while it can’t hurt to ask yourself, “Do I want more business or better 
business from my customers?” More business can mean additional sales, but better business can 
be far more profitable. Check your income and balance sheet statements on a regular basis. 
 Use  Cultural Diversity  to Your Advantage with Your 
 Customers  
 When you provide an exceptional export service to customers worldwide, you 
need to understand the diverse needs of those customers. The different perspec-
tives and cultural norms of your customers force you to dig deep into cultural 
differences and offer a vibrant source of ideas and process improvement to meet 
customer expectations. It is only when exporters leave their comfort zones that 
they can then grow and become stronger both personally and professionally. 

Chapter 23 | In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service
448
 Rather than focus on cultural differences with your customers—what you 
don’t have in common—look at what you do have in common. When you’re 
in a new environment, ask questions about how you should behave. Seek help 
in understanding your customer’s culture and the way things are done. 
 Develop an open culture that encourages feedback so that your employees, 
customers, and suppliers, wherever they may be located, will know their opin-
ions and ideas matter and are valued. Culture permeates all relationships. It’s 
not an afterthought. It’s a first thought. Exporters who work on their cultural 
skills will be able to offer more value to customers, be better colleagues, and 
triumph in the export marketplace.  
 Face Bad News or Bad Times Head On with Your 
Customers 
 Have you ever had to share bad news with a customer? I have. The best way to 
share disheartening news is to deliver it in the same fashion you would want 
to receive it: in person or, if distance is a problem, via a telephone call. If it’s 
by telephone, make sure you reach the person directly that needs to be told. 
Picking up the telephone to discuss the situation with your customer lets you 
reassure them that the situation can be resolved, and will be, and provides you 
with an opportunity to answer any questions or concerns they might have. 
The same holds true for an in-person visit. Just make sure you give your cus-
tomer plenty of time to meet, receive the information, react to it, and discuss. 
 If you handle a matter correctly, the customer will not remember that bad 
news was shared. They will remember that you were honest and forthright 
and kept them apprised of the state of the situation, even when it did not go 
according to plan.  
 Recommend Others for Your Customers When You 
Can’t Do the Job  Yourself  
 Ever have your customer ask you to do something that is out of your realm 
of expertise and you know just the company to fill the bill? A competitor. You 
might balk at that thought, but if a competitor you are on good terms with 
offers a fairly better product or service export offering than you do, and your 
customer’s success heavily depends on the quality of that product or service, 
then everyone is better off when you recommend the competitor. Nothing 
beats providing exceptional export service like a willingness to forgo short-
term gains for long-term success for all. 
 Make that kind of behavior your trademark and you will find your unselfish-
ness returned a hundred times over by way of becoming a trusted advisor to 
your customer and an honest, fair, and transparent company to your competi-
tor. New export business will follow.  

Exporting
449
 Create Meaningful and Compelling Product 
Offerings for Your Customer 
 Don’t become too proficient. You may be good at what you do, but are you 
churning out the same product time and again with minimal changes? Your 
customers don’t always want bigger and better or new and improved. They 
want breakthroughs. 
 To create meaningful and compelling product offerings for your customers, 
bring them into the conversation. Liberate them to speak up on what they 
want. It starts with asking for input. After all, you are seeking new approaches 
and variations on what you are currently exporting. There’s no better way to 
breakthroughs than to listen to your customers, see under the surface of what 
your customers really want, and then deliver on it.  
 Be Thankful and Show Appreciation for Your 
Customers 
 One last bonus philosophy that I know most of you already do: Thank a cus-
tomer for their business in person or via the telephone. Then follow up by 
expressing further sincere appreciation via e-mail. These are musts, absolutes, 
givens. Don’t miss a beat here.  
 If I were to sum up in one sentence how I approach my clients during and 
after a sale, it would be this: I provide the service, I’m interested, I care, and I 
will do my best to help.  
 The  Absence of Complaints  
 In the article “After the Sale Is Over ,” marketing professor Theodore Levitt 
says: “One of the surest signs of a bad or declining relationship is the absence 
of complaints from the customer. Nobody is ever that satisfied, especially not 
over an extended period of time. The customer is either not being candid or 
not being contacted. Probably both.”  v That said, treat customer complaints as 
a gift and an expectation that can now be met. 
 Delivering exceptional customer service is complex. That explains why there 
are very few businesses that make us look forward to every transaction we 
have with them. If you show some passion and enthusiasm for what you do, do 
what you do exceptionally well, and have fun, your customers will come back 
happy and with great gusto.  

Chapter 23 | In Pursuit of Exceptional Export Service
450
 Summary 
 In the final analysis, you must have the courage and strength to do what you 
know is right for the benefit of your customers. Adhering to key values plays 
a big role in differentiating your firm from someone else’s and can lead to a 
more effective management tool for a firm. 
 You must also constantly drive and evolve your business profitably and safely 
in today’s world. As you evolve and mature as an exporter, your customers and 
the market itself evolve and mature. Delivering superior customer service for 
your exports is the essential ingredient to profiting from the power of your 
customers and reflects a moment of truth for any high-performance, success-
ful organization. Great customer service is a collaborative effort among your 
employees, your suppliers, and your customers. If you are constantly asking 
your customers what they need and want, your employees can deliver the 
best. Do your best work and your exports will grow.  
 Notes 
  i.   Tom Peters,  Re-Imagine! Business Excellence in a Disruptive 
Age (New York: DK Publishing, 2003), 113 . 
  ii.   “Service to Our Customers,” Sam Walton, Walmart 
China,       http://www.wal-martchina.com/english/
service/aim.htm  .  
  iii.   A book on the success of Zappos was written by Tony 
Hsieh. It is called  Delivering Happiness: A Path to Profits, 
Passion, and Purpose (New York: Business Plus, 2010).  
 iv.   Howard Schultz and Dori Jones Yang,  Pour Your Heart into 
It: How Starbucks Built a Company One Cup At a Time (New 
York: Hyperion, 1997), 332 . 
  v.   Theodore Levitt, “After the Sale Is Over . . .,”  Harvard Business
Review , September 1983,    http://hbr.org/1983/09/
after-the-sale-is-over  .  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_24
 C H A P T E R 
 Cross-Cultural 
Learning 
 The Importance of Communicating with  Cultural 
Intelligence  
 Seventy percent of international ventures fail because of cultural 
differences. 
 —David Livermore, author, Leading with Cultural Intelligence  i 
 What does it mean to be a global worker and a true “citizen of the world” 
today? It goes beyond merely acknowledging cultural differences. In reality, 
it means you are able to adapt your behavior to conform to new cultural 
contexts without losing your authentic self in the process. 
 —Andy Molinsky, author, Global Dexterity  ii 
 Whether you realize it or not, thanks to the Internet, everyone is part of 
the global marketplace. Just look at the billion+ people who use Facebook 
worldwide. To thrive, all companies must develop a multicultural perspective, 
cultural intelligence, or  cultural literacy  . When exporting and using digital plat-
forms like Facebook to support those efforts, you must try your best to 
understand people, no matter where they are from. 
24

Chapter 24 | Cross-Cultural Learning
452
 In this chapter, I’ll discuss the elements of cross-cultural consciousness and 
how it can make or break your business success. I’ll also offer a short list of 
online resources, books, and intercultural tips to help you minimize embar-
rassments and misunderstandings so that your global negotiations proceed 
comfortably and productively. 
 
■ Tip  Don’t assume that a market is like America, even if it is an English-speaking country. Every 
country has its own cultural norms. Get culturally competent. It’s a critical element to success in 
the export marketplace. 
 What is culture? It’s how people learn, the way people do things, or how they 
share and interact with each other.  Culture affects  every part of daily life 
and makes up one’s social heritage. From a business standpoint, culture con-
sists of many components—language, social interactions, religion, education, 
and values, for example—that create diversity among peoples and influence 
our expectations of what is appropriate or inappropriate. For the aspiring 
exporter, recognizing cultural diversity is imperative. The greater your com-
mitment to expanding your cultural consciousness, the more comfortably and 
effectively you will function within business and social environments beyond 
your own borders. 
 Soon Ang  and  Linn van Dyne  define cultural intelligence— or  literacy—as “a 
person’s capacity for functioning effectively in situations characterized by cul-
tural diversity.”  iii In another instance, van Dyne, professor of management at 
the Eli Broad Graduate School of Management at Michigan State University, 
says: “Knowledge of your Cultural Intelligence provides insights about your 
capabilities to cope with multi-cultural situations, engage in cross-cultural 
interactions appropriately, and perform effectively in culturally diverse work 
groups.”  iv 
 If you want to derive the greatest personal and professional profit from your 
travels, your goal should be no less than to enter a different culture and engage 
successfully in cross-cultural interactions. This goes back to the global mindset 
I talked about in Chapter   1 : the ability to venture out in the world and adapt 
as you go. You must also have the propensity to learn and succeed in your 
endeavors. Don’t just go to another country, take care of business, and come 
home. Confront and welcome the differences and let them affect and alter 
you. International travel is one of the most exciting, memorable, and precious 
experiences that any of us will ever have. On-the-ground exposure to other 
cultures and other ways of doing things helps develop skills in dealing and 
working with people from other cultures. And you will enjoy the experience 
much, much more if you can cross your own mental borders to experience 
cultural diversity in the process. 

Exporting
453
 For the businessperson, selling a product or service overseas takes particular 
sensitivity to the values and concerns of overseas customers. International 
training, including language acquisition, is vital to building an optimal trade 
relationship in your target market. Things move very fast in the business world 
of the twenty-first century, so it’s best to learn at least the most fundamental 
social norms and basic grammar now—not later. Don’t wait for your product 
or service to take off—it will be too late! 
 
■ Note   While many customers, including myself, appreciate the consistency in service, quality 
and cleanliness of McDonald’s and Disneyland worldwide, local adaptation is not totally ruled out. 
McDonald’s, for example, now serves beer and wine in Europe and adapted the menu to local tastes. 
Disneyland Paris allows alcoholic beverages to be served within the park, at sit-down restaurants. 
Both companies are paying attention to cultural differences in order to satisfy customers. 
 Are You Culturally Aware? Test Yourself! 
 Here are some questions to ask yourself to see how well you know your 
prospective target  market  :
 1.  How do people typically dress there? Casual or formal? Dark 
or light clothing? Are any body parts to be covered at all 
times when out in public or when making business calls? 
Are there different norms of dress for men and women?  
 2.  What do body mannerisms convey? Are your customers’ 
arms always folded when discussing serious issues? Do 
they wave their hands a lot while talking? Do they avoid 
your eyes while speaking to you? Do they grin while you 
are telling them bad news?  
 3.  Do your customers expect you to accept all hospitable ges-
tures and participate in all group activities when visiting? If 
they ask you to join them for a smoke and you decline, 
will that mean no business? If they smoke and you make 
a big fuss, will that hurt business? If they offer you an 
alcoholic beverage before noon and before you’ve even 
started business discussions, what should you do?  
 4.  What about religious or political issues? Will your custom-
ers be flattered or offended if you partake in a religious 
ceremony when it is clear that you are not a practitioner 
of that particular faith? Should you go toe to toe with the 
head honcho in a political discussion or had you best just 
back off?  

Chapter 24 | Cross-Cultural Learning
454
 5.  What are the customs that are considered offensive? Your 
host cleans his teeth during dinner. Would his country-
men regard him as a vulgar clod? Should you do the 
same? Should you be shocked?  
 If you fumbled for answers to some of these questions, it’s time to culti-
vate some intercultural awareness. First of all, cultural ignorance sets you up 
for culture shock, which compounds the stress of international travel and 
deprives you of much of its pleasure. Second, culture is so subtle and perva-
sive that there is no way of estimating how your ignorance might impact your 
business. You will feel paralyzed and inept because you won’t dare to take any 
initiatives for fear of looking foolish and offending your customer. Why spend 
anxious hours wondering if something you said or did with a prospective 
overseas customer helped or hindered your efforts? The more you learn, the 
more freedom, mobility, and confidence you will have.  
 Get the  Global Edge  : Learn the Language! 
 Learning the language is arguably the best start you can make in your cultural 
training. Language acquisition gives a global marketer a definite edge in a new 
market by reducing the stress of cultural adjustment and increasing rapport 
with overseas associates. Language itself primes an individual’s cultural values 
and attitudes, which can affect behavior. It also empowers you by increasing 
awareness of what is happening during negotiations and by earning immediate 
respect from your hosts. 
 You’re probably asking yourself, “Must I learn a whole new foreign language 
before I can do international business?” Yes and no. Yes, it helps—the payoffs 
are incalculable. No, you don’t have to. But I have found that my most gratify-
ing and profitable business relationships have happened in those parts of the 
world where I’ve made an effort to study the language, learn the culture, read 
the national history, and visit in person as often as possible.  
 Resources for  Cultivating Cultural Awareness 
 You don’t need to go far off the beaten path to acquire the information you 
need to jump-start your cultural learning. Start with your bank. Many big inter-
national banks,  HSBC  for example (  https://globalconnections.hsbc.
com/global/en/tools-data/country-guides  ), offer country guides right 
on their site. Universities also offer a rich, in-depth pool of resources covering 
cross-cultural country insights. A good example: Michigan State University’s 
 globalEDGE  : 
  http://globaledge.msu.edu/global-insights/by/coun-
try  . Then start searching for what you are looking for on the Internet. After 
that, visit a store that specializes in world travel equipment and incidentals 

Exporting
455
(like   http://www.WorldTraveler.com ). They typically sell books, CDs, and 
digital recordings with which you can brief yourself on the economy, dress, 
cuisine, etiquette, and other vital statistics of just about any country in the 
world. Some specialize in lessons on what to do and what not to do when 
conducting business in specific foreign countries. 
 Travel bookstores ( Magellan’s  , for example:   http://www.magellans.com/
country_guides/country-guides  ); Amazon; and bookstore chains like 
Barnes and Noble usually have a respectable selection of sophisticated coun-
try-by-country travel guides. You’ll find more than enough to get you started. 
 I particularly recommend the following books:
• 
 Roger E. Axtell’s  Gestures: The Do’s and Taboos of Body 
Language Around the World (  1977 ) is a simple, amusing, 
and informative survival guide to understanding cultures 
other than your own.  
• 
 Dr. David Livermore’s  Leading with Cultural Intelligence: 
The New Secret to Success (  2009 ) provides solid academic 
research and years of experience on how to become 
more adept at managing across cultures. He’s also written 
 The Cultural Intelligence Difference: Master the One Skill You 
Can’t Do Without in Today’s Global Economy (2011), which is 
also worth a look.  
• 
 Axtell’s  Do’s and Taboos of Hosting International Visitors 
(  1990 ) is another good guide to everything from enter-
taining, to business protocol, to what overseas guests find 
peculiar about the American way.  
• 
 Terri Morrison and Wayne A. Conaway’s  Kiss, Bow, or Shake 
Hands (The Bestselling Guide to Doing Business in More than 
60 Countries) (2006) discusses cultural overviews, behav-
ior styles, negotiating techniques, protocol, and business 
practices in sixty countries. They also have books in the 
same series for Asia, Europe, and Latin America, and on 
sales and marketing. 
• 
 Jerome Dumetz and colleagues’  Cross-Cultural Management 
Textbook: Lessons from the World Leading Experts (2012) 
helps people develop the behaviors and skills necessary 
to adapt to a culturally diverse world.  
• 
 Meyer’s  The Culture Map: Breaking Through the Invisible 
Boundaries of Global Business (2014) helps you navigate 
through cultural differences and decode cultures foreign 
to your own.  

Chapter 24 | Cross-Cultural Learning
456
• 
 Smit’s  How to Overcome Cultural Differences in Business: 
Avoid the Mistakes that Everyone Else is Making When Doing 
Business Internationally (2014) is a practical guide to aid 
you in bridging the multicultural differences that you face 
when doing business across borders.  
• 
 Lewis’s  When Cultures Collide ,  3  rd   Edition: Leading Across 
Cultures (2005) discusses the need to consider cross-
cultural differences in managing any company in today's 
global world.  
• 
 Molinsky’s  Global Dexterity: How to Adapt Your Behavior 
Across Cultures Without Losing Yourself in the Process (2013) 
discusses how to adapt your behavior to conform to new 
cultural contexts without losing your authentic self in the 
process.  
 A few blogs on cross-cultural understanding worth a look:
• 
 The Culture Mastery (  http://theculturemastery.
com/blog/  )  
• 
 The Culture Prophecy (  http://dfaintercultural.
com/the-culture-prophecy/  )  
• 
 Cultural Detective Blog (  https://blog.culturalde-
tective.com  )  
• 
 Cross 
Culture 
(  http://www.crossculture.com/
category/blog/  )  
• 
 David Livermore: Global Thinker and Author (  http://
davidlivermore.com/blog/blog/  )  
 For more country-specific cultural information, you might also try the following 
online sites:
• 
 National Geographic (  http://www.nationalgeo-
graphic.com/  )  
• 
 Living Abroad (  http://www.livingabroad.com ) 
• 
 Lonely Planet (  http://www.lonelyplanet.com/usa ) 
• 
 Fodor’s Travel guides (Ireland’s guide, for example, can be 
found here: (  http://www.fodors.com/world/europe/
ireland  ) 
• 
 Export.gov “Travel and Tourism” (  http://export.gov/
industry/travel/  )  

Exporting
457
• 
 Central Intelligence Agency’s “World Factbook” (  https://
www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/docs/profileguide.html  ) offers information 
beyond a country’s culture, including on geography, the 
people, government, economy, and transportation.  
 
■ Tip  I use  National Geographic for quick cultural tips. Conduct a search for “cultural tips, Russia,” 
for example, and you’ll end up with a Russia guide (  http://travel.nationalgeographic.
com/travel/countries/russia-guide/  ). An alphabetical list of other guides can be 
found here:   http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/countries/  . They are 
wonderful! 
 Cross-Cultural Training  
 If you truly value cultural literacy and want to learn more and leverage that 
knowledge as a competitive advantage for your firm, you might consider par-
ticipating in a cross-cultural training program. A good program will address the 
very deep issues of the different ways in which people live their lives and how 
they see the world. These programs offer best thinking and best practices on 
conducting business in different countries, modifying your own behavior, and 
working confidently with cultural differences in a virtual context or face-to-
face meetings. 
 Although such training can be helpful, some experts find training may have 
more impact after a person has some firsthand experience to reference. Say 
you just started exporting to China, for example, and your key manager runs 
into communication problems not tied to a language barrier. They have more 
to do with a stylistic or behavioral issue on the part of the manager in that 
she likes to confront every detail in a conversation as if she’s trying to hit 
the ball out of the ballpark to score a home run, and this is too contentious 
for the Chinese communication style. After all, that’s how she is accustomed 
to behaving at the home office in the United States, and with much success. 
The Chinese, on the other hand, like to minimize provocation and keep com-
plaints or disagreements polite and discreet. That prods you to figure out how 
to keep the communications fluid and make a success out of your interac-
tion with this market. Dealing with the reality that something isn’t working 
prompts questions, and questions lead to solutions. 
 If you get stuck and have doubts about how to handle a particular situation in 
an overseas market, training might be your next step. Conduct a web search 
on “cross-cultural training” and several resources will come up, including web-
based training available at your convenience. The US Department of State offers 

Chapter 24 | Cross-Cultural Learning
458
a list of companies that offer cross-cultural training and consulting programs 
(  http://www.state.gov/m/fsi/tc/79756.htm ). Before participating, be sure 
to get references from people who have used these services successfully.  
 
■ Note  Cross-cultural differences don’t only apply to language. Culture impacts food choices 
(eating and well-being), design (viewed through a cultural filter formed by language), and religious 
beliefs (interpretation), for example. If you need help with any of these specific areas, conduct 
a web search using the words “cross-cultural ____________” (fill in the area—design, for 
example), and you will discover a wealth of information to guide you in your work. 
 Quick Intercultural  Tips  
 It’s unlikely you’ll be able to learn everything there is to know about any given 
overseas country, so I’ve constructed a list of quick tips to apply to interacting 
with all cultures. These tips are based on what a typical international traveler 
usually does wrong when trying to conduct global business. Keep these guide-
lines in mind and you will be a global chameleon:
• 
 Slow down! The rest of the world does not do business 
at lightning speed. Practice patience. This can actually be 
enjoyable if you are an American, because you probably 
don’t often get the chance!  
• 
 Decide by consensus and take your time arriving at one. 
Refrain from making unilateral decisions. The more opin-
ions and comments you can get from all parties involved, 
the more satisfactory your final decision will be. It’s always 
better if everyone feels like the decision was a consensus 
of the whole group, anyway.  
• 
 Show sincerity. Listen to what your customer is saying 
and be interested. Don’t be superficial—a plastic cheer-
leader smile won’t cut it. You are building a long-lasting 
relationship.  
• 
 Embrace the environment and its people to make it your own. 
• 
 Take a passive approach rather than an overly aggressive one. 
Go with the flow. Don’t arrive with an ironclad action 
plan geared toward achieving results within a week.  
• 
 Smile and communicate contagious enthusiasm. 
• 
 Develop a strong sense of self. This allows interaction with 
another person or culture without fear of losing one’s 
own identity.  

Exporting
459
• 
 Act ridiculously polite. Be forever trying to win them over 
with your humble, courteous manner. Too often people 
take an adversarial approach to business deals, as if the 
other party is one to be gotten the better of.  
• 
 Make on-the-spot attempts to learn the other party’s culture. 
Try to master some words and phrases of their language, 
ask about their history, observe their ways.  
• 
 Refrain from desiring instant feedback and the expecta-
tion of immediacy caused by the focus on time. Instead, 
demand richer, deeper interactions that fuel a lifelong 
relationship.  
• 
 When in doubt, get over your embarrassment and ask ques-
tions. Gather input to find solutions and to learn as much 
as you can. You have nothing to lose, and it shows them 
you care.  
• 
 Compromise when you should. Collaborate as needed. Be 
open to possibilities that may leave you feeling vulnerable, 
yet grow you as a human being and the relationship.  
• 
 Wear a pin or accessory that symbolizes a global perspective, 
not a national one. A symbol that represents world peace 
can only help.  
• 
 When you catch yourself being driven by an ingrained ethno-
centric attitude, pull it up out of your subconscious and take 
a good hard look at it. Remember that no matter how ill 
at ease you are, you should welcome every encounter 
with the unknown and unfamiliar as an opportunity to 
cultivate your global mindset (review Chapter   1 ). And 
expect to be ill at ease, because we all believe that what 
we are accustomed to is the natural order of things! This 
is why we need to keep a sense of humor about our own 
and others’ interpersonal missteps. Exercise tolerance 
and make good-faith efforts to bridge differences and find 
common ground.  
 
■ Caution   Not all exports will be successful. Understand how to deal with cultural differences 
concerning failure. What may seem like a failure to you and the end of a business relationship could 
be quite the opposite to a company in another market that perceives failure as a need to learn from 
it and start over. Resist walking away. There’s a point where it can only get better. The way to find 
out is to keep plugging away. 

Chapter 24 | Cross-Cultural Learning
460
 Cultural differences and quirks make our life rich, diverse, exciting, and 
unnerving—and in the fast-changing world of international business, they will 
play an increasingly important part in all our lives. How you deal with the dif-
ferences can make or break your business success. Your mastery of culture 
will enhance your competence in all areas of your international business—in 
coping with the simple logistics of living and getting around in another coun-
try, in establishing trust, in pacing negotiations, in knowing which gifts and 
gestures will please people of that nationality, and in knowing whether you’ve 
got a deal or not. There is no better way to understand the people who are 
going to buy or use your product twelve thousand miles away than by meeting 
them, literally or figuratively, on their own ground. Start getting ready for your 
cross-cultural encounter today.  
 A  Real-Life Example  of Learning Culture 
on the Fly 
 One of my most delightful and memorable encounters with another culture 
happened in my own hometown—in fact, practically in my own home. Some 
very dear Japanese friends, a gentleman and his two daughters, were staying 
in a guest suite next door to my apartment. We had spent several activity-
packed days together, but on the last morning before my friends were to 
return to Japan, we found we didn’t have enough time to go out for a proper 
leisurely breakfast. Naturally I hated the thought of just saying goodbye from 
the lobby and sending them off on their long, wearying flight overseas. So I got 
up early, boiled a huge kettle of rice and phoned them an hour before I knew 
they had to leave to see if I might help them with anything. My friend replied, 
“My daughters are complaining they are hungry.” I said I would be right over. 
I grabbed a carton of eggs, some butter, a frying pan, a bunch of chopsticks, 
and my kettle of rice. The latter was my contingency plan—I knew that Asians 
eat rice at every meal, but I frankly had no idea if the Japanese ate fried or 
scrambled eggs, for breakfast or otherwise! 
 I walked in and announced that I was going to make a quick American break-
fast of either an omelet or scrambled eggs. I don’t know if the girls even heard 
me, though—their eyes fell on that kettle of fresh steaming rice and their 
faces immediately lit up as if they had never been offered anything so delicious 
in their lives! Before I could say another word, they asked if I had soy sauce. 
Thanking my lucky stars that that Asian staple has been a familiar American 
grocery item for decades, I ran back to my apartment and grabbed my bottle 
from the refrigerator. By the time I returned, the girls had begun cracking raw 
eggs into the rice pan. Then they set the pan on the stove and slowly stirred 
in the egg, carefully adding just the right amount of soy sauce. Once done, we 
all happily dug in with the chopsticks. 

Exporting
461
 I had improvised the best I could, but I had no idea that I was offering my 
guests such a satisfying and familiar breakfast—or that I would find myself 
eating barely cooked eggs in rice with soy sauce! And to think that my friend 
asked if I had any relish to go along with it! Sometimes on cold winter morn-
ings I make this dish for breakfast and fondly remember my friends from over-
seas who shared it with  me . 
 The same thing will happen to you in the international marketplace. If you do 
your best to act with cultural sensitivity, value your own culture, learn about 
your associates’ culture, and then let them meet you halfway, you can build a 
cross-cultural bridge and achieve world-class excellence together.  
 Summary 
 You don’t want to show up to a meeting without preparing in advance. The 
same holds true for understanding other cultures. Don’t assume that a mar-
ket is like that in America. Even if you think it is (in Ireland, Australia, or the 
United Kingdom, for example), you don’t want to export or travel to it with-
out first learning everything you can about the culture. Whenever you feel you 
have underestimated the importance of cultural differences, come back to this 
chapter for a refresher. It will mean everything to your customers and might 
make or break your export business. Last, keep an open mind, be flexible, and 
place trust in your international business relationships, and encourage coop-
eration. Profitable exports will surely follow. 
 Now that you’ve mastered the basics in cross-cultural learning, you are ready 
to develop your moral compass, which intersects with intercultural intelli-
gence. Read on.  
 Notes 
  i.   David Livermore,  Leading with Cultural Intelligence: The New 
Secret to Success (New York: AMACOM, 2010), xiv . 
  ii.   Andy Molinsky,  Global Dexterity: How to Adapt Your Behavior 
Across Cultures without Losing Yourself in the Process (Harvard 
Business Review Press, 2013),   http://www.amazon.com/
Global-Dexterity-Behavior-Cultures-Yourself/
dp/1422187276  .  
 iii.   Soon Ang and Linn van Dyne,  Handbook of Cultural 
Intelligence: Theory, Measurement, and Application (Armonk, 
New York: M.E. Sharpe, 2008), 415 . 
 iv.   Linn Van Dyne, Linn van Dyne, [REPETITION OK 
HERE? –LP] “Cultural Intelligence (HQ),”   http://www. 
linnvandyne.com/cq.html  .  

P A R T
 The Export 
Journey 
 
VII

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_25
 C H A P T E R 
  Global Ethics 
 The Export World’s Rules on  Ethical Conduct  
 To build a truly great, global business, business leaders need to adopt a 
global standard of ethical practices. 
 — Bill George  , author, Harvard Business School professor, and 
former CEO of Medtronic  i 
 People with high levels of personal mastery . . . cannot afford to choose 
between reason and intuition, or head and heart, any more than they 
would choose to walk on one leg or see with one eye. 
 — Peter M. Senge  , American scientist, author, founding chairperson 
of the Society for Organizational Learning, and senior lecturer 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology  ii 
 Many people think of values as soft; to some they are usually unspoken. A 
South Seas island society uses the word mokita, which means, “the truth 
that everybody knows but nobody speaks.” 
 — Thomas Donaldson  , author and professor, Wharton School of the 
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia  iii 
 While conducting business across borders, companies need to be mindful of 
ethics and laws, especially as they relate to exporting. You will have to contend 
with different cultures, different rules and regulations of each country you 
plan to do business with, different perspectives, and different end goals. There 
are so-called right and wrong behaviors, and there are also gray behaviors, 
25

Chapter 25 | Global Ethics
466
which can make things complex. In this chapter, I’ll talk about the impact of 
unethical behavior such as bribes, unveil how sound ethics are our best 
competitive advantage in the digital global economy, and discuss why each of 
us must have a moral compass. 
 Unethical behavior can damage a business or take it down. Just look at Enron, 
WorldCom, Arthur Andersen and Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities 
LLC. US firms are restricted from bribery, yet bribery abroad is rampant and 
is a serious issue facing all exporters. 
 What is a  bribe ? A bribe is anything of significant value—including money—
given to someone who influences the individual to do something she 
wouldn’t ordinarily do had she not received the special treatment for her 
own benefit. What constitutes  bribery can vary from country to country, 
depending on local customs, values, and practices. But let me be perfectly 
clear about one point: If a US company offers a bribe, not only is it breaking 
the law; it is sending a signal that it can’t compete legally without illegal help. 
And that behavior typically starts with a cavalier attitude about the law. 
 In the case of an export business, bribes are sometimes made to foreign 
officials, foreign political parties, or candidates for foreign political office for 
the purpose of obtaining or retaining business. This is illegal and the penalties 
can be fierce. According to the  Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA)  , which 
affects every US company that does business outside the country, you can face 
large fines, prosecution and jail, and be barred from receiving US government 
contracts, for engaging in bribery.  iv 
 Whether you are a broker, sales agent, supplier, or exporter, the temptation 
to accept or give bribes (to move goods through ports faster, to get unions 
to unload ships, or to have customs officials turn a blind eye to sketchy docu-
mentation, for example) or act unethically exists in the pursuit of business. 
When any of these things is done with the understanding that payoffs could 
come later, that’s a bribe. In other words, when another party persuades you 
with the logic “Do it now and good things will follow—and probably under 
the table,” they’re tempting you with bribery. 
 Why the  FCPA ? 
 In 1977, Congress enacted the US Foreign Corrupt Practices Act ( FCPA  , or 
“the act”) in “response to revelations of widespread bribery of foreign officials 
by U.S. companies. The Act was intended to halt those corrupt practices, cre-
ate a level playing field for honest businesses, and restore public confidence in 
the integrity of the marketplace.”  v 
 Congress said this when drafting the FCPA: “The payment of bribes to influence 
the acts or decisions of foreign officials, foreign political parties or candidates 
for foreign political office is unethical. It is counter to the moral expectations 

Exporting
467
and values of the American public. But not only is it unethical, it is bad business 
as well. It erodes public confidence in the integrity of the free market system. 
It short-circuits the marketplace by directing business to those companies 
too inefficient to compete in terms of price, quality or service, or too lazy to 
engage in honest salesmanship, or too intent upon unloading marginal products. 
In short, it rewards corruption instead of efficiency and puts pressure on 
ethical enterprises to lower their standards or risk losing business.”  vi 
 The bottom line: FCPA rules apply to all companies, irrespective of size, and 
its terms are not negotiable. As a small business exporter, even though you 
may lack the time, human resource capabilities, legal expertise, or financial 
resources to meet overseas regulatory requirements, you must still have an 
effective compliance program and measure in place. What’s worse is that 
criminal penalties may impact a small business exporter at a far greater 
magnitude than they do a large business, because the fines imposed will make 
up a larger proportion of the small business exporter’s earnings.  
 How Poor  Ethics  Plays Out 
 Here’s how poor ethics can play out, and don’t think for a second these sce-
narios do not apply to you as a small business exporter! In any company, you 
or one of your people could be tempted do one of these things to increase 
or expedite  business :
• 
 Make a call to get an export delivery sped up, and if it 
is done, in return you could offer a prestigious club 
membership to the organization controlling the port, 
trucking lines, or what have you  
• 
 Make improper payments through your intermediaries 
(wholesalers or sales agents, for example) to foreign 
government officials to win business in India, China, and 
Russia  
• 
 Fail to prevent a sales agent or importing wholesaler from 
taking the performance-based bonuses you gave them 
as gifts and secretly using them to make unauthorized 
payments to governmental officials in Korea  
• 
 Pay routine bribes, referred to as “flowers,” to Argentinian 
officials in order to obtain lucrative sales contracts with 
government hospitals  
• 
 Make illicit payments to a US government veterinarian 
responsible for certifying your American company’s beef 
products for export sales  
• 
 Accept improper payments made by employees at your UK 
subsidiary to food industry officials in the United Kingdom  

Chapter 25 | Global Ethics
468
 Ethical Ground  Rules  
 So how do you avoid or handle bribery temptations and disputes in the first 
place? It gets back to your company culture, vision, and shared values. Ask 
yourself this:  What’s your gold standard for the way people should behave in pur-
suit of export business? 
 Not only should you define this standar, but  you should develop guidelines and 
procedures around it, implement a training program for all levels of world-
wide business to quickly address red-flag temptations, get involved, and have a 
process in place to investigate and address any reports of misconduct. This is 
done to stay within the law. 
 
■ Tip  Explore the  International Business Ethics Institute (  http://business-ethics.org/  ) 
to help you develop a global business ethics and integrity program and try  World Citizens Guide 
(  http://www.worldcitizensguide.org/ ) to brush up on becoming a better global citizen. 
 Beyond developing your standard, offer an open two-way dialogue with your 
employees about your ethical policy, enforce it rigorously with practical con-
versations having to do with real-world situations, and seek feedback. As 
Angus Loten of Inc.com says, “Making employees feel secure enough to raise 
concerns is a key factor in creating an ethical workplace.”  vii Drive the message 
home until it sticks. Make sure everyone involved in the company, regardless 
of where they are located, applies the culture of integrity (trust, credibility, 
etc.) in discussing both their private and public lives so there are no murky 
areas. And there should be no exceptions to the policy—not even for star 
performers! 
 Who Should Be in Charge of a Gold Standard Code 
of Ethics? 
 In “How to Avoid Bribes  in International Business,” published by About.com, 
I write:
 Designate someone at the top . . . to be responsible for FCPA 
compliance and be accountable for the FCPA program. This should be 
an individual who stays at the pulse of all international activities and is 
not necessarily top legal counsel (small firms typically don’t have their 
own in-house legal representation so it shouldn’t be an issue) or the 
president. The designated person can work in tandem with the top 
legal inside or outside counsel and president, but he/she should also 
have the ability to act on his/her own, be capable of making sound 
moral judgments and demonstrate prudent ethical decisiveness.  viii  

Exporting
469
 The bottom line: Engage someone—maybe it’s you—to take charge of writ-
ing guidelines and upholding strict ethical standards throughout the entire 
organization. You want to investigate any red flags and remediate where neces-
sary. “Applying ‘situation ethics’ in developing countries is the fastest way to 
destroy a global organization. To sustain their success, companies must follow 
the same standards of business conduct in Shanghai, Mumbai, Kiev, and Riyadh 
as in Chicago,” says author, Harvard Business School professor, and former 
CEO of Medtronic Bill George.  ix 
 My suggestion is to use US federal law, including the FCPA, as a baseline for 
determining appropriate behavior and as a model for your own country’s 
value structure, and apply those things to your dealings with all countries. And 
always, always, explicitly state your ethical guidelines so people know what to 
expect. Then be consistent with your actions. 
 
■ Tip  Including FCPA terms in every single one of your contracts allows you to steer clear of 
bribery trouble and to exemplify that you intend to do clean, transparent international business. This 
can be as simple as stating: “Export Company ABC will not tolerate corruption with either our foreign 
partners or our own sales staff.” Also incorporate a statement in the agreement you have with agents 
or distributors that acknowledges that both parties (seller and buyer) recognize the existence of the 
FCPA and will honor its rules and regulations by not making any improper payments or performing 
other such conduct. Incorporate the ability to terminate the agreement should your partner ever be in 
violation of the FCPA. Consult with your attorney to ensure you’ve done everything right.  
 There are other ways in the export field to easily, and unintentionally, break 
the law. 
 
■ Note   When someone has broken the law, even if unknowingly, it can still be a matter of legal 
dispute whether that person knew or was aware of the matter. 
 The next sections detail a few areas to be aware of when it comes to getting 
into ethical trouble and that it is important for the person in charge of your 
ethics program to write into your guidelines.  
 Travel Act 
 The  Travel Act  involves traveling around or using the mail system to violate a law. 
TA “prohibits traveling between states or countries or using an interstate facility 
in aid of any crime, and carries a 5-year jail sentence for most offenses.”  x To avoid 
violating the Travel Act, don’t pay bribes to officers or employees of companies 
you are conducting business with in other countries to obtain or retain  business  . 

Chapter 25 | Global Ethics
470
 Money Laundering  
 Trade-based  money laundering   consists of concealing and disguising proceeds, 
usually via wire fraud, false or double-invoicing, or over- or underinvoicing 
goods that are exported regularly around the world. A good portion of money 
that has been laundered is moved out of the country through undervalued 
exports (to move money out) or overvalued exports (to move money in). 
Buyers and sellers agree on a price and so as long as the price is not unrealis-
tic, the chances that customs officials will detect suspicious activity by bankers, 
brokers, or law enforcement officials are slim. Hence, the opportunity to earn, 
move, and store proceeds disguised as legitimate trade becomes a small business 
exporter’s new alternative remittance system. To avoid money laundering, 
don’t let financial complacency creep into your financial methods: follow the 
money trail from beginning to end, match up your exports to imports, and 
obey the law.  
 Mail and Wire Fraud 
 Mail and wire fraud  happens when someone knowingly executes or 
attempts to execute a scheme via mail or wire communication to defraud 
another for the purpose of obtaining money or property. To illustrate how 
this works, let’s say,  for   example, you export products to an importing 
wholesaler in Vietnam. Per the instructions of the wholesaler, you send 
money by wire to an off-the-books bank account in the market that the 
company controls. Out of that account, illegal commissions and kickbacks 
are paid to local or contiguous country officials but disguised as trade 
allowances, distribution costs, trade show expenses, refunds, or other 
seemingly legitimate expenses.   
 Tax Violations 
 Tax violations   can be anything from taking illegal tax deductions for bribes 
to declaring false sales commissions. When exporting, failing to pay income 
taxes on the amounts you owe, especially as they pertain to foreign-earned 
income, can result in severe penalties (costly fines and imprisonment, for 
example) and other major sacrifices down the road, including reputational 
consequences. Many governments, that of the United States for one, are 
increasing taxes and stepping up tax enforcement for exports. The solu-
tion: Get the help you need from an international tax accountant, have 
open and frank conversations about  all your money-making export activi-
ties with him, and honestly and willingly report and pay what you owe 
in taxes. This allows you to manage and anticipate potential tax risks on 
export activities.  

Exporting
471
 Certification and Reporting Violations 
 Producing a  false  certification—whether it be an Electronic Export Information 
(EEI), an export license, a health certificate, a claim made to the Export-Import 
Bank for a direct loan or loan guarantee—may give rise to criminal liability for 
manufacturing a false statement. Don’t do it. You should enforce a zero toler-
ance policy on any deviation from total truth, transparency, and accuracy. A case 
in point: In 2007, the Disciplinary Committee of the Royal College of Veterinary 
Surgeons (RCVS) concluded that an Oxfordshire-based veterinary surgeon should 
be removed from the RCVS Register on the basis of disgraceful professional con-
duct. According to the RCVS, “John Williams of the Avonvale Veterinary Practice in 
Ratley, near Banbury, admitted signing export health certificates for three horses 
in October 2006 to state that they had received negative test results for the con-
tagious equine metritis organism, before these results were actually available. At 
the time, Mr Williams was working in his capacity as an Official Veterinarian (OV) 
for DEFRA.”  xi In a nutshell, never  ever provide a false certification (forged docu-
mentation, for example), and  never bribe people to provide one either. 
 
■ Tip  For more information on the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, download the free 130-page 
guide  A Resource Guide to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act from   http://www.sec.gov/
spotlight/fcpa/fcpa-resource-guide.pdf  . For more information on the actual act, 
download the ten-page report  Foreign Corrupt Practices and Domestic and Foreign Investment 
Improved Disclosure Acts of 1977  from   http://www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa/
history/1977/senaterpt-95-114.pdf  . 
 The Honest Export Business 
 So, what is an honest export business? It’s one that uses its moral compass as 
a guide to be as truthful, accurate, and transparent as possible in its dealings 
and one that maintains a high level of standards in everything it  does  . 
 
■ Tip  To brush up on procedures concerning enforcement actions and learn how to fully comply, 
see the Security and Exchange Commission’s  Enforcement Manual at   http://www.sec.gov/
divisions/enforce/enforcementmanual.pdf  . To learn the basics on what small legal 
departments need to be aware of to stay FCPA compliant, see the “Top Ten Basics of Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act Compliance for the Small Legal Department” at   http://www.acc.com/
legalresources/publications/topten/SLD-FCPA-Compliance.cfm  . To assess the level 
of some of the more  corrupt countries   in the developing world, see “These are the 18 most corrupt 
countries in the developed world” at   http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/these-
are-the-18-most-corrupt-countries-in-the-developed-world-a7066391.html  .  

Chapter 25 | Global Ethics
472
 Rules and Regulations of Each Country 
 A subdivision of the US Department of  Commerce’s  International Trade 
Administration, the Trade Compliance Center, in its issuance of policies 
on bribery (  http://tcc.export.gov/Bribery/index.asp ), is the US 
Government’s key source of monitoring foreign compliance with trade agree-
ments to see that US firms and workers get the maximum benefits from 
these agreements. The center also provides access to information to help 
US exporters understand and evaluate opportunities created by trade agree-
ments that the United States has negotiated. Additionally, the  WTO   offers the 
 Trade Policy Reviews (TPR;   http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/tpr_e/
tp_rep_e.htm  ), which are fully searchable market-access reports with infor-
mation on foreign trade policies and regulations. To ensure you are current, 
spend some time reviewing these. 
 
■ Tip  Don’t let your employees get conflicted between their values as individuals and the 
compromises they think they must make for your organization. Spell out what you expect and hold 
steady to it. Incorporate your ethical policy into your overall business strategy. 
 Learn More About Bribes and  Corruption  
 The following key resources will help get you up to speed on bribery and 
corruption issues and  help  you create an ethics policy for your company:
 1.  Top Ten Basics of Foreign Corrupt Practices Act Compliance 
for the Small Legal Department : (  http://www.acc.com/
legalresources/publications/topten/SLD-FCPA-
Compliance.cfm  ). This document provides ten points 
small legal departments need to be aware of to stay FCPA 
compliant.  
 2.  The United States Department of Justice’s information on the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act : (  http://www.justice.gov/
criminal/fraud/fcpa/  ). The Department of Justice 
offers several ways to contact the office to get informa-
tion on the FCPA. The FCPA helps you to protect your 
business and reputation and to understand what the law 
and regulation requires of you. It can also help you iden-
tify the customers who are a higher risk.  
 3.  Trade Compliance Center : (  http://tcc.export.gov/
Bribery/index.asp  ). Run by the US Department of 
Commerce’s International Trade Administration, the 
Trade Compliance Center offers a “Bribery” page on its 

Exporting
473
Web site covering trade agreements between the United 
States and other countries and international conventions 
devoted to combating bribery and corruption.  
 4.   Documents related to the OECD’s Bribery in International 
Business conference : (  http://www.oecd.org/daf/anti-
bribery/oecdantibriberyconvention.htm  ). 
Held 
by the Organization of Economic Cooperation and 
Development, this conference provides cutting-edge 
measures for governments and businesses to combat 
corruption. Many of the statements and information pro-
vided at the conference are available for download at  the 
 OECD’s Web site. As the OECD says, “Corruption knows 
no boundaries, or border …”  xii 
 5.  The FCPA Blog : (  http://www.fcpablog.com ). Pro busi-
ness and pro compliance, The Foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act blog provides free and unrestricted coverage of 
all things related to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
enforcement actions. It can help you understand how 
corruption happens, what it does to people and compa-
nies, and how anti-corruption laws and compliance pro-
grams work.  
 6.  Transparency International : (  http://www.transparency.
org  ). Transparency International works together with 
governments, businesses, and citizens to stop the abuse 
of power, bribery, and secret deals.  
 
■ Caution   If you run up against a problematic country with continual ethical dilemmas, pull out. 
Why jeopardize your company’s stellar reputation? 
 Summary 
 Payoffs  , bribes, or  gifts should never ever be a means to accomplishing your 
business goals. Reputations are the lifeblood of organizations. Ethical deficien-
cies can put the entire reputation of a company at risk. One mistake can ruin a 
company overnight. To overcome the potential for ethical misconduct, promote 
a two-way conversation with your employees on the importance of keeping 
ethics in check. Draw a line in all ethical areas that no one can overstep, clearly 
defining the violations in each matter. Set a zero tolerance policy for behavior 
deviations that are not in sync with the company’s culture. And keep your moral 
compass top of mind at all times to accommodate cultural differences that you 
may not understand. This will allow you to not sell yourself short—or out. 

Chapter 25 | Global Ethics
474
Global business ethics are an ongoing effort and need to be instilled in people. 
We most certainly must work together to protect our companies, our employ-
ees, and our constituency base. 
 In the next chapter, I address international travel. Before you pack your bags, 
learn the dos and don’ts of traveling abroad.  
 Notes 
  i.   Bill George, “Ethics Must Be Global, Not Local,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek , February 12, 2008,  http://www.
businessweek.com/stories/2008-02-12/ethics-
must-be-global-not-localbusinessweek-business-
news-stock-market-and-financial-advice  .  
  ii.   Peter Senge,  The Fifth Discipline (New York: Doubleday, 
2006), 157 . 
 iii.   Thomas Donaldson, “Values in Tension: Ethics Away From 
Home,” Harvard Business Review, September-October 
1996, accessed June 5, 2016,   https://hbr.org/1996/09/
values-in-tension-ethics-away-from-home  . 
 iv.   “Foreign 
Corrupt 
Practices Act,” 
United 
States 
Department of Justice, accessed June 5, 2016,   http://
www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa/  . 
  v.   The Criminal Division of the US Department of Justice 
and the Enforcement Division of the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission,  FCPA: A Resource Guide to the 
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act , November 14, 2012, accessed 
June 5, 2016,     http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/fcpa/
fcpa-resource-guide.pdf  .  
 vi.  Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United 
States Senate,  Foreign Corrupt Practices and Domestic and 
Foreign Investment Improved Disclosure Acts of 1977 , May 2, 
1977,   http://www.justice.gov/criminal/fraud/fcpa/
history/1977/senaterpt-95-114.pdf  .  
 vii.   Angus Loten, “What Enron Didn’t Teach Us,” Inc.com,
January 1,  2008,      http://www.inc.com/articles/2008/01/
ethics.html  .  

Exporting
475
 viii.   “How to Avoid Bribes in International Business: Brush Up 
on the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act,” Laurel Delaney, 
About.com: Import & Export, accessed November 
5,2013,   http://importexport.about.com/od/
RegulationsOfForeignTrade/a/How-To-Avoid-
Bribes-In-International-Business.htm  . 
 ix.   Bill George, “Ethics Must Be Global, Not Local,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek , February 12, 2008,    http://www.
businessweek.com/stories/2008-02-12/ethics-
must-be-global-not-localbusinessweek-busi-
ness-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice  . 
 x.   “Travel Act Bribery Cases Made Simple,” accessed 
November 
5, 
2013, 
  http://www.fcpablog.com/
blog/2011/12/19/travel-act-bribery-cases-
made-simple.html  .  
 xi.   “Oxon Vet Struck Off For False Export Certification,” 
RCVS, November 16, 2007,     http://www.rcvs.org.uk/
news-and-events/news/oxon-vet-struck-off-for-
false-export-certification/  . 
 xii.   Roberto A. Ferdman, “How the World’s Biggest 
Companies Bribe Foreign Governments – in 11 Charts,” 
 The Washington Post, December 3, 2014, accessed June 5, 
2016.  

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_26
 C H A P T E R 
 International 
Business Travel 
and Security Tips 
 What does it mean to pre-board? Do you get on before you get on? 
 —the late George Carlin, comedian 
 Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by the things you 
didn’t do than by the ones you did do. So throw off the bowlines, sail away 
from the safe harbor. Catch the trade winds in your sails. Explore. Dream. 
Discover. 
 —Mark Twain, American author and humorist 
 As a woman I have no country. As a woman my country is the whole world. 
 —Virginia Woolf, English writer  
 As a fearless exporter, you must be prepared to boldly go where you have 
never gone before! At the beginning of your export venture, and to help save 
money, you might use e-mail, Skype, Google+, or Apple’s FaceTime for con-
versations with your international customers. But at some point, a face-to-
face meeting with them is absolutely essential to cement a quality  business 
26

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
478
relationship.  The practical aspects of international business travel can make 
or break your trip. Use this chapter as a checklist of the details you’ll want to 
attend to in order to have a safe, comfortable, and productive journey. 
 Sweating the Details Comes with the  Global 
Territory  
 Before we get to the checklist, I want to share the following experience with 
you. This story proves the importance of having an open mind (it gets back to 
that global mindset I talked about in Chapter   1 ), remaining flexible, and being 
adaptable as you navigate through an uncharted export marketplace. 
 The first time I had to travel from my hotel in Tokyo to a customer’s office 
a few miles away, I got a little more of an adventure than I bargained for. 
Clutching the phone in my four-by-four–foot hotel room, I listened as my 
customer gave me directions for getting from my hotel to his office via Japan’s 
intricate  subway system  . I didn’t have the heart to tell him I couldn’t follow 
his rapid-fire Japanese English to save my life. Besides, my customer seemed 
to have such a flattering confidence in my ability to conduct myself like an 
old pro that I was unwilling to give him cause to change his opinion, and so I 
didn’t ask him to repeat himself. In this situation, a normal person would have 
just jumped in a cab, given the driver the address, and felt assured of getting 
there cool, collected, and on time. But when I travel, I always keep two central 
objectives firmly in mind: (a) growing as a person and (b) saving money, and 
not necessarily in that order. So, I decided to take a chance on the subway. I 
figured the worst thing that could happen was that I might go a bit astray and 
have to flag down a cab after all. So I closed the conversation by saying brightly, 
“I understand, no problem! I’ll see you at 3 p.m.!” 
 Then, I flew straight down to the concierge’s desk, showed her my customer’s 
address, and asked her to tell me in English how to get there via the subway 
system. She carefully mapped out the directions and patiently reviewed them 
with me, and once I thought I understood what she was explaining, I asked 
her to write it all down again in Japanese. That way, if I got lost and had to ask 
someone for help, I could just show him the piece of paper. 
 Well, it worked. I arrived at my customer’s subway stop just in time—only to 
find that I was by no means done sweating the details. It was a hot and humid 
day. I got up to the street level, already rather worn and rumpled from the trip, 
and instantly felt beads of sweat begin to crawl down my neck. Before long, I 
could feel thick strands of my hair sticking to my damp face. Just exactly the 
sort of first impression every businessperson wants to make! I looked around 
for my customer, and lo and behold, there he was standing next to his sporty 
little motor scooter that had enough room, just barely, for another person. 
He greeted me with a firm handshake and a broad smile, gestured to his bike 
and asked, “Do you mind?” 

Exporting
479
 “Of course not!” I said, smiling just as broadly, and hopped on, skirt, pumps, 
and all. What else was there to do? 
 Welcome to the world of international business travel. If there’s one thing you 
can expect, it’s the unexpected. The more prepared you are for the predict-
able demands, stresses, and pitfalls of travel beyond your borders, the more 
grounded and confident you’ll feel when the unexpected happens. 
 The trip I just described took place in the 1990s, when traveling felt far safer. 
Since September 11, 2001, however, our world of domestic and international 
travel has changed. Terrorism and other criminal activities are a fact of life in 
our interconnected world. To combat threats, one must become knowledge-
able of what’s going on in the world, have a heightened awareness of her sur-
roundings, and develop a personal-security competence sufficient to dissuade 
potential assailants. Crime can affect anyone, almost anywhere. The prevention 
starts with creating protective strategies to ensure that your international 
travel is safe, comfortable, and productive . 
 
■ Tip  Tap into powerful new apps that are available for international travelers and your travel 
experience can seem like a walk in the park (see “3 Must Have Apps for  Global Travelers :”   http://
importexport.about.com/od/GlobalResourceCenter/fl/3-Must-Have-Apps-for-
Global-Travelers.htm  ) 
 Scouting Out the Territory Before You Leave 
 An excellent way to start planning your overseas trip is to surf the Internet, 
preferably well in advance of your departure date. The Internet is an incredibly 
useful tool for finding out everything from the weather to the local currency 
exchange rate in the country you are about to visit. Three particularly handy 
sites you’ll want to check out are:
 1.  Travel.State.Gov : (  https://travel.state.gov/content/
passports/en/alertswarnings.html  ). A service of the 
Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel.State.Gov’s Travel Alerts 
are issued by the US Department of State to publicize 
conditions that make a country dangerous or unstable. 
They are what are used by the State Department to rec-
ommend that Americans avoid or consider the risk of 
travel to a certain country. The site also provides tips on 
traveling abroad and information on passports and visas 
to help make your travel more enjoyable and profitable.  

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
480
 2.  Foreign & Commonwealth Office :   (  http://www.fco.gov.
uk/en/  ). Featured on the GOV.uk site, the FCO is an 
organization that sponsors an international network of 
embassies and consulates. Its site offsets the conserva-
tism of Travel.State.Gov by giving you a balanced picture 
of what’s really happening in a country. The FCO provides 
useful information for countries throughout the world 
(  https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice  ). 
For 
example, you can find a country by clicking on its region on 
a map or by using an A–Z country name selection process.  
 3.  Smart Traveler Enrollment Program (STEP) : (  https://step.
state.gov/step/  ). STEP is a free service to allow U.S. 
citizens and nationals traveling abroad to enroll their 
trip with the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate. It also 
then sends out travel and security updates about your 
destination.  
 
■ Note  When you are unsure of the real safety level of traveling to a foreign country, it helps 
enormously to contact officials who are on the ground in a country. Reach out to the US Commercial 
Service for information. A case in point: Recently, when a colleague of mine was debating whether 
to travel to Egypt, I e-mailed the commercial consular at the Foreign Commercial Service in Egypt 
for her and inquired about the safety conditions in the country. She responded within five hours 
with a helpful report. My colleague and I then compared the consular’s report with the information 
on the Travel.State.Gov and the British Foreign & Commonwealth Office sites. Based on our careful 
examination of all the different alerts and updates, my colleague was able to make an intelligent 
decision as to whether she could travel safely to Egypt. 
 For help you can’t get online, cover the following checklist:
 1.  Go over all the  logistics   of your trip with your travel agent. 
These include ticketing, hotels, arrival and departure 
times, ground transportation, baggage handling, currency 
adjustments, health precautions, and possible language 
barriers. Discuss whether you need to get any insurance 
coverage before you depart. If your US health care plan 
does not cover you overseas, consider buying supple-
mental insurance to cover medical costs and emergency 
evacuation. Ask for a map of the town center or urban 
area where you will be staying. If your agent doesn’t have 
one, you can ask your hotel concierge upon arrival or 
check the local phone directory or tourist guide in your 
room if there is one.  

Exporting
481
 2.  Share your itinerary. It is always prudent to share your 
itinerary with family, friends, and co-workers. It is good 
for people to know where you are in case you have an 
emergency or they do. And don’t forget to stay in touch 
throughout your trip.  
 3.   Learn the local culture. Spend some time brushing up on 
local culture and customs. You never know when being up 
on news might be helpful in your conversations and travels.  
 4.  Call your  bank’s international department   and ask for a short 
lesson, or perhaps a brochure, on your country of destination’s 
currency and how the various bills and coins relate to one 
another . 
 5.   Ask the US Department of State about passport, visa, and 
immunization requirements . Allow at least eight weeks for 
processing the documents, especially if you are going to 
be traveling during a peak tourist season. Immunizations 
can cause some lingering pain and discomfort, so if sev-
eral immunizations are required, allow time for them to 
be administered in stages rather than all at once.  
 6.  Check with the  US Embassy  (  http://www.usembassy.
gov/  ) on the holiday schedule and regular business hours for 
the country you are about to visit . This will affect your access 
to stores, services, and public transportation.  
 7.   Find out about the usual  climate  of the country you are about 
to visit as well as the weather forecast for the time of your trip 
by consulting your travel agent or an international newspaper . 
Take these things into consideration when packing.  
 8.   Contact your local Chamber of Commerce for a directory of 
your country’s government offices throughout the world . If the 
directory is pocketable, bring it along, or, if it is available 
online,  bookmark  it for later use. Many US government 
offices have more than one branch in each country. For 
example, the Department of State has five different office 
locations in Japan (refer to   http://www.state.gov/p/
eap/ci/ja/c3122.htm  ). You could end up visiting all of 
them online! This is because, in the United States, there is 
a separate directory of the key officers at foreign-service 
posts American business executives would most likely 
need to contact. The directory lists all embassies, mis-
sions, consulates general, and consulates. Each of their 
commercial officers will probably arrange appointments 
with local businesses and government officers and also 
identify potential importers, buyers, agents, distributors, 

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
482
and cross-border partners for your business. It may also 
be worthwhile to pay a visit to administrative officers 
who are responsible for normal business operations 
and agricultural officers who promote the export of US 
agricultural products. You should contact these offices in 
advance to schedule a visit. Explain the purpose of your 
visit so they can set you up with the appropriate officer.  
 9.   Prepare for the time and weather change. Take note of the 
time change and what time you will arrive. Once you know, 
try adjusting your sleep patterns slightly to accommodate 
your new arrival time. Determine what the weather will 
be upon arrival and dress accordingly.  
  10.   Install on your mobile phone your destination maps, local 
guides, and transportation apps. These will come in handy 
when you hit the ground running in your new locale.  
 
■ Tip  Get e-mails and telephone numbers of key officers at embassies, consulates, and foreign 
service posts located in the country you plan to visit in case you have any type of emergency, 
including a medical one. Should you suddenly get sick where you can’t leave your bed, nothing is 
more comforting then knowing help is just a phone call or e-mail away. 
 11.  Finally, sit down with pen and paper and review your itinerary 
yourself . Envision yourself going through each day of your 
trip. Whom will you meet? Where will you need to be each 
day and at what times? How will you get there? What will 
you need to wear? What will you need to bring to each 
appointment? How much money will you need for your 
daily expenses? Then, based on this activity schedule, list 
all the items you think are important enough to bring. If 
no one, such as a bell captain, taxi driver, or limo attendant, 
will be available to assist you upon arrival in a remote part 
of the world, will you be able to handle the amount of lug-
gage you will have? This consideration will encourage you 
to pack what you need—and only what you need.  
 Packing Smart 
 I wish someone would have intervened and set me straight when I planned 
my first business trip overseas. Because I was going so far from home, my 
 natural impulse  was to bring everything I could possibly imagine needing, so 
naturally I ended up with much, much more stuff than I could possibly use. This 
excess baggage burdened me both physically and mentally throughout the trip. 

Exporting
483
I remember literally dragging my overstuffed garment bag, hard overnight case, 
and cumbersome attaché case (yes, we had attaché cases back then), dreading 
the thought of the next hotel move—the third within a week—when I would 
have to pack up and haul everything all over again. I came close to  ditching 
possessions   that proved useless, except I knew I’d need them when I got 
home. I vowed not to make the same mistake again. 
 
■ Tip  Many airports not only conduct the full body scan before you head to your airline gate, but 
also can request to open your carry-on luggage to discuss suspicious items. Pack light. Pack neatly.  
 The next section contains some essentials for a one-week business trip, includ-
ing wardrobe, accessories, and documents. Needed items will naturally vary 
according to the type of trip you are making and the activities to which you’ve 
committed yourself. If it seems highly unlikely that you’ll be partaking in any 
given activity, for example, athletic recreation or formal evening outings, don’t 
bother to pack garments  appropriate   for that activity “just in case.” And don’t 
make the opposite mistake of omitting essential items, such as business attire, 
on the presumption that you’ll be able to buy whatever you need when you 
arrive. You are on a business trip, not a shopping spree—and you might find that 
you don’t have time. Equip yourself so you arrive ready to conduct business. 
 
■ Note   For creative and high-tech people, some of these packing considerations may not apply. 
Crisp and neat business casual, for example, is popular in the United States but not necessarily in 
other parts of the world. Wherever you plan to travel, do your research in advance, dress the part, 
and pack accordingly. The point is to be who you are and dress with style and authority. 
 One-Week Packing  Checklist  
 Here are my suggestions on what you should pack for a  weeklong business 
trip :
• 
 Your passport and visa, if required, plus additional photo iden-
tification in case these items are lost or stolen : I always make 
a copy of my  passport  and place it in a different piece of 
luggage or even in my bra—depending on whether the 
country I am going to is a known trouble spot.  
• 
 Three good  suits : For men, basic businesswear solids—in 
charcoal or navy blue—are generally preferred within the 
worldwide business culture. Women should also choose 

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
484
clearly coordinated suits (pants or slightly below-the-
knee skirts) in these subdued shades, with more feminine 
tailoring. I don’t recommend pinstripes for women, as 
many international businessmen think they look too mas-
culine; rather you should go with a leaner, meaner power 
suit with slimmer sleeves and more flattering lines. Keep 
your shoes on the conservative side, too. Men should 
wear shoes with laces—loafers look too casual. Women 
should wear low-heeled pumps with a closed toe.  
• 
 Eight shirts or blouses : Men should stick to white or light-
blue shirts, while women can add off-white and other 
pastel colors as well. Tapered cuts and button-down col-
lars are acceptable for men; women can wear soft suit 
shells and blouses in richer textures like satin or silk. You 
should stay away from thin and see-through materials. 
The shells and blouses should complement or add some 
color under your suit. Avoid low necklines at all costs—
they are distracting and simply not businesslike.  
• 
 For women, a good supply of stockings : International sizes 
and textures of  stockings  can vary greatly from what 
you’re used to buying back home, and you may find them 
neither comfortable nor attractive. You won’t want to 
waste valuable business time finding acceptable fit by trial 
and error.  
• 
 One complete outfit of “ play clothes ” if you and your associ-
ates are booked for sightseeing or other outdoor recreation : 
Such clothes consist of casual slacks (never jeans!), a 
short- or long-sleeved collared shirt, and good walking 
shoes. This attire will be suitable for all but extremely 
hot climates; if you happen to be going to one, tailored 
walking shorts and a thin short-sleeved cotton shirt with 
a collar along with good-quality sandals would be consid-
ered acceptable.  
• 
 A  super-compact umbrella  and a classic lightweight rain or 
all-weather coat: A good coat is suitable for damp, cool, 
or variable climates. (Burberry’s coats are the most com-
monplace in international business circles.)  
• 
 Business essentials :   These consist of a smart phone with 
international service, a tablet, a laptop, a computer 
adapter for any presentation that requires a projector 
connection (commonly needed for Apple computers), 

Exporting
485
an international charger, a portable travel lock for hotel 
doors, plenty of business cards (put them in several dif-
ferent locations in case you lose a bag), courtesy gifts, 
sales and marketing information, and any other items that 
might be required in your specific situation.  
• 
 Health-related items : Such items include aspirin, cough 
drops, eye drops, flu remedies, stomach aides, antihista-
mines, tea bags, vitamin pills (if you usually take them), and 
any other medicine you need to maintain good health.  
• 
 Incidentals  (keep them to a minimum) : These might be a 
portable electric converter, a USB flash drive, a stand-
alone digital camera, a high-security money belt, and a 
bilingual dictionary (it can’t hurt!).  
 Making Your Hotel Work for You 
 Good accommodations are worth shopping around for. You want your stay to 
be comfortable as well as efficient from a business standpoint. Here are some 
things to consider when choosing a hotel:  
• 
 Location : Map out your appointments and activities and 
find a hotel from which you can access them all without 
too much difficulty. You’ll also want easy access to public 
transportation, shopping, restaurants, and entertainment. 
But be careful not to position yourself in a very “happen-
ing” area where it’s crowded, overly expensive, and hard 
to get around. Make business your priority—that’s why 
you’re there—and plan accordingly.  
• 
 Business travelers’ rooms and suites : The accommodations 
in the hotel room where you choose to stay should be 
as precisely worked on as the work you will do there, 
providing a peaceful  refuge but also allowing you to keep 
in touch with associates, family, and world news. Reserve 
a room that offers at least enough table or desk space to 
spread out your papers and hold your digital equipment, 
electrical outlets that are placed conveniently and will 
accept your converter, and sufficient lighting to enable 
you to go over paperwork and attend to your appear-
ance. Any reputable hotel will have a television with a 
variety of cable offerings so that you can relax and sample 
local mass culture. The newest and best hotels offer guest 
suites that include a separate room furnished with a large 
console table and mobile writing desk, with power 

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
486
outlets and a modem jack easily accessible in the console 
top, a movable task light, and an adjustable, ergonomically 
designed upholstered chair. Some even offer a kitchen 
area for those who want all the conveniences of home, 
so that they needn’t interrupt their business by having to 
get food outside.  
• 
 Business centers :  Absolutely essential for the savvy busi-
ness traveler, many hotels offer business centers on the 
premises that are equipped with computers, fax machines, 
voicemail systems, and copiers, and are staffed by multi-
lingual receptionists. Most have e-mail capabilities, video 
conferencing, and daily business papers available for read-
ing and keeping abreast of what is going in the world. 
Many of the individual features can be rented by the hour, 
day, or month, or even indefinitely. These business center 
services are offered in addition to Wi-Fi capabilities in 
every room (whether complimentary or for a flat, per-
day rate).  
• 
 Miscellaneous conveniences : The bigger hotels offer coffee 
shops, restaurants, and bars on-site. You may prefer to 
eat at outside restaurants, especially if you’re going to a 
city known for its fine dining, but for impromptu business 
meetings, the hotel’s facilities often have admirable appear-
ances and can serve as convenient, comfortable sites.  
 Surviving the Flight 
 Every time I’m due to board a plane going overseas, I grab just about every 
magazine at the newsstand so I’ll be occupied for as much of the trip as pos-
sible. When you’re traveling internationally, it can be a lo-o-o-o-ng flight, and 
boredom can be the least of your worries. By setting up a few preliminary 
requirements, you can guarantee yourself a certain level of comfort and mini-
mize your travel fatigue:  
• 
 Expedited screening at the   airport : The Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA) protects our transporta-
tion systems to “ensure freedom of movement for people 
and commerce.”  i You can become eligible for expedited 
screening through TSA Pre √ (  http://www.tsa.gov/
tsa-precheck  ) by signing up through selective airlines 
(not all participate—be sure to check) or by applying 
directly to US  Custom Border Patrol’s (CBP)  Global 
Entry 
Program 
(  http://www.globalentry.gov/ ). 
Through the program, a passenger’s “information will be 

Exporting
487
embedded in the barcode of a passenger’s boarding pass” 
to ensure rapid clearance for preapproved travelers.  ii You 
can also save time by using your airline mobile app to 
check in and get a mobile boarding pass.  
• 
 Window, middle, or aisle seat :   This is a choice you’ll be mak-
ing if, like most economical travelers, you’re flying coach. 
A naive or youthful traveler will pick the window seat, 
so he can look out of it. This may prove disappointing if 
the weather clouds over and you are forced to squeeze 
past two sets of knees to get to the restroom. The win-
dow seat offers a nice solid surface to park your pillow 
against, but that’s about it (don’t forget to bring your spe-
cial travel or bed pillow if it helps you sleep better). The 
middle seat usually ends up being occupied by a person 
who didn’t give the issue any thought or by the signifi-
cant other of a window or aisle seat holder. The aisle seat 
is for those who, like myself, have flown over the ocean 
too many times to want to look at it and who want the 
option of standing up and walking around at will. You’ll be 
much less stiff and sore at the end of the trip if you book 
the aisle seat.  
• 
 Economy or business class : Economy class offers standard 
seating that reclines slightly; a fold-down table; an in-flight 
movie; snacks; complimentary nonalcoholic beverages; 
and in-flight, duty-free shopping. Business class provides 
special privileges like a nifty ticket holder; bag tags; prior-
ity baggage check-in and boarding; entrance to the airline’s 
club; special extra-large seats (some being lie-flat seats) in 
a separate cabin; electronic headsets; meal service con-
sisting of several courses of gourmet food; brand-name 
complimentary beverages; and a case of practical ameni-
ties containing mouthwash, lip balm, moisturizing lotion, 
socks, and facial tissues. 
• 
 First-class service   offers all the same privileges as busi-
ness class and then some, including: highest boarding pri-
ority, a complete seven-course meal that can be better 
than the fare at most four-star restaurants accompanied 
by the finest in brand name beverages, personalized ser-
vice during the flight, sleeper seats that can be adjusted 
horizontally, and concierge service at the airport for 
personal business assistance. First class is the way to go 
when you have an ample budget. So, if you can afford it, 
book it. Once you do, you will find it’s the most luxuri-
ous and pleasurable way to travel long distances. Second 

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
488
best is business class—not as expensive as first class but 
nearly as comfortable. Not all airlines make the distinc-
tion between first and business class any longer, so check. 
All airlines have restrictions on economy and discount 
fares, so be sure to inquire.  
• 
 Reading   material  and music : If you can’t sleep on planes, 
you’ll need something to occupy your mind (an old-fash-
ioned printed book or a Kindle, Nook, or iPad)—this also 
discourages the determinedly friendly chatterbox next 
to you! Make your in-flight reading selection do double 
duty—choose an informative and entertaining e-book 
about the country you are about to visit to educate your-
self and product- or company-specific reading to catch 
up on everything there is to know about your customer.   
• 
 A variety of music is always available for free on flights—
the same holds true for movies and special programs—
yet with apps such as Pandora or TuneIn Radio uploaded 
onto your digital device and a good set of earplugs, you 
can be off in your own little jazz, rock, or classical music 
world until you land at your destination.  
• 
 Quiet section : If you like a quieter seat on a plane, be sure 
to request a seat as far away as possible from the plane 
engine but near the exit area (these exist just below the 
wings, near or in the tail—ask the airline before you book 
your flight; the kitchen; or close the the lavatory areas 
(in the front, middle, and tail of the plane).  Even the best 
noise-reduction headphones or earplugs can’t eliminate 
the distraction of people constantly standing next to you 
in your seat, so it’s important to stake out the quiet areas. 
It’s too long a flight to be stuck in a situation you can’t 
tolerate!  
 
■ Tip  To really tune out what’s going on during your plane journey, use earplugs and eye masks 
for sleeping. Just remember that when you put them on, you’ll miss any important announcements 
or suspicious behavior. 
• 
 Refreshments : Although we all like to relax and unwind 
on what seems like an  endless journey, do be careful of 
excessive alcohol intake—it causes dehydration, acts as a 
depressant, and causes your body to retain water. Even if 
you don’t consume alcohol, you may experience painful 

Exporting
489
swollen feet from sitting for prolonged periods of time. 
That’s why some airlines distribute packages of dispos-
able slipper socks—because so many passengers end up 
wanting to remove their shoes. Keep yourself hydrated 
with natural refreshments, like water or juice. And again, 
get up and walk.  
 Managing Your Money 
 Most international travelers  know  that they should have enough of their own 
currency on hand to get from their home to their final destination and back 
again, plus enough extra to pay for a meal should there be a serious flight delay. 
In addition, check with your travel agent and bank as to where you can get the 
best rates of exchange on the currency you’ll be using upon arrival. Convert 
enough money to last you a few days. Keep these usual expenses in mind when 
figuring out the amount of cash you will need to make it to your hotel:
 1.  Transportation costs  from overseas airport to your hotel 
via airport shuttle or taxi.  
 2.  Tips for  baggage handlers   at the airport and at your hotel.  
 3.  Baggage transport fees   from the airport to your hotel 
(paying for your bags to be transported for you elimi-
nates the chore of handling it by yourself altogether and 
oftentimes requires payment in advance).  
 4.  Gifts you purchase at the overseas airport shops, often 
because you ran out of time to shop before leaving home.  
 5.  One night’s stay at your hotel. You want to plan to have 
enough currency or traveler’s checks to pay for staying 
one night at a hotel and to stash it somewhere other than 
your wallet. Most people pay their hotel bills by credit 
card, but if you lose your wallet you’ll be glad you kept 
extra money somewhere else in case of emergency—
especially on that critical first night when you arrive 
fatigued and jet-lagged and really need the rest.  
 There are many ways to pay for goods and services while traveling overseas: 
in cash; using the local currency; or by credit cards, traveler’s checks, and debit 
cards. Before you leave home, call your credit card financial institution to ask if 
your credit cards are widely accepted in your country of destination and to let 
them know you will be traveling abroad so they won’t think a charge is suspi-
cious behavior and freeze your card. That’s a surprise you don’t need. At the 
same time, ask for the locations of  international ATMs  . Unless the machines 
are a part of your card’s network, you can’t use them!  

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
490
 And don’t forget to activate the global  features  on your cell phone before 
you depart on your international trip! Roaming without an additional 
charge is not a default feature and can lead to extra costs. Consider buy-
ing a special data package and insert its SIM card into the phone. These are 
called prepaid international SIM cards. In some instances, you can order 
a SIM card ahead of time so you can get it before your trip or have it 
delivered to your hotel. Also, if you are on a tight budget, never make 
phone calls to your home or office from your hotel room. Having the hotel 
operator connect you while you stretch out on your bed is the height of 
comfort and convenience, but it’s an expense the thrifty exporter will 
want to avoid. Instead, sign up with an international discount telephone 
service and use public telephones. It’s less efficient, but it can save you a 
bundle—the call that costs US$10 from a pay phone can run you as much 
as US$50 from your room! Keep that in mind.  
 
■ Tip  Many international hotels offer complimentary Wi-Fi service. Inquire. In lieu of a phone 
call, you can e-mail people at your home office from your laptop to let them know you arrived 
safe and sound or report on other important matters. Download some of the free communication 
services such as WhatsApp, the data-based app for messaging and calling, or in China, the 
messaging app WeChat. Skype or Apple’s FaceTime can be alternative ways to contact people 
using your laptop.  
 Security Tips 
 International   travel should be an enjoyable and enriching experience, but don’t 
leave your street smarts at home! As a tourist, you are a prime target for 
crime. Criminals and con artists of all kinds know that you are likely to be 
carrying significant quantities of money and valuables and that you are likely to 
be naive, bewildered, and distracted. Don’t be a victim. Here are some major 
precautions you should take when traveling, sightseeing, or conducting busi-
ness overseas:
• 
 Protect your   money . Never keep all your money in one 
place while traveling internationally. When boarding your 
flight, hide your payment resources in a variety of places: 
in your carry-on bag, inside your breast pocket, in your 
money belt, in your bra, wherever it feels comfortable 
and least likely to be stolen while you are distracted or 
sleeping. After arrival, take your cash, checks, and credit 
cards with you when you leave your hotel room or lock 
them up in the hotel safe.  

Exporting
491
 
■ Tip  Some savvy international business travelers carry a fake wallet along with their real wallet. 
The fake wallet serves as the detour for robbers. Load it with $30 or $40 (consisting of singles, a five, 
and a twenty), photos of strangers or someone else’s baby, and expired credit cards. If an assailant 
targets you, don’t resist. Turn over the fake wallet. This will avoid a situation going from bad to worse.  
• 
 Pay attention to your belongings when taking   pictures . 
 Never set your purse, tote, or briefcase down next to 
you to photograph some spectacular sight. While you’re 
absorbed in getting that perfect shot, someone can snatch 
your stuff. I have seen this happen in my own hometown 
with international guests! We couldn’t run fast enough to 
catch the culprit, and even if we could have, it would have 
been dangerous to try to apprehend the person without 
police assistance. Be careful. And it goes without saying: 
never set your smart phone down anywhere unattended 
or ask a stranger to use your smart phone to take a pic-
ture of you and your companions. Some people can run 
faster than a speeding bullet, and you don’t want to take 
the chance of witnessing it as they dash off with your 
smart phone. 
 
■ Tip  Two fantastic pamphlets,  Managing Travel Risks (  http://www.chubb.com/businesses/
csi/chubb2205.pdf  ) and  Managing Terrorism Risks (  http://www.chubb.com/businesses/
csi/chubb2206.pdf  ), produced by the  Chubb Group of Insurance Companies should be read by 
everyone who plans to travel to minimize a wide array of risks. 
• 
 Be careful about talking with strangers . Always be on guard 
when approached by  strangers.   They may be genuinely 
helpful and hospitable locals or they may be tourists like 
yourself needing a little assistance, but they may also be 
smooth professional thieves. Pickpockets often work 
in teams. One will get your attention and engage you 
in conversation while her counterpart proceeds to dig 
through your handbag, pocketbook, or briefcase. Keep 
your belongings close to you and minimize lengthy con-
versations when you are approached by a group, espe-
cially when they look and act suspicious.  

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
492
• 
 Find out which locations are the most safe . Always ask your 
local business associates or hotel concierge which neigh-
borhoods or districts should be avoided, especially if you 
are traveling alone.  
• 
 Be aware of  scams . Don’t fall prey to con artists that offer 
you special deals. For example, people may approach you 
and offer to take your picture for a price, only you never 
receive the photo, or offer to drive you somewhere at a 
bargain fare, only you find out later that it cost you five 
times the normal cab rate. Anytime someone comes up 
to you with an aggressive sales pitch and you are uncer-
tain of their truthfulness or decency, walk away from him 
fast. Keep a degree of healthy skepticism. Ask your host 
or local contacts about what is legitimate and acceptable 
behavior in the country you are visiting.  
• 
 Carry your local contact information, US embassy or US 
Consulate and emergency phone numbers with you in English 
and the local language . 
• 
 Be cautious about what you drink . The safest choice of  bever-
ages   while traveling internationally is bottled water, where 
you recognize the brand and can open it yourself. Be extra 
careful of all beverages served in public places where you 
are unfamiliar with the people. In particular, be careful of 
your consumption of alcohol while traveling internation-
ally. Alcoholic beverages can easily be tampered with while 
you’re not looking. Further, watch how much you drink 
because you may not know your limits (especially when 
factoring in time zone and altitude changes).  
• 
 Carry or wear personal high-value  items  in discreet places . 
If you carry a shoulder bag or laptop computer, wear it 
on the side opposite to where all the traffic is. You want 
to avoid a bicyclist or motorcyclist grabbing and running 
off with your precious commodity. When traveling on a 
bus or train or in a taxi, wear a minimum of expensive 
jewelry and carry as few expensive tech items as pos-
sible. You don’t want to stand out as an easy theft target. 
And speaking of taxis, only hire taxis from a regular cab 
service and never let a taxi driver encourage you to sit in 
the front seat alone or add strangers to your taxi ride—
even if it will save you money. You don’t know her motive. 
Don’t take the chance.  
• 
 Use a tracking software to locate your devices in case they’re 
lost or stolen. 

Exporting
493
 Health Tips  
 Accidents and illness can happen anywhere and may be more likely to happen 
while traveling internationally. Whether you sprain an ankle, experience the 
sudden onset of a toothache, or suffer a bad case of Montezuma’s revenge 
(better known as traveler’s diarrhea), you want to know you can get adequate 
medical care fast. 
 In traveling, what constitutes a serious health risk? The most important 
determinant of a health risk is your destination. “All travelers should famil-
iarize themselves with conditions at their destination that could affect their 
health (high altitude or pollution, types of medical facilities, required immu-
nizations, availability of required pharmaceuticals, etc.),” advises the US 
Department of State.  iii High-risk destinations include developing countries 
in Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. Additional risk factors 
include known risks such as a recent outbreak of influenza (check the World 
Health Organization’s Web site for any recent outbreaks of infectious dis-
eases abroad:   http://www.who.int/en/ ) or something as simple as think-
ing it was perfectly safe to drink hotel tap water in a developing country, for 
example. 
 What should you do if you are struck with an unexpected illness and need 
help? Contact your  hotel concierge  ,  the local American Embassy (  http://
www.usembassy.gov/  ), or, provided you are already a member, a company 
such as International SOS (  https://www.internationalsos.com/en/ ) or 
the Ackerman Group through the Chubb Corporation (  http://www.acker-
mangroup.com/index.php  ). Before you go, however, you might want to con-
sider getting a health insurance policy (check the US Department of State’s 
Medical Insurance providers at   https://travel.state.gov/content/
passports/en/go/health/insurance-providers.html  ) designed specifi-
cally to cover international travel. 
 International SOS   is an international healthcare, medical assistance, and secu-
rity services company that provides solutions that help people wherever they 
live or travel, 24/7. Once a member, you can contact ISOS’s nearest assistance 
center regarding any emergency you encounter while traveling (  http://
internationalsos.com/en/emergencies.htm  ) by selecting the country 
you are in and simply clicking “Go.” ISOS also offers a variety of member-
ship plans—comprehensive, medical, security, project, or simply a member-
ship that covers your next trip. Fees vary, so be sure to inquire. Members get 
pretravel information and advice, a fast response, emergency help, evacuation 
capabilities, and more. Optional medical and travel insurance is also available. 
According to ISOS, “Whether you are concerned about finding a qualified 
doctor, obtaining accurate security advice, or getting travel  assistance  for lost 
documents or airline tickets, ISOS can help in these and other worrisome 
situations.”  iv 

Chapter 26 | International Business Travel and Security Tips
494
 The  Ackerman Group  is best known for a broad range of security and 
investigative-related issues,   with the emphasis always being on prevention. It 
works in conjunction with the insurance giant Chubb Group of Insurance 
Companies to produce its kidnap/ransom policy geared more toward publicly 
traded companies. Chubb says, “Extortion, crime, and political instability are 
facts of life that corporate leaders must deal with when transacting business 
in an increasingly global, and unfortunately, hostile environment.”  v 
 While traveling, above all, trust your instincts, be alert at all times, keep moving 
toward your destination, and don’t let yourself be deterred from going about 
your business.  
 What Women Want While Traveling for  Business  
 Today, women make up nearly half of all business travelers—and that number 
will surely increase thanks to the number of women in the workforce and 
starting businesses. Up until now, I made a point not to distinguish between 
businessmen and businesswomen in regard to international travel because 
they are similar. But there are subtle differences. 
 I have a message for the travel industry, and hotels in particular. Women, more 
than men, want safe, super-clean rooms with high-end toiletries and hair dry-
ers and complete access to what they may need along their journey: a curling 
iron, illuminated and magnified makeup mirror, a swimsuit, a bathrobe that fits, 
extra hangers, razors, a yoga mat, inexpensive nickel-free earrings (pierced 
or clips), socks, hose, Vaseline, hairspray, and Q-tips, for example. All of these 
items need to be available to women either on loan or for purchase. In addi-
tion, women like lighter fare when it comes to food, particularly when arriving 
late at night. Hotels that provide a holistic, good-for-you approach to food will 
win more women for their facility. And women want tech amenities that work, 
and when they don’t work they want 24/7 support. These are the perks that 
women want when they travel for business. 
 What women in particular need to watch out for while traveling internationally 
is walking around alone after dark in foreign countries where they are unfamil-
iar with the area, particularly in developing countries. Don’t take a chance. If an 
area is questionable, hire a driver assigned by your hotel concierge to take you 
to where you want to go. If it’s late and you are hungry, order room service or 
order food recommended by the hotel to be delivered to your room . 
 
■ Tip  Stay away from rooms that are on the ground floor. You don’t want to make it easy for 
someone to break in. Rather, choose a hotel room that is several floors up but not so high up that 
should you need to jump (in the case of a fire, for example), you won’t survive. 

Exporting
495
 Summary 
 Perhaps the most important things you can take with you on your  interna-
tional travel  s are patience, enough money, and a sense of humor. Operations 
that are relatively simple at home, like catching a bus across town, can seem 
overwhelming, complicated, and uncertain when you’re off your native turf. 
You feel like you will never get to your destination, you’re never sure if you’re 
on the right bus, and you don’t know if the bus is going in the right direction. 
When you ask people for help, they either don’t speak your language or tell 
you things exactly backward. But if you keep your head up and persist, you’ll 
get everywhere you need to go and accomplish what you came for. And after-
ward, you’ll probably feel that the journey was far more valuable than most 
other things you’ve done in life thus far. 
 At some point, international business travel is essential to cement a qual-
ity business relationship—and the practical aspects of international business 
travel can make or break the success of your trip. To ensure you have a safe 
trip, do your homework before you leave home and keep a heightened aware-
ness throughout your trip. 
 Between one-quarter and one-third of the world’s businesses are owned by 
women—they are a new breed of globetrotters and a key driver of competi-
tiveness. That’s what I am going to discuss in the next chapter.  
 Notes 
  i.   “About TSA,” accessed June 10, 2016,   http://www.tsa.
gov/about-tsa  .  
  ii.   “TSA Preü FAQs,” Transportation Security Administration, 
last modified October 25, 2013, accessed June 5, 2016, 
  https://www.tsa.gov/tsa-precheck/faq . 
  iii.   “Medical Care,” United States Department of State, 
Bureau of Education and Cultural Affairs Exchange 
Programs, accessed June 5, 2016,   https://exchanges.
state.gov/us/medical-care  .  
  iv.   “Get a Quote: Worldwide Reach, Human Touch,” 
International SOS, accessed June 10, 2016,   http://
buymembership.internationalsos.com/  . 
  v.   “Executive Protection Portfolio Kidnap/Ransom & Extortion 
Insurance,” Chubb Group of Insurance Companies, accessed 
June 10, 2016,   http://www.chubb.com/ . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_27
 C H A P T E R 
 Women Business 
Owners: Engine 
of Global Growth 
 A New Breed of  Globe-Trotters  Take On the 
World  
 Women must try to do things as men have tried. When they fail, their 
failure must be but a challenge to others. 
 — Amelia Earhart  , the first woman to cross the Atlantic by plane 
and the first female pilot to make solo transatlantic and 
transpacific flights  i 
 But for those as yet unknown women to distinguish themselves, we as a 
society need to create an environment where anything is possible for all 
women and girls. We celebrate achievement, but we make achievement 
possible with opportunity. 
 —Donna Brazile, CNN contributor and a Democratic strategist  ii 
27

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
498
 I want to start this chapter with the fact that women drive the world econ-
omy and then share a story that relates to  businesswomen  in the world mar-
ketplace. Forty years ago, Harvard Professor Theodore  Levitt   was conducting 
a case discussion in his marketing class about a person’s rise in the workplace. 
The fact that the person in this particular case was a woman was disguised to 
the students, who were predominantly men. After a long brainstorming dis-
cussion, Professor Levitt finally told the class that the protagonist in the case 
was a woman: “Boys, you’d better wake up now, because there are going to 
be more and more women in management, and they’re going to have an edge. 
You fellows are going to be so competitive with each other that the thought of 
collaboration [with women] is never going to cross your minds. Women will 
come in willing and able and ready, and you’re going to lose.”  iii 
 Let’s face it: “Women . . . really and truly do rule!” as put by my colleagues Tom 
Peters  and Marti Barletta.  iv If you pretend they are invisible, look again: for the 
first time in history a woman, Hillary Clinton, clinches nomination, presump-
tively, of a major party for president of the United States in 2016. Women are 
dynamic, cutting-edge players in the current age of entrepreneurship (or even 
politics), beating the odds, epitomizing bootstrap success, and becoming an 
engine of economic growth. They represent a growth market more than twice 
as big as China and India combined and control $20 trillion in global consumer 
spending, own or operate in the US between 25-33% of all private businesses, 
and earn an estimated $13 trillion.  v 
 Women need to be recognized for who they are, what they do, and how signif-
icantly they impact the  global economy.   To maximize their complete business 
potential, women need help in expanding internationally. This notion is not 
just that it’s good for business but that it’s good for the global economy—and 
citizens of the world are finally waking up to it. “[Big businesses are] funda-
mentally seeing that entrepreneurs, women especially, are really the key to our 
global and sustainable future,” says entrepreneur, investor, and media person-
ality Ingrid Vanderveldt.  vi Make no mistake, these  globe-trotting women  are 
not leaning in, as Sheryl Sandberg says in her book  Lean In: Women, Work, and 
the Will to Lead ;  vii they are leaping in by choice. As Babson Professor Candida 
Brush says, “It is impossible to be an entrepreneur by leaning—you have to 
commit, take risks and take action.”  viii Surely, and I speak from experience, 
leaping in is a vital prerequisite to entering the export marketplace. 
 According to the  OPEN Forum, American Express  ,  there are more than 9.4 
million women-owned businesses in the United States alone, generating nearly 
$1.5 trillion annually in revenues and employing more than 7.9 million people.  ix 
It is no secret as to why there are more and more women starting businesses 
in America. In early 2003, I wrote an article called “ Escape from Corporate 
America  ” for  Across the Board , the magazine of the Conference Board.  x In it, 
I talked about the reasons why women were abandoning corporate America 
to strike out on their own. Many of the inspiring women business owners 

Exporting
499
mentioned in the article—Sara Blakely,  who opened the body-shaper company 
Spanx (  http://www.spanx.com ) and Maxine Clark,  who began Build-a-Bear 
Workshop (  http://www.buildabear.com/ ), for example—have successfully 
expanded their businesses internationally. How? By having what is required 
to take on the world. It’s not just good collaboration skills that have brought 
them this far. It’s a slew of other great characteristics that women possess, 
such as being more risk averse (i.e., less likely to throw the dice on making a 
decision); being more sensitive to losses; being less prone to toot their own 
horn (putting the other person first); being more prone to emphasis; and hav-
ing a tendency to take a long-term view on business matters. 
 In this chapter, one that is dear to my heart, I’ll address the state of women 
business owners, their impact on the world economy, and the issues that 
confront women business owners who are actively exporting or planning to 
engage in global trade. I’ll also address the special characteristics women bring 
to the international business table, how those characteristics can be used 
as a competitive tool in export business, and how women can succeed in 
exporting. 
 Women Take On the World  
 The timing has never been better for businesswomen to get out of their 
own backyards and transition from local, regional, or niche-market players 
into global players. According to the  Global Entrepreneurship  Monitor ’s (GEM’s) 
Special Report Women’s Entrepreneurship:   2015,  xi in which entrepreneurial 
activity in 83 economies around the world is monitored, globally, women play 
a major role in driving the world economy, controlling about $20 trillion in 
annual consumer spending, a number expected to rise to nearly $28 trillion in 
the next five years. In GEM’s 2012 report, it indicated there are more than 126 
million women entrepreneurs worldwide. An estimated 98 million women are 
running established businesses—which are ripe for growth through exporting. 
In countries surveyed for the 2015 report—Suriname, Barbados, and Kuwait, 
for example, —women exhibit higher rates of entrepreneurial intention than 
men. The GEM report also indicates that economies with high female labor-
force participation rates are more resilient and experience slowdowns of eco-
nomic growth less often..   
 Between one-quarter and one-third of the world’s businesses are now owned 
by women. According to the Global Entrepreneurship and Development 
Institute ( GEDI ) The Female Entrepreneurship Index (FEI), in 2015, the top 
ten countries for female entrepreneurs are as follows:  xii 

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
500
 The top ten countries for female entrepreneurs 
 Rank 
 Country 
 Score 
 1 
 United States 
 82.9 
 2 
 Australia 
 74.8 
 3 
 United Kingdom 
 70.6 
 4 
 Denmark 
 69.7 
 5 
 Netherlands 
 69.3 
 6 
 France 
 68.8 
 7 
 Iceland 
 68.0 
 8 
 Sweden 
 66.7 
 9 
 Finland 
 66.4 
 10 
 Norway 
 66.3 
 Despite the fact that the global market presents a huge opportunity for women 
to advance their careers and impact the world of business, “in 2014, only 13 
percent of the more than nine million US women-owned firms exported. But 
the women-owned businesses that did export had a lot to be proud of: aver-
age receipts for women-owned exporting firms were $14.5 million compared 
with $117,036 for women-owned nonexporting firms.  xiii 
 The data doesn’t stop there. Here’s more from the latest available US Census 
Bureau’s  Ownership Characteristics of Classifiable U.S. Exporting Firms: Survey of 
Business Owners Special Report on the impact exporting has on  women-owned 
firms: 
• 
 Women-owned, nonexporting firms employ on average 
8 employees; the comparable number for women-owned 
exporting employer firms was 42.  
• 
 Women-owned, nonexporter’s average productivity (i.e., 
receipts per employee) was $107,288; the comparable 
calculation for women-owned employer exporters was 
$389,757.  xiv 
 It is evident that  t hrough export activities, women-owned firms grow more 
rapidly, hire more people, create more jobs, and are more productive. Just 
like sports, exporting can also be a major confidence builder for women, and 
confidence, even being overly confident, is what women need at all stages of 
business growth.  

Exporting
501
 
■ Tip  For a look at the best and worst countries for women’s employment, based on benchmarked 
gender gaps in economic, political, and education- and health-based criteria, download the  World 
Economic Forum ’s  2015  Global Gender Gap Report (  http://reports.weforum.org/global-
gender-gap-report-2015/  ). The United States ranks number twenty-eight out of 145 
countries, which collectively contain more than 90 percent of the world’s population. The report is 
a collaborative effort by experts from Harvard University, the University of California, Berkeley, and 
the World Economic Forum. 
 Women-owned businesses  offer a promising opportunity to increase 
American export activity. Yet, women owners of export-oriented small- and 
medium-sized businesses ( SMEs )  face unique challenges and opportunities, 
many of which begin at the start-up stage of a business. To help eliminate those 
challenges, government policy makers have tailored initiatives and programs 
in their respective countries to best serve women entrepreneurs. The Gem 
report outlines two of these programs—one that targets initiatives that pro-
vide women entrepreneurs with equal access to opportunities, as suppliers of 
goods and services worldwide, and the other program, designing educational 
and training programs for women entrepreneurs that go beyond the start-up 
stage and focus on growth (through exporting, for example). 
 
■ Tip  For a bird’s eye view on what challenges and opportunities women business owners face 
around the world, download the fone-hundred fifty-nine-page  Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 
2015 Special Women’s Report at   http://gemconsortium.org/report/49281  . 
 Issues Confronting Women Business Owners 
Who Currently Export or Plan to Export 
 In early 2012, the State Department’s Bureau of International Information 
Programs asked me to write an article called “ Women Entrepreneurs Energize 
Economies  . ” In it, I talk about my experience in starting and running a global 
business. The key point I make not only applies to starting a business but 
also to exporting: “To gain self-confidence and overcome inhibiting social atti-
tudes, women need to network continuously, support each other, look for 
role models, update their knowledge and skills as well as have a clear vision of 
what they wish to accomplish.”  xv My esteemed colleague Dr. Marsha Firestone, 

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
502
 founder and president of the  Women Presidents’ Organization  , adds to that, 
saying: “Social conventions often discourage women from pursuing entrepre-
neurial activities. Additionally, the lack of outside investments women-owned 
and led businesses receive puts them at an immediate revenue disadvantage 
compared to their male counterparts. Barriers aside, however, there has never 
been a better time to be a woman entrepreneur on a global scale.”  xvi 
 Based on my experience running a successful global business,  serving  as a 
consultant to countless global women business owners, and being President 
of  Women Entrepreneurs GROW Global (WEGG)  , a nonprofit that educates 
women entrepreneurs and business owners on how to go global, my observa-
tions indicate that women entrepreneurs must condition themselves to be 
 risk oriented, innovative, and proactive (RIP)   in order to achieve any reason-
able level of success in the export marketplace. Like everyone else, they must 
also achieve five things before venturing out beyond borders (much of which 
has already been covered in previous chapters): becoming ready mentally, par-
ticularly emotionally; being ready operationally; having run a successful local 
business; knowing how to use the latest technology; and having a business with 
export potential. 
 Also, in my view, a perceived lack of credibility is the number one barrier for 
women doing business globally. This perceived deficiency lack makes it difficult 
for women to access markets, market information, and establish relationships. 
If you don’t already have an influential person in your life who can tout your 
capabilities, find one and cultivate the relationship. 
 
■ Tip  Women Entrepreneurs GROW Global’s makes exporting affordable and accessible 
for women entrepreneurs and business owners worldwide. It meets its mission and vision by 
providing women-owned SMEs worldwide with tuition-free online education that walks them 
through the practical aspects of exporting and provides them with concrete strategies for global 
entrepreneurship. Check it out   https://womenentrepreneursgrowglobal.org  . 
 Lack of access to capital is also a serious problem for women business owners 
in the global marketplace, which causes an inability to scale their operations 
and garner greater market share. While male and female business owners alike 
face barriers to obtaining sufficient and affordable capital to start or acquire 
a venture, lack of access to credit and the ability to make use of it remains 
the number one obstacle to US women entrepreneurs starting and expand-
ing their businesses.  Fast Company  says, “Today, women still struggle to access 
the capital they need to spur economic development. While women entre-
preneurs are now understood to be an accelerator of global growth, their 
difficulty acessing capital is a pernicious global brake..”  xvii 

Exporting
503
 In spite of that, many women still finance their start-ups or businesses using 
credit cards, personal savings, second mortgages, or with the help of family and 
friends. That means that without  special financing programs   for women’s ven-
tures, only women who have savings or friends with savings can become entre-
preneurs, let alone export. Much work has to be done in this area to resolve 
the problem so women entrepreneurs can be on equal footing with men. 
 
■ Tip  Check with the Small Business Administration and the  Import-Export Bank of the United 
States   to learn what special programs are available for women exporters who are in need of working 
capital. Also, some of the new  crowd-funding sites such as Indiegogo, Kickstarter, and Fundable 
might have ways to finance an export activity. According to  Crowdfund Insider , “The success rate for 
women-led crowdfunding projects was 65 percent as opposed to just 35 percent for men.” They go 
on to say, “Analyzing crowdfunding campaigns collectively, about 42 percent are run by women.”  xviii  
 Training   is another obstacle for women business owners who aspire to grow, 
especially into international markets. How does a woman get the appropriate 
training to trade outside her own local area? This book is a start. In addition, 
online resources such as  Women Entrepreneurs GROW Global  (  https://
womenentrepreneursGROWglobal.org  ), the “Office of Women’s Business 
 Ownership ” page on the SBA Web site (  https://www.sba.gov/starting-
business/how-start-business/business-types/women-owned-busi-
nesses  );  US Export Assistance Centers  (  http://www.sba.gov/content/
us-exports-assistance-centers  ); the  Women’s Business Development 
Center (  https://www.wbdc.org/ ); the “Export NOW” page on the  Women 
Impacting Public Policy site  (  http://www.wipp.org/?page=ExportNOW  ); and 
a page listing global business initiatives on the Women’s Business Enterprise 
National Council ( WBENC  ) site (  http://www.wbenc.org/global-busi-
ness-initiatives/  ) -- all offer research, webinars, workshops, podcasts, and 
videos on growing a business through exports. Women need to consult with 
their export dream team—their professional banker, logistics expert, interna-
tional accountant, and lawyer—for advice on minimizing the challenges that 
come with exporting into new and unfamiliar markets. 
 Before the Internet, women had a difficult time getting access to markets 
and networking or finding like-minded individuals with whom they could end 
their isolation, share challenges, and gain access to strategic information. Now, 
however, there are hundreds of  women-centric online community forums  
readily available and designed specifically for women business owners who 
desire to connect with women the world over, acquire knowledge, develop 
enriching relationships, and keep learning and growing.  Dell has the  Women’s 
Entrepreneur Initiatives  (  http://www.dell.com/learn/us/en/uscorp1/
women-powering-business?c=us&l=en&s=corp&cs=uscorp1  );  IBM has the 

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
504
Women-Owned Businesses SME Toolkit (  http://us.smetoolkit.org/us/
en/category/3201/Women-owned-Businesses  ); and  PNC has the Women 
In Business (  https://www.pnc.com/en/small-business/topics/women-
in-business/women-in-business0.html  ).  
 Special Characteristics Women Bring to the 
International Business  Arena  
 With women starting and growing businesses at a record rate, they are or will 
become a major force in the export marketplace. Even though the business 
world demands that we leave a lot of unworkable behaviors and attitudes 
behind, the emotional sensitivity and the capacity for human connectedness 
usually attributed to women can be very useful in overseas business negotia-
tions. To win their colleagues’ confidence and respect, the key element for 
women is to stick to a complex business agenda and never deviate. Based on 
my experience and observations, let’s have a look at the interpersonal habits 
that women have traditionally been encouraged to cultivate and how abso-
lutely indispensable they are in international business. Note: These are general 
impressions, not absolutes, and many  characteristics   will also apply to men.
• 
 We tend to be more attentive and supportive toward 
others. We are socialized to give care and support to the 
people close to us, and we often extend this caretaking 
impulse to people outside our  family circle . This trait can 
serve you well in an export business, too. You wouldn’t 
want to upset or offend a foreign associate, and it’s not 
possible to tell what will offend anyway. All you can do is 
be gentle, gracious, and respectful, and let your colleagues 
guide you. When they see that you are committed to 
their comfort and happiness, they’re likely to forgive any 
minor blunders and keep negotiations moving forward.  
• 
 We study people, “read” their behavior, and make judg-
ments. We’re concerned about why people do and say what 
they do. We do this because we want to act effectively in 
the interpersonal world. We’ve developed an instinct for 
taking accurate readings in a hurry and acting accordingly. 
Trust that instinct. Where  language and cultural barriers 
 hinder communications, it might be all you have. Don’t let 
anyone disparage your impressions because you can’t pro-
duce empirical proof. They’re based on a lifetime’s experi-
ence, and that’s all the proof you need.  

Exporting
505
• 
 We typically have patience and a capacity for forgive-
ness. The international business arena belongs to peo-
ple who can give others the benefit of the doubt and 
let misunderstandings slide. Frustration, discomfort, and 
embarrassing social gaffes are the rule rather than the 
exception when you’re conducting a complex transaction 
in a strange environment. Women who export stand fast 
through good and bad times and ultimately can bring out 
the best in their  foreign colleagues.  
• 
 We have been conditioned to follow etiquette and 
appropriate  social behavior.  Understanding foreign cul-
tures, customs, and protocol is absolutely essential for 
anyone who wants to succeed overseas. You can’t afford 
not to learn the local system. If you don’t make yourself 
acceptable, you won’t do business. When you’re traveling 
the globe, you might find yourself beating drums, eating 
with your hands, even bathing with your associates! The 
next day you and those same people are in on a grueling 
round of negotiations and you realize that you’re working 
together better than you dreamed possible. When you 
respect foreign ways, it’s noticed—and appreciated.  
• 
 We generally have an  intuitive knowledge   of how to con-
verse with interesting and thoughtful questions, and when 
we have in-person meetings, we pay close attention to a 
person’s facial expressions and body language. We also 
know when to give the floor to someone else if we’ve 
been talking too much.  
• 
 We are raised to be charming and pleasant to be around. 
Our sincerity and willingness to offer a conciliatory smile 
can save the day when things get awkward or even out-
right nasty. Foreign associates appreciate charm, so smile 
graciously—but stay on track. And don’t indulge in humor. 
You never know if foreign associates get the joke, or how 
they’ll take it. Just because they’re laughing doesn’t mean 
they’re amused. It means they’re watching what you do 
and going along with it to keep from rocking the boat. 
Spare your associates the discomfort—everybody’s more 
comfortable when you stick to business. You can still 
entertain by storytelling. I do this quite often. It’s one of 
the oldest, purest ways to communicate and always puts 
people at ease.  

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
506
• 
 We take a  collaborative approach  in our relationships by 
listening and know how to build them to get business 
done. Women are ready, willing, and able to connect with 
people to develop win-win situations.  
• 
 We have the ability to be resilient, foster a sense of team-
work and connect with a global community. The more 
competitive a woman becomes in business, the greater 
the necessity to pull on resiliency. Fostering a sense of 
teamwork is an essential part of a successful and nurtur-
ing workplace. Connecting with a global community is fun-
damentally human, requiring women, who are naturals at 
this, to share, connect and come together the world over.  
 For a few more positive characteristics that women possess, read, “11 
Reasons 2014 Will be a Breakout Year For Women Entrepreneurs”   http://
www.forbes.com/sites/geristengel/2014/01/08/11-reasons-2014-
will-be-a-break-out-year-for-women-entrepreneurs/#61b24ca1e
f1d  
 
■ Tip  I’ll make your day. According to  Pew Research , “When it comes to essential traits of a 
leader, both men and women saw women as being more compassionate, organized and honest 
than men, and saw men as being more ambitious and decisive (though for most traits, an even 
higher share said both genders possess them equally)!”  xix 
 The lucrative and wide-open world of export business is the businesswom-
an’s natural habitat. Our gentler qualities are powerful assets that can trans-
form the way the world does business. “Nonsense!” you might say. “Foreign 
businessmen don’t take women seriously!” It’s certainly intimidating to head 
over to a country where, in some instances, women are forced to walk ten 
paces behind their husbands, but take heart. Many savvy international busi-
nesswomen have been pleasantly surprised by their reception in the business 
arena and have discovered the following perceptions about them to be signifi-
cant reasons for their welcome:
  1.   They’re   still a novelty . Because businesswomen are unusual 
in some countries, they are highly visible. Think about it—
there’s something unremarkable about men doing busi-
ness, domestically or overseas. So when a woman enters 
the business world, it automatically stands out. She gets 
attention—and deservedly so—for her confidence and 
professionalism as well as her gender. Use your status as a 
relative novelty to your advantage. Be confident, act confi-
dently, and know your stuff. Then do what you came for.  

Exporting
507
 2.   They’re educated .  Even in countries where women are 
indisputably second-class citizens, educated women com-
mand respect.  
 3.  North American women are known for seeking top manage-
ment positions and aspiring to break through what is com-
monly referred to as the “ glass ceiling.” This perception gives 
them a particular advantage in international business. The 
thinking is that in struggling against the invisible barri-
ers to advancement, these women have had to become 
superbly competent, creative, and resourceful—all of 
which adds up to an exceptionally fine businessperson.  
 America continues to stand for equality and for a strong work ethic. People 
expect Americans, men and women, to be smart, gutsy, and aggressive, and to 
mean business. An American businesswoman overseas tends to be viewed first 
as an American, then as a representative of her own or someone else’s com-
pany, and lastly as a woman. So, an American global businesswoman can hope 
in most places to be understood and respected on her own terms—and the 
more women who export and make the global arena their own, the better the 
chance of shattering that  glass ceiling  for good! 
 My fellow women readers, if you still find yourself feeling intimidated, call on 
the old-fashioned “masculine” qualities of single-mindedness, confidence, and 
determination. First of all, remember that you must have a product they want 
or you wouldn’t be there. Second, put your knowledge on the table. Look your 
associates in the eye and tell them what you know. No need to be an arrogant 
know-it-all; just state your case and stand your ground. Natural confidence 
commands respect. Finally, if you stay focused on doing the job you flew half-
way around the world to do, nobody else can stop you. 
 A woman business owner who exports is a whole human being. She calls 
on both masculine and feminine traits and can be both gentle and powerful 
at the same time. She knows how to adapt her interpersonal instincts to fit 
smoothly into the professional environment and how to show authority and 
inspire confidence without intimidating and alienating others. A woman busi-
ness owner who exports adds value to any business, whether it’s her own or 
that of her home corporation—pushing limits, shaking things up, competing 
vigorously in the world marketplace, and making the world a better place in 
which to live.  
 Building a Global Empire via the Internet 
 When it comes to developing social or e-commerce platforms,  women 
 might have the edge. Why? Women use a universal language that everyone 
can understand—the language of conducting business with high integrity and 

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
508
honesty—and they are apt to carry a stronger emotional quotient than men, 
which can be invaluable for striving to make things perfect and accessible to 
the everyday Jane or Joe. According to the blog posting “Are Women Leaders 
Better than Men?” on the   Harvard Business Review Blog Network :   “Specifically, at 
all levels, women are rated higher [than men] in fully 12 of the 16 competen-
cies that go into outstanding leadership.”  xx That entails everything from taking 
initiative, to displaying high integrity and honesty, to solving problems and 
analyzing issues. A women’s attitude is: If my mom or grandma can figure this 
e-commerce platform out and like it, the whole world will too. And in most 
instances, they are likely to be right. 
 Here’s one example of a woman taking  advantage   of social media to start her 
own multimillion-dollar business and reach customers: At a mere thirty-two 
years of age, the contrarian thinker, capitalist, and CEO of  Nasty Gal  (  http://
www.nastygal.com  ) Sophia Amoruso built her fashion retail empire in just 
seven years from zero to $300 million  xxi by starting an eBay vintage store and 
then developing it into her own e-commerce site. She named the company 
after jazz legend Miles Davis’s second wife, the funk and R&B singer Betty 
Davis, who produced an album of the same title.  xxii Her company sells edgy, 
retro-inspired stylish clothes, shoes, and accessories at reasonable prices to a 
loyal customer base of young women worldwide.  xxiii 
 What are her secrets to success? First and foremost, she went with her gut 
instincts on her business decisions. She has a good  business model:  She buys 
hip clothing dirt cheap and resells it on her site at a sizable profit margin (for 
example, she resold a Channel leather jack she found for $8 at a Salvation 
Army on her site for $1,000). She uses approachable clothing models that 
everyone can relate to and applies her own styling to the photos of them. She 
has developed an intense social media presence (via Instagram, Pinterest, and 
Facebook, for example) among her audience to keep them actively engaged. 
Her clothes allow her user base of independent young women to dream 
yet also make their dreams a reality through their purchases. She puts every 
penny of profit she makes right back into the business, carrying zero debt. 
And when asked by the   Wall Street Journal  what she thinks has set her apart 
from others, Amoruso’s simple response was, “Nasty Gal really emerged from 
a conversation. I’ve probably spent more time than any other brand reading 
every last comment. To listen to people the way you’re able to online is very 
powerful. I think other companies are just starting to figure that out.”  xxiv 
 Summary 
 The current rise of woman-owned businesses in our country has the potential 
to have a significant impact on American competitiveness. Women the world 
over should celebrate the unique qualities that make them born leaders in the 
global marketplace. 

Exporting
509
 As my friend and esteemed colleague  Karen Kerrigan  , president and CEO of 
the  Small Business & Entrepreneurship Council  ( SBE Council  ), says: “Women 
who become successful entrepreneurs need to be celebrated and held up as 
role models for other women. This is a powerful tool in helping to reshape the 
mindset of women in terms of visualizing what is possible.”  xxv Regardless of 
race, age, gender, religion, education, locale, or income status, everyone must 
have equal opportunity to participate in the export marketplace. 
 My final message to fellow women business owners: Exporting can serve as a 
lever to vault your business onto a level global playing field. Yes, there will be 
challenges and, yes, you will work hard because you are put to a different test 
than men. Enjoy and cultivate yourself, love what you do, and plot your own 
export course. Only good things will follow.  
 Notes 
  i.   Women Who Changed the World: Fifty Inspirational Women 
Who Shaped History (London: Smith-Davies, 2006), 110.  
  ii.   “Breaking the Ultimate Glass Ceiling, CNN.com, accessed 
June 10, 2016,   http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/07/opin-
ions/womens-voices-on-hillary-clinton-clinch-
ing-nomination-roundup/  .  
 iii.   “Ted Levitt Changed My Life,” Harvard Business School: 
Working Knowledge; the Thinking that Leads, December 
7, 2008,   http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/6054.html . 
 iv.   Martha Barletta and Tom Peters,  Trends: Recognize, Analyze, 
Capitalize (London: DK Publishing, 2005), 12.  
  v.  Sylvia Ann Hewlett, Melinda Marshall, and Laura Sherbin, 
“How Women Drive Innovation and Growth,” August 
23, 2013, accessed June 11, 2016,   https://hbr.
org/2013/08/how-women-drive-innovation-and  . 
 vi.   Miles Kohrman, “Can Women Entrepreneurs Make 
Bureaucracy a Word of the Past?,”  Fast Company , 
accessed June 21, 2013,   http://www.fastcompany.
com/3012900/creative-conversations/can-women-
entrepreneurs-make-bureaucracy-a-word-of-the-
past  . 
 vii.   Sheryl Sandberg,  Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead 
(New York: Knopf, 2013).  

Chapter 27 | Women Business Owners: Engine of Global Growth
510
 viii.   Candida Brush, “‘Leaning In’ Is Not Enough: Women 
Entrepreneurs Need to ‘Leap In,’”  Forbes, accessed April 
13, 
2013, 
  http://www.forbes.com/sites/babson/
2013/04/13/leaning-in-is-not-enough-women-
entrepreneurs-need-to-leap-in/  .   
 ix.  Julie Weeks, “Women-Owned Firms Springing Up 
All Over, OPEN Forum, American Express May 18, 
2015, accessed June 10, 2016,   https://www.ameri-
canexpress.com/us/small-business/openforum/
articles/women-owned-firms-springing/  . 
 x.   Laurel Delaney, “Escape from Corporate America,”  Across 
the Board: The Conference Board Magazine of Ideas and 
Opinion , March/April 2003, 39–43.  
 xi.  Donna J. Kelley, Candida G. Brush, Patricia G. Greene, 
Mike Herrington, Abdul Ali, Penny Kew,  GEM’s Special 
Report Women’s Entrepreneurship 2015 Women’s Report , 
2015, accessed June 11, 2016,   http://gemconsortium.
org/report/49281  .  
 xii.   Female 
Entrepreneurship, 
Global 
Entrepreneurship 
Development Institute, 2015, accessed June 11, 2016, 
  https://thegedi.org/research/womens-
entrepreneurship-index/  . 
 xiii.   ExportNOW2, Women Impacting Public Policy, accessed 
June 11, 2016,   http://www.wipp.org/?page=Export
NOW2  . 
 xiv.   US Census Bureau,  Ownership Characteristics of Classifiable 
U.S. Exporting Firms: Survey of Business Owners Special 
Report , June 2012, accessed June 11, 2016,   http://www2.
census.gov/econ/sbo/07/sbo_export_report.pdf  . 
 xv.   Laurel 
Delaney, “Women 
Entrepreneurs 
Energize 
Economies,” IIP Digital, March 1, 2012,   http://iip-
digital.usembassy.gov/st/english/publicati
on/2012/03/20120301135847jezrdna0.1726757.
html#axzz2jyxqxZDU  . 
 xvi.  “How to Conquer the Global Economy,” Marsha 
Firestone, PhD, Enterprising Women Magazine, 2013, 
24-25. 

Exporting
511
 xvii.    Melanne Verveer, “The Other Gender Gap: How Women 
Entrepreneurs Are Getting Screwed Out Of Funding,” 
May 7, 2014, accessed June 11, 2016,   http://www.
fastcompany.com/3030144/bottom-line/gender-
inequality-isnt-just-about-pay-why-female-
entrepreneurs-need-greater-acce  .  
 xviii.    Chris Tyrrell, “Crowdfunding is Changing the Female 
Entrepreneurial Landscape, Crowdfund Insider, July 15, 
2015, accessed June 11, 2016,   http://www.crowdfun-
dinsider.com/2015/07/71191-crowdfunding-is-
changing-the-female-entrepreneurial-land-
scape/  .  
 xix.    D’vera Cohn and Gretchen Livingston, “Americans’ 
Views of Women as Political Leaders Differ By Gender,” 
Pew Research Center, May 19, 2016, accessed June 
11, 
2016, 
  http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2016/05/19/americans-views-of-women-as-
political-leaders-differ-by-gender/  . 
 xx.    “Are Women Better Leaders than Men?,” blog entry by Jack 
Zenger and Joseph Folkman,  Harvard Business Review :  HBR 
Blog Network , last modified March 15, 2012,   http://blogs.
hbr.org/2012/03/a-study-in-leadership-women-do/  .  
 xxi.     https://womenentrepreneursgrowglobal.
org/2016/06/04/nasty-gals-sophia-amoruso-
puts-her-big-global-girl-shoes-on/  . 
 xxii.    “Betty Davis: A ‘Nasty Gal’ ahead of Her Time,” Meredith 
Ochs, October 26, 2009, NPR Music, accessed June 11,
2016,  http://www.npr.org/templates/story/
story.php?storyId=114171958  . 
 xxiii.   “Shop by Currency,” Nasty Gal, accessed June 11, 2016,  
  http://www.nastygal.com/index.cfm/fuseaction/
localization.home  . 
 xxiv.   John Ortved, “Sophia Amoruso Expands Nasty Gal,”  Wall 
Street Journal , last modified August 22, 2013,    http://
online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324354
704578637870086589666.html  .  
 xxv.    “International Women’s Day Q&A with CIPE Board 
Chair Karen Kerrigan,” blog entry by Karen Kerrigan, 
 CIPE Development Blog , accessed June 11, 2016,    http://
www.cipe.org/blog/2013/03/08/international-
womens-day-qa-with-karen-kerrigan/  . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_28
 C H A P T E R 
 New Frontiers 
in Emerging 
Markets 
 Brazil ,  Russia  ,  India ,  China  , and  South Africa  
 Emerging markets offer an extensive and generous opportunity, and if you 
are going to be successful, you need to take advantage of what benefits 
doing business overseas can provide for your company. 
 —Ty Morse, CEO of Songwhale  i 
 Many [companies] continue to focus on the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China and South Africa) and a few other economies. But the emerging-
market growth story extends to pockets all across the globe, and offers a 
premium to fast movers. 
 —Matt Reilly, Managing Director, Accenture’s Management 
Consulting business across North America  ii 
 Do you have a product or service that you could sell to nearly 3 billion 
people? That is a question millions of global citizens and companies alike 
are asking themselves, because the world is shifting its attention to  BRICS 
28

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
514
(Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa)  in the next phase of globalization 
to drive export  revenue growth. The BRICS countries are a major force in the 
world economy where a rising middle class promises a long-term customer 
base. Even with recent market turbulence and a slight stall on exports, the 
potential of BRICS is too big for companies to limit their activities to develop-
ing countries. 
 BRICS, a term that Jim O’Neill, of investment bank Goldman Sachs coined, cur-
rently have “combined foreign currency reserves of $4.4 trillion and account 
for 43 percent of the world’s population.”  iii The long-range impact of this mul-
titrillion-dollar group of countries includes: the creation of jobs, the reduction 
of trade deficits, and an increase in prosperity throughout the world econ-
omy. Jonathan Lemco, senior investment strategist with Vanguard Investment 
Strategy Group says, “The quality of life for people in these countries, with 
some exceptions, has never been this good.”  iv It is only a matter of time before 
you will need a strategy that will land your product or service in BRICS, no 
matter how complex, remote, or tumultuous. And I’m not referring to sourcing 
or manufacturing there. I’m referring to a pure selling export strategy.  
 This chapter highlights the key growth drivers for BRICS, important market 
facts and products in demand in these countries, the implications for small 
businesses operating in them, a blueprint for export success to the countries, 
and other second-tier fast-growth countries to watch out for in the future. 
The key question to think about as you read through this section is this: do 
you have a product or service that BRICS want and can afford? 
 
■ Caution   The markets mentioned in this chapter are not easy to enter. It takes time, knowledge, 
money, and patience to make headway. It took companies like Intel, KFC, and GE years to make 
inroads in emerging markets. They invested millions of dollars over a protracted period of time 
before ever seeing a dime in profit. But they did this because of upside potential down the road. 
One example is Coca-Cola where future growth will be fueled by emerging markets, which are 
naturally showing higher rates of growth.  v 
 What Drives Growth in BRICS? 
 The BRICS countries are the focus of many companies when they set their 
sight on targeting big, fast-growth markets for exports. After all, four of the 
five countries (all of them except South Africa) are the world’s largest  emerg-
ing economies  , with China being the biggest in population. 
 What drives this unprecedented demand for imports by BRICS? Besides a 
having a hardworking group of people anxious to improve the quality of their 
lives, most of the BRICS countries have these  characteristics   in common:

Exporting
515
 1.  A large land mass or extensive territories  
 2.  A huge population. The total population for the five coun-
tries is 3.02 billion.  vi 
 3.  Massive infrastructure demands  
 4.  Strategic economic policies in place to support rapid 
growth 
 5.  The specific goal of expanding trade and investment with 
the world 
 The discussion of the BRICS countries and the reasons to export to them in 
the following sections provides important market facts for and specific prod-
ucts and services in demand for each market. 
 
■ Note   Although the actual  GDP growth rates of BRICS may appear to be modest, you must take 
into consideration the general outlook for each economy, including its past and present conditions 
and its future potential. The source for the data is the Central Intelligence Agency’s  World Factbook 
unless otherwise noted. 
 
■ Tip  I have made a point to highlight the more Internet-savvy countries, the languages spoken, 
and the preferred online payment methods when dealing with them. Take these factors into 
consideration as you prepare to tweak or build your e-commerce site. Your goal should be to satisfy 
consumers’ needs in each of these markets. 
 Brazil 
 The following are general statistics about conditions in Brazil related to 
exporting:  vii 
• 
 Languages : Portuguese (official and most widely spoken 
language); Spanish (less common)  
• 
 Population : 204,259,812—making it the sixth-largest coun-
try (July 2015 estimate)  
• 
 Population growth rate : 0.77 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Internet usage :  108.2 million, representing a 53.4 percent 
penetration rate (percentage of population as of 2014 
estimate) Internet country code is .br  

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
516
• 
 Preferred  online payment method : Debit and credit cards 
remain the most popular method of online payment  viii 
• 
 Gross domestic product : US$3.192 trillion (2015 estimate)  
• 
 GDP growth  rate : -3.8% (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Inflation rate : 9 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Per capita GDP : US$15,600 (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Imports : US$174.2 billion (2015 estimate)  
 Why Brazil? 
 According to the Office of the United States Trade Representative, U.S. goods 
and  services trade  with Brazil totaled $95.4 billion in 2015 (latest data avail-
able for goods and services trade). U.S. goods exports to Brazil in 2015 were 
$59.5 billion, imports were $35.9 billion—making Brazil the United States’ 
12th largest goods trading market in 2015 and the 11 th largest goods export 
market in 2015.  ix 
 Brazil’s primary  trading partners  are the United States, Argentina, Germany, 
Netherlands, Nigeria, and China. 
 A hot tip for exporting to  Brazil:   You need patience, persistence, and an under-
standing of the market to enter into Brazil. Brazilians are known to be enthu-
siastic, confident, innovative, and adaptable. They enjoy dealing with foreigners. 
Learn how to leverage this in your favor. Be open to developing relationships 
with Brazilians from the outset, and dedicate time to growing the relationship. 
 The best prospects for general exports to Brazil are: Footwear, coffee, machin-
ery, electrical, and transport equipment (including airplane and helicopter 
parts); chemical products, oil, automotive parts, and electronics; pharmaceuti-
cal drugs for humans and veterinary medicine; and so forth. Specific to United 
States, the top export categories in 2012 include: Machinery, mineral fuel, 
aircraft, electrical machinery and optic and medical instruments. The leading 
agricultural categories include: wheat, dairy products, prepared foods, choco-
late and cocoa products, and feeds and fodders. (Note: Brazil is preparing for 
the Olympics in 2016, which can be promising for US exports.) The top US 
exports of private services to Brazil are in the following areas: transporation, 
telecommunications, computer, travel, and information service sectors.  

Exporting
517
 Russia 
 Russia’s general conditions relative to the export process are:  x 
• 
 Languages : Russian (official); many minority languages  
• 
 Population :  142,423,773—the tenth-largest country (July 
2015 estimate)  
• 
 Population growth rate :  –0.04 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Internet usage :  84.4 million, representing a 59.3 percent 
penetration rate (percentage of population; 2014 esti-
mate); Internet country code is .ru  
• 
 Preferred  online payment method : e-wallets such as QIWI  xi 
• 
 Gross domestic product :   US$3.718 trillion (2015 estimate)  
• 
 GDP growth rate : -3.7 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Inflation rate : 15.5 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Per capita GDP :   US$25,400 (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Imports :  US$197.3 billion (2015 estimate)  
 Why Russia? 
 Russia is the world’s eigth-largest  economy  by population and has under-
gone significant changes since the collapse of the Soviet Union. A combination 
of falling oil prices, international sanctions, and structural limitations pushed 
Russia into a deep recession in 2015, with the GDP falling by close to 4%. 
Yet Russia is still considered a high-income country, with a highly educated 
and trained workforce and sophisticated, discerning consumers. One should, 
however, proceed cautiously because conducting business there currently 
might be impeded. According to export.gov, “The recent events in Ukraine 
have changed the landscape of the bilateral trade and investment relationship 
between the United States and Russia.”  xii 
 A hot tip for exporting to  Russia:  Personal relations are vital to build trust 
with Russian businesspeople. Business discussions can often be slow and 
detailed, so patience is required, along with punctuality at meetings. Russians 
are tough negotiators (with interpreters who speak both Russian and English 
and provide information in both languages) and rely on fact-based information 
on hand at meetings. Plan on developing and maintaining long-term relation-
ships when traveling to Russia. 

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
518
 The best  export prospects  to Russia are: Machinery; vehicles; pharmaceutical 
products; plastic; semifinished metal products; meat, fruits, and nuts; optical 
and medical instruments; and iron and steel. Note: Russia’s biggest import 
trading partners for 2015 are Netherlands, China, Germany, and Italy. 
 
■ Tip  Just as there is Tmall (  http://www.tmall.com ) in China—the country’s B-to-C 
shopping destination for brand-name goods letting companies sell directly to the public (review 
chapter   7 )—there are  Ozone Holdings (  http://www.ozon.ru/  ) and  Ulmart (  http://www.
ulmart.ru  ) in Russia, two of the country’s largest e-commerce companies. Although e-commerce 
is in the early state of its development in Russia, it is very much alive and flourishing. The trick for 
small businesses in that country is to partner or collaborate with companies such as Ozone and 
Ulmart. That can only happen with the appointment of a good on-the-ground person to stay at the 
pulse of consumer action. 
 India 
 Here are the conditions for India that relate to exporting:  xiii 
• 
 Languages : Hindi, Bengali, Telugu, Marathi, Tamil, Urdu, 
Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Oriya, Punjabi, Assamese, 
Maithili, and others, including English (considered a sub-
sidiary language but nonetheless an important language 
for national, political, and commercial communications)  
• 
 Population : 1,251,695,583—the second-largest country 
(July 2015 estimate)  
• 
 Population growth rate : 1.22 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Internet usage :  237.3 million, reflecting a 19.2 percent pen-
etration rate (percentage of population); Internet coun-
try code is .in  
• 
 Preferred  online payment method :  Direct debit accounted 
for more than a half of B-to-C e-commerce payment 
transactions in 2012  xiv 
• 
 Gross domestic product :   US$7.965 trillion (2015 estimate)  
• 
 GDP growth rate : 7.3 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Inflation rate : 4.9 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Per capita GDP : US$6,200 (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Imports :  US$432.3 billion (2015 estimate)  

Exporting
519
 Why India? 
 With a population of more than 1.2 billion, India is the second-most populous 
country in the world. Approximately 30 percent of the country’s population 
resides in urban areas. 
 A hot tip for exporting to India:  Indian society  has a very strong belief system 
based on the family, and these beliefs extend to business, so get to know your 
business partner first before ever negotiating one ounce of business—do not 
rush the process. Adapting a laid-back approach with clear and direct commu-
nications is the best approach to dealing with Indian businesspeople. 
 The best export  prospects  are: crude oil, precious stones, machinery, fertil-
izer, iron, steel and chemicals. The hot industry sectors are: corrosion control; 
defense; architecture; civil aviation; education services; environment and water; 
health care and medical equipment; infrastructure/smart cities (roads, ports, 
and railroads); mining and mineral processing supply chain/logistics; power and 
renewables; and travel and tourism.  xv 
 Note: As of 2015, India’s best trading partners are China, the United Arab 
Emirates, Saudi Arabia, Switzerland, and the United States.  
 China 
 The following statistics are relative to China’s exports:  xvi 
• 
 Languages :  Standard Chinese or Mandarin (Putonghua, 
based on the Beijing dialect); Yue (Cantonese); Wu 
(Shanghainese); Minbei (Fuzhou); Minnan (Hokkien-
Taiwanese); Xiang; Gan; Hakka dialects; and other minor-
ity languages  
• 
 Population :  1,367,485,388—the world’s largest country 
(July 2015 estimate)  
• 
 Population growth rate : 0.45 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Internet usage : 626.6 million, representing a 46.0 percent 
penetration rate (percentage of population; estmate 
2014); Internet country code is .cn  
• 
 Preferred online payment method : Cash on delivery (COD), 
credit cards (China UnionPay cards), and debit cards 
(China UnionPay cards), AliPay, WePay by TenCent and 
WeChat. Apple Pay and Samsung Pay will be new entrants 
– keep an eye out.  xvii 
• 
 Gross domestic product :   US$19.39 trillion (2015 estimate)  

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
520
• 
 GDP growth rate :   6.9 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Inflation rate :  1.4 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Per capita GDP :  US$14,100 (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Imports :  US$1.596 trillion (2015 estimate)  
 Why China? 
 China’s sheer geographic size, population, and growth prospects offer unlim-
ited possibilities. Building a large and profitable presence in China requires 
exporting top-quality  products that are affordable to the masses. Small busi-
nesses that might not have the deep financial pockets that big companies do 
need to be extra careful on how they approach entering China. Be on height-
ened awareness at all times because one big China export misstep could 
cost you your business. As I write in an article for  The Wall Street Journal ,  “You 
better put on your boxing gloves, for China can seem more like a sparring 
partner than a trading partner.”  xviii I say this because of having had first-hand 
knowledge of conducting business in China and it being a tough nut to crack. 
As a result of my experience with China, its popularity, and its growth pros-
pects, I am providing more information on the country. 
 Here are some hot tips for exporting to China (which might apply to the 
other countries in BRICS as well):
• 
 Create  desirability . Get to know your customer in order 
to determine which of your products offers the greatest 
appeal for the Chinese consumer and fits best with the 
local culture.  
• 
 Provide your product or service at your lowest price .  
• 
 Have a negotiating  strategy . The Chinese expect you to 
have a strategy, and if you don’t, they will take advantage 
of you. Know where you want to end up and how you 
plan to get there.  
• 
 Build strong relationshipsnegotiating strategy  because   they are 
the lifeblood of business in China . It’s not how much you 
know but whom you know in China. Look for a partner 
who already has a Chinese presence and a great reputa-
tion in your industry. Take care of the people who take 
the time to make introductions for you. Thank them, 
thank them again, and thank them one more time.  
• 
 Set the right course and slow your pace . Your success will 
be based not on how well you craft your strategy but on 
how well you execute the deliverables.  

Exporting
521
• 
 Be  courteous .  
• 
 Invest a significant amount of time and money to build and 
monitor sales, marketing, and distribution . 
• 
 Prepare for a fierce competitor. The Chinese are known to 
flex their muscle relative to the sheer population size of 
the market they are dealing with, insist that you partner or 
form a joint venture together, learn everything you do and 
improve on it, and then turn around and compete against 
you. Do you have a strategy in place to combat that?  
• 
 Put people on the ground in China who are respected, know 
the market, the language, the industry, and the lay of the land .  
• 
 Train staff at the national   HQ  and locally in China to work with 
the country well in advance of developing business . Training 
helps your staff connect, become knowledgeable on what 
needs to be accomplished, and develop confidence in 
their ability to get things done.  
• 
 Take extra precaution in protecting your intellectual  property . 
Will it be sufficiently complicated for someone in China 
or other emerging markets to duplicate your product? 
Figure it out and then come up with a plan that acts like a 
Sun Tzu  Art of War contingency plan. “The supreme art of 
war is to subdue the enemy without fighting,” Tzu says.  xix 
 
■ Tip  A great primer on operating in China is  Doing Business in China for Dummies (2007). 
Robert Collins, my friend and colleague and the CEO of the Shanghai-based company Doing China 
Business, coauthored the book with Carson Block. The book is not just for dummies, as it covers 
everything we all want to know about how business is done in China. It also includes a cheat 
sheet on common business blunders and discusses Chinese business values and even fun ways 
to spend your downtime in China. The chapter “Managing Risks” is particularly insightful for those 
who are concerned at the outset over managing legal (intellectual property, for example) and 
environmental issues, if any. Another good book is Jeffrey  Towson’s  The One Hour China Book: Two 
Peking University Professors Explain All of China Business in Six Short Stories (2014). One hour 
with this and Collins’ books will make you an instant expert on business in China. 
 The best export  prospects  for China are: electrical equipment and other 
machinery, oil and mineral fuels, optical and medical equipment, nuclear reac-
tor, boiler and machinery components, metal ores, motor vehicles, and a range 
of professional services. Note: The biggest trading partners on China’s imports 
for 2015 are Japan, South Korea, United States, Germany, Taiwan, and Australia.  

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
522
 South Africa 
 Here are the general statistics about South Africa:  xx 
• 
 Languages : IsiZulu, IsiXhosa, Afrikaans, Sepedi, English (9.6 
percent—widely spoken in business circles), Setswana, 
Sesotho, Xitsonga, siSwati, Tshivenda, and isiNdebele  
• 
 Population :  53,675,563—the twenty-sixth largest country 
(July 2015 estimate)  
• 
 Population growth rate :  1.33 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Internet usage :  24.8 million, constituting a 46.9 percent 
penetration rate (percentage of population); country 
code is .za  
• 
 Preferred online payment method :   Visa, PayPal through 
First National Bank (FNB), Ukash, M-Pesa, Cell Pay Point, 
Zapper and FlickPay.  xxi 
• 
 Gross domestic product : US$723.5 billion (2015 estimate)  
• 
 GDP growth  rate : 1.3 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Inflation rate : 4.6 percent (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Per capita GDP :   US$13,200 (2015 estimate)  
• 
 Imports : US$86.81  billion (2015 estimate)  
 Why South Africa? 
 The United States is a critical trading and technology partner for South Africa, 
and ranks annually as South Africa’s third largest partner in two-way trade by 
value. 
 According to Export.gov, “The African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), 
renewed for a final 10 year period with last minute eligibility for South Africa 
in 2016, provides duty-free access to the U.S. market for most sub-Saharan 
African countries, including South Africa. The United States and South Africa 
signed a new Trade and Investment Framework Agreement (TIFA) in 2012. 
The United States and SACU concluded a Trade, Investment and Development 
Cooperation Agreement (TIDCA) in 2008.”  xxii These agreements will elimi-
nate tariffs and other trade barriers, which will enable trade to expand with 
South Africa. 
 A few hot tips for exporting to South Africa: Take it slow, start with trusting 
relationships (South Africans like sticking with known suppliers), and perform 
due diligence on the companies you are dealing with. South African companies 
are receptive to a range of partnering arrangements with U.S. companies that 
can range from licensing to joint ventures to acquisitions. 

Exporting
523
 The best export  prospects  for commodities are: Machinery and equipment, 
electrical, chemicals, petroleum products, scientific instruments, and food-
stuffs. Opportunities exist for a wide range of consumer products and ser-
vices as well. Note: as of 2012, South Africa’s biggest trading partners are 
China, Germany, United States, Saudi Arabia, India, and Nigeria.  
 Achieving Success Exporting to BRICS 
 Even the poorest markets in the world can generate revenue for small busi-
nesses provided they tailor their products and services to meet the needs of 
the consumers. If you target countries that have a healthy GDP, are Internet 
savvy, and have a population with a high percentage of people using the 
Internet, you will greatly improve your chance for success. Before entering 
a market, check with the  World Bank Group ’s ranking of 189 economies to 
learn the ease of doing business in each country at   http://www.doingbusi-
ness.org/rankings  and the full   Doing Business 2016 report at   http://www.
doingbusiness.org/~/media/GIAWB/Doing%20Business/Documents/
Annual-Reports/English/DB16-Full-Report.pdf  . A high ranking on the 
index means that the country’s regulatory  environment  is more conducive to 
the starting and operation of a local firm but is not necessarily representative 
of the ease of exporting there. Nonetheless, it will give you a good idea of the 
complexity or ease of entering into any given market. 
 Here is a blueprint for success in operating in BRICS. Consider these my 
export imperatives or immutable rules. Take these lessons with you on your 
journey and then use your own insight and intelligence to make good decisions.
• 
 Develop a  distinctive quality product  at a very low price . Many 
people in the emerging parts of the world are at the bot-
tom of the pyramid living in poverty. They cannot afford 
many products, so price as low as you can while still mak-
ing sure you will earn a profit, and use the pricing as a 
basis for entering other markets.  
 
■ Tip  Develop products for emerging markets, which can serve as invaluable breeding grounds 
for innovations that were originally developed for these markets. These products will pioneer new 
uses when introduced back to the developed countries (the United States, for example). Authors 
Vijay Govindarajan, Chris Trimble, and Indra K. Nooyi describe the developing world as a fertile 
research and development lab for companies in any market in their provocative book  Reverse 
Innovation: Create Far from Home, Win Everywhere (2012). 

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
524
• 
 Tap into markets that have a healthy GDP, are creditworthy, 
are Internet savvy, and whose population has a high percent-
age of people using the Internet (in China, for example) . You 
are seeking a  tipping point   where consumers and busi-
nesses are just getting a knack for e-commerce.  
• 
 Determine your best BRICS market by comparing opportu-
nities across borders within a particular industry based on 
a sector -specific methodology. Check with  Top Markets: 
A Market Assessment Tool for U.S. Exporters   http://
trade.gov/topmarkets/?utm_source=blog&utm_
medium=tradeology&utm_campaign=topmarkets  . Each 
report is available for download.  
• 
 Access the  Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)  Data Tool to get 
a quick snapshot of statistics on trade and investment between 
the United States, BRICS and other countries by simply click-
ing on a world map:   http://bea.gov/international/
factsheet/  . 
 
■ Tip  According to [the late]  C. K. Prahalad , who created the “bottom of the pyramid” concept, 
“The dominant assumption is that the poor do not have money to spend and, therefore, are not 
a viable market. Certainly, the buying power for those earning less than $2 per day cannot be 
compared with the purchasing power of individuals in the developed nations. However, by virtue of 
their numbers, the poor represent a significant latent purchasing power that must be unlocked.”  xxiii 
For an in-depth look at bridging the Internet gap and creating new global opportunities in low- 
and middle-income countries, read Intel’s “Women and the Web” at   http://www.intel.com/
content/www/us/en/technology-in-education/women-in-the-web.html  . 
• 
 Prequalify  potential business partners  and maintain constant 
communications with them so you can rapidly respond to the 
whims of customers .  
• 
 Take a long-term view on  goals  and progress (five to ten years 
out) because that is where opportunity enters . By then, you 
will have acquired new knowledge and developed suffi-
cient expertise to act on it.  
• 
 Be patient —overseas business, especially in emerging mar-
kets, sometimes seems like it takes forever to get done .  

Exporting
525
 
■ Tip  Goldman Sachs has a complete 272-page e-book on the growth potential of BRICS 
and what the future holds  BRICS and Beyond  available for immediate download (  http://www.
goldmansachs.com/our-thinking/archive/archive-pdfs/brics-book/brics-
full-book.pdf  ). PWC offers  The World in 2050: Will the Shift in Global Economic Power 
Continue? also available for immediate download (  http://www.pwc.com/gx/en/issues/
the-economy/assets/world-in-2050-february-2015.pdf  ). 
 Useful Guides on Doing Business with  BRICS   
 The US Commercial Service, part of the US Department of Commerce, has 
already taken initiatives to help you learn about, and take advantage of, the 
new and existing opportunities for your business in BRICS. The following 
reports offer rich, in-depth looks at different countries’ political and economic 
environments and selling US products and services to those countries and 
discuss their trade regulations, investment climate, contracts, market research, 
trade events, and even market entry strategies. To understand the challenges 
and opportunities BRICS present, it is important to read these publications. 
The reports are the latest available.
• 
 Doing Business in Brazil:  2016 Country Commercial Guide 
for U.S. Companies :    http://www.export.gov/ccg/bra-
zil090732.asp  
• 
 Doing Business in Russia:  2016 Country Commercial Guide 
for U.S. Companies :     http://www.export.gov/ccg/rus-
sia090879.asp  
• 
 Doing Business in India:  2016 Country Commercial Business 
Guide for U.S. Companies :    http://www.export.gov/ccg/
india090814.asp  
• 
 Doing Business in China:  2016 Country Commercial Business 
Guide for U.S. Companies :    http://www.export.gov/ccg/
china090765.asp  
• 
 Doing Business in South Africa:  2011 Country Commercial 
Business Guide for U.S. Companies :   http://www.export.
gov/ccg/southafrica090960.asp  

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
526
 
■ Caution   As you drill down on the information, look for each country’s credit rating to determine 
how fluid the market is. In other words, can capital flow in and out freely? Consult with your banker. 
Also look at “Global Online Payment Methods Report 2015—Second Half 2015” (  http://www.
researchandmarkets.com/research/zndp9d/global_online   ) to determine each country’s 
preferred method of e-commerce payment. There is a fee.  
 Challenges of Operating in Emerging Markets 
 With any opportunity comes a  host of challenges . When entering into BRICS, 
there is no single  cookie-cutter approach  because each market varies along 
with the individual companies. But this I can guarantee: You will face unpredict-
able market conditions; limited human resource capabilities; corruption; high-
income inequality; weak infrastructure (poor transport systems that make 
shipping goods particularly problematic, for example); spotty retail systems 
(small local retailers and kiosks vs. small number of big chains); lack of credit 
card penetration (the vast majority of purchases, including online ones, being 
made in cash); electrical shortages; and weak fixed line telecommunications. 
The bottom line: In many instances, the countries are too underdeveloped to 
get into. Still, it is worth a try to beat your competitors from getting the first-
mover advantage on new customers. Take your conquest of BRICS in steps or 
stages and you will fare best. 
 
■ Caution   Trade and technology regulations and standards vary from country to country, which 
makes life difficult for manufacturers and exporters. Always check with a variety of sources to 
determine whether the regulations and standards specific to a country can become obstacles to 
trade. The “Technical Barriers to Trade” section on the  World Trade Organization   site (  http://
www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/tbt_e/tbt_e.htm  ) is a good place to start. 
 Other Opportunities in New Frontier Markets 
 Frontier markets  or next- generation   emerging markets often have shakier 
economies with a much younger labor force, yet in the next five years, 
growth could become much faster for frontier markets than in the established 
emerging markets. For now, monitor the following markets closely for growth 
and development: Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Columbia, Poland and Kenya 
(Africa’s other growing economy). Some will grow so fast that they move into 
the emerging-market category. 

Exporting
527
 
■ Tip  For addiitional emerging markets, read, “The Top 20 Emerging Markets: Global Emerging 
Markets   http://www.bloomberg.com/slideshow/2013-01-30/the-top-20-emerging-
markets.html#slide1   
 While these markets are still in their early stages of growth and development, 
they can be attractive export opportunities that offer long-term economic 
growth with strong profit-return potential, provided you actively manage this 
area. There is nevertheless great risk, volatility, and inefficiencies in frontier 
markets, so tread carefully.  
 Summary 
 A successful export business revolves around satisfying customer demand. 
If you want to succeed in BRICS and other second-tier fast-growth markets, 
you must make extraordinary efforts, understand the operating environment 
and consumer trends, have the financial capacity to sustain the journey, offer 
products that are in demand at low prices, take a risk, and get the right people 
on board to execute your strategy. Nothing feels more satisfying in the busi-
ness world than claiming your place as a high-powered export player in BRICS, 
especially if you are improving billions of lives in the process. If you are up to 
the challenge and persist, you will reap the benefits for years to come. 
 After venturing into BRICS and other  second-tier countries  , what’s next? The 
world is larger than you think for opportunity! In the next chapter, I will look 
at ten export markets that are possibly the most attractive for selling your 
products. 
 Notes 
  i.   “5 Reasons Your Startup Isn’t in Emerging Markets (And 
Why It Should Be),” Huffpost Business, June 1, 2016, 
accessed June 12, 2016,    http://www.huffingtonpost.
com/young-entrepreneur-council/5-reasons-
your-startup-is_b_10166316.html  . 
  ii.   “How Smart Businesses Are Winning in Emerging Markets,” 
Reuters, February 22, 2013, accessed June 12, 2016,   http://
blogs.reuters.com/great-debate/2013/02/22/
how-smart-businesses-are-winning-in-emerging-
markets/  .  

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
528
 iii.   “BRICS Nations Plan New Bank to Bypass World Bank, 
IMF,” Mike Cohen and Ilya Arkhipov, Bloomberg, March 26,
2013,   http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-25/
brics-nations-plan-new-bank-to-bypass-world-
bank-imf.html  .  
 iv.   “Beyond the BRICS: Emerging Markets Opportunity,” 
Vanguard, March 23, 2016, accessed June 12, 2016, 
  https://personal.vanguard.com/us/insights/
article/beyond-brics-032016  .  
  v.   “Coca-Cola ‘Still the Largest Brand’ As Local Players Apply 
Pressure, FoodBev, June 9, 2016, accessed June 12, 2016, 
  http://www.foodbev.com/news/coca-cola-still-
the-largest-brand-as-local-players-apply-
pressure/  .  
 vi.  “The World Factbook; Country Comparison: Population,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, July 2015,   https://www.
cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-fact-
book/rankorder/2119rank.html?countryname=Braz
il&countrycode=br&regionCode=soa&rank=5#br  . 
 vii.   “The World Factbook; South America: Brazil,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, last modified October 25, 2013, 
  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/br.html  . 
 viii.   Patrick Bruha, “Payment Methods in Brazil,” The Brazil 
Business, January 19, 2015, accessed June 12, 2016, 
  http://thebrazilbusiness.com/article/payment-
methods-in-brazil-1421683322  . 
 ix.   “Brazil,” Office of the United States Trade Representative, 
accessed June 12, 2016,     http://www.ustr.gov/
countries-regions/americas/brazil  . 
 x.  “The World Factbook; Central Asia: Russia,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, last modified June 7, 2016, 
accessed June 12, 2016,   https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/
geos/rs.html  .  
 xi.   Anna Kuzmina, “An Introduction to Online Payments 
in Russia,” Internet Retailer, June 30, 2015, accessed 
June 12, 2016,   https://www.internetretailer.com/
c o m m e n t a r y / 2 0 1 5 / 0 6 / 3 0 / i n t r o d u c t i o n -
online-payments-russia  . 

Exporting
529
 xii.   “Doing Business in Russia: Market Overview,” export.gov, 
last modified June 7, 2013,     http://export.gov/rus-
sia/doingbusinessinrussia/index.asp  . 
 xiii.   “The World Factbook; South Asia: India,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, last modified October 31, 2013, 
  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/in.html  . 
 xiv.   “Global Online Payment Methods Report 2013–First Half 
2013,”  Wall Street Journal , May 30, 2013,    http://online.
wsj.com/article/PR-CO-20130530-906555.html  . 
 xv.   “India Country Commercial Guide,” Export.gov, last 
updated October 13, 2015, accessed June 12, 2016, 
  http://www.export.gov/ccg/india090814.asp . 
 xvi.  “The World Factbook; East & Southeast Asia: China,” 
Central Intelligence Agency, last updated June 7, 2016, 
accessed 
June 
12, 
2016, 
  https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/
ch.html  . 
 xvii.   Oren Levy, “Where In the World Are the Mobile Payment 
Users?” ATM Marketplace, June 10, 2016, accessed June 
12, 
2016, 
  http://www.atmmarketplace.com/arti-
cles/where-in-the-world-are-the-mobile-pay-
ment-users/  . 
 xviii.   Laurel Delaney, “Trade Routes to China,” The Wall Street 
Journal, June 12, 2000,   http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB960218205555337004  . 
 xix.   “The Art of War Quotes,” Sun Tzu, goodreads, 
  http://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/
3200649---s-nz-b-ngf  . 
 xx.  “The World Factbook; Africa: South Africa,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, last modified June 9, 2016, accessed 
June 12, 2016,   https://www.cia.gov/library/
publications/the-world-factbook/geos/
sf.html  .  
 xxi.   “Crossborder-Ecommerce | Payment Methods South 
Africa,” The Paypers, accessed June 12, 2016,   http://www.
thepaypers.com/payment-methods/southafrica/25  . 

Chapter 28 | New Frontiers in Emerging Markets
530
 xxii.   “South Africa Market Overview,” Export.gov, last updated 
June 7, 2016, accessed June 12, 2016,   http://apps.export.
gov/article?id=South-Africa-Market-Overview  . 
 xxiii.   C. K. Prahalad,  Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: 
Eradicating Poverty through Profits, Revised and Updated 
5 th Anniversary Edition (Philadelphia: Wharton School 
Publishing, 2009), 35 . 

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_29
 C H A P T E R 
 The Top Ten 
Export Business 
Markets 
 The best way to predict your future is to create it. 
 —Peter  Drucker  , management consultant, educator, and author 
 Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do. 
 —Johann Wolfgang von Goethe  
 By now, you’ve learned what it takes to find fulfillment and fortune beyond 
your national borders as an export business executive. Now it’s time to get 
started, and there’s no time like the present. So where are the  hot export 
markets  ? I won’t leave you guessing for long. 
 In this chapter, I discuss America’s ten best export trading markets. It is likely 
that your domestic competitors could already be taking advantage of these 
markets, which may or may not influence your decision to export to them. 
Check with your state trade office to see what kind of exporting support 
it provides. It could be anything from helping companies land new overseas 
 opportunities  to determining if an overseas inquiry is a scam or even offering 
export financing ideas. In Illinois, where I am based, there is fantastic support 
29

Chapter 29 | The Top Ten Export Business Markets
532
through the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity, 
the  International Trade Association of Greater Chicago  , the  Export Assistance 
Center Illinois, the  US Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity  , 
and the  International Trade Centers  . 
 The  Illinois Department  of Commerce and Economic  Opportunity  alone oper-
ates ten foreign trade offices in cities ranging from Mexico City to Shanghai. 
Both, as you will see, are top export markets for American companies. What 
does that mean for small businesses operating in Illinois? Free assistance to 
conduct business in those ten countries. Most people don’t even know about 
this magical gem of a resource offered by Illinois or that their own state has 
international trade office support. So, again, reach out to your state before you 
get started to see what kind of support it offers. 
 Once armed with your state’s best-kept secrets on export trade resources, 
it’s up to you to take action and expand your business into the hot markets. 
Let’s go! 
 America’s Best Export Markets  
 Here’s a look at the exporting facts related to America’s top ten export trading 
partners this year to date through April 2016, according to the United States 
Census Bureau.  i All numbers shown are in billions of dollars and reflect exports 
from the United States to a specific country. The data are for goods only. 
 
■ Note  Review the  Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement (  http://trade.gov/fta/tpp/?utm_
source=hero&utm_medium=tradegov&utm_campaign=tpp  ) and  North American Free Trade 
Agreement (  https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/north-
american-free-trade-agreement-nafta  ) to see how these agreements might eliminate 
tariffs, lower service barriers, and increase competitiveness in some of these markets.  
 1.  Canada  
 More than $176.7 billion worth of US goods were traded with Canada year 
to date April 2016, and the total exports from the United States year to date 
equal $87 billion (18.6 percent of export trade).  ii Given its closeness in geo-
graphic proximity, the similarity in business cultures, and the  North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),  Canada offers excellent business opportuni-
ties for qualified US firms, especially those operating in such key sectors as 
aerospace, energy, travel, tourism, automotive, and government procurement.  

Exporting
533
 
■ Tip  Looking for importers in Canada? You can contact the US Commercial Service in Canada 
(  http://export.gov/canada/ ), or you can get an even-faster idea of companies importing 
goods into Canada by product, by city, and by country of origin through the Canadian Importers 
Database (  https://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/cid-dic.nsf/eng/home ) on the Industry 
Canada site. The information is based on 2014 data collected by the Canada Border Services 
Agency (CBSA). 
 2.  Mexico  
 The total exports from the United States to Mexico so far this year are $75 
billion (16.1 percent of export trade). Mexico was the second-largest goods 
 export   market for the United States in 2016. This is in part based on the 
North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ), which has fueled interna-
tional trade activity between the United States, Canada, and Mexico due to 
the elimination of duties and other trade restrictions. In 2016, according to 
the latest data available, $170.5 billion worth of US goods alone were traded 
with  Mexico  .  iii 
 According to the Office of the United States Trade Representative, the top 
export categories for Mexico in 2015 were machinery, electrical machinery, 
mineral fuel and oil, vehicles, and plastic. Mexico ranks as the third largest 
US agricultural export market, reaching $18 billion for that year. The lead-
ing export categories are corn, coarse grains, pork and pork products, beef 
and beef products, soybeans, and dairy products. U.S. exports of services to 
Mexico were an estimated $30.8 billion in 2015. Travel, intellectual property 
(computer software), and financial services, as well as the travel industry, 
accounted for most of US services exports to  Mexico.  
 
■ Tip  All small business owners worry about getting paid on exports. When doing business in 
Mexico, it’s no different. Keep your payment options open. The fifteen-page PDF report (2012)  Mexico: 
Financing Options for your Mexican Buyer  (  http://www.buyusainfo.net/docs/x_5718905.
pdf  ) will help you minimize risks associated with each payment option and ensure you get paid.  
 3.  China  
 The total  exports   from the United States to China year to date 2016 are 
$33.9 billion (7.3 percent of export trade). Trading with China—the more than 
1.3 billion-person Goliath—strengthens our economy and at the same time 

Chapter 29 | The Top Ten Export Business Markets
534
creates jobs for American workers. As reported by export.gov, “China is cur-
rently our largest goods trading partner with $598 billion in total (two way) 
goods trade during 2015. Goods exports totaled $116 billion; goods imports 
totaled $482 billion.”  iv Opportunities abound for businesses of all sizes in 
China. You don’t have to look far. The following Web sites, organizations, and 
programs provide valuable information for doing business with China:
• 
 Commercial Service China :  (  http://www.export.gov/
china/  ). Every year, this site analyzes the best opportuni-
ties for exports from the United States to China—from 
education and training to automotive components mar-
kets and travel and tourism.  
• 
 AccessAmerica :   (  http://export.gov/china/services/
accessamerica/index.asp  ). This program promotes 
the services of US-based firms to customers and inves-
tors in China, giving access and exposure to Chinese cli-
ents seeking US expertise in trade finance, branding, legal, 
insurance, and other needs.  
• 
 E-to-China.com :  (  http://www.e-to-china.com ). Have 
a look at the only Web site authorized by the General 
Administration of Customs of P. R. China (GACC) to 
provide comprehensive Chinese customs information in 
English.  
• 
 The National Bureaus of Statistics of China :  (  http://
www.stats.gov.cn/english/  ). This organization is the 
authoritative source of trade statistics collected by the 
Chinese government. 
• 
 The Sinocism China Newsletter : (  https://sinocism.com ). 
This free email newsletter helps readers better under-
stand China with commentary and curated links to the 
important English and Chinese news of the day.  
• 
 A Pocket Guide to Doing Business in China : (  http://www.
mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-
and-corporate-finance/our-insights/a-pocket-
guide-to-doing-business-in-china  ). McKinsey & 
Company provides trends shaping the world’s second-
largest economy to explain what companies must do to 
operate effectively.  

Exporting
535
 
■ Caution   China continues to be a challenging environment for intellectual property protection. 
To safely market your products and services abroad, visit   http://www.STOPfakes.gov . Also 
review the Inernational  AntiCounterfeiting Coalition site, where several big companies such 
as Tiffany & Co., Gucci, and Michael Kors withdrew their participation due to the organization 
admitting Chinese e-commerce company Alibaba Group Ltd.—a company that doesn’t combat 
fakes online—as a member in April 2016:   http://www.iacc.org . 
 4.  Japan 
 The total exports from the United  States  to Japan at this point in 2016 equal 
$19.7 billion (4.2 percent of export trade). Japan is the world’s third largest 
economy, after the United States and China. Japan is the fourth largest export 
market for U.S. goods and services, exporting over $66.5 billion (8 billion yen) 
worth of goods to Japan in 2015.  v The top export categories for Japan are: 
civilian aircraft engines, equipment, and parts; medicinal equipment; pharma-
ceutical preparations; meat and poultry; and corn, to name just a few. 
 Due to Japan’s “silver” market, where in 2014, twenty-six percent of the coun-
try’s population is sixty-five years old or older,  vi home care products, nursing 
homes, and hospital products are very much in demand.  
 
■ Tip  For a comprehensive look on what it’s like to do business in Japan, visit Japan Commercial 
Country Guide at   http://www.export.gov/ccg/japan090820.asp  . For additional support 
and help with your exports to Japan, try the  Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) Web site at 
  http://www.jetro.go.jp/usa/ . JETRO helps American companies enter and expand in the 
Japanese market. 
 5. United Kingdom 
 Exports from the United States to the United Kingdom total $18.4 billion (3.9 
percent of export trade) as of this point in 2016. According to the CIA’s 2015 
 World Factbook , the United Kingdom is a major  international trading power  , 
holding the position of the third largest economy in Europe after Germany 
and France.  vii According to export.gov, the United Kingdom has few trade 
barriers and is the entry market into the European Union for more than 
forty-three thousand US exporters.  viii However, with the recent news that the 
UK has removed itself from the European Union, referred to as Brexit, Britain 
must seek new trade accords with countries around the world. Watch closely 
for how Brexit pans out in the future and whether trade between the US and 
the UK is impacted, if at all.  

Chapter 29 | The Top Ten Export Business Markets
536
 Major export  categories   for US companies to the United Kingdom include 
aerospace products; building products and sustainable construction; cyber 
security; medical equipment; pet products; low-carbon energy and smart grids; 
and travel & tourism. 
 
■ Tip  For a comprehensive look at conducting business in the United Kingdom, access  Doing 
Business in the United Kingdom: 2016 Country Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies from   http://
export.gov/unitedkingdom/doingbusinessintheuk/eg_gb_026650.asp  . For more on 
Brexit, visit   http://importexport.about.com/od/TradePoliciesAndAgreements/fl/
Stunned-UK-Votes-to-Remove-Itself-from-European-Union-EU.htm  . 
 6.  Germany 
 The total exports going from the United States to Germany so far in 2016 
are $16.3 billion (3.5 percent of export trade). Germany is considered the 
 largest market  in the European Union for American exporters. It is the largest 
European trading partner of the United States and is the fifth largest market 
for U.S. exports for 2015. Further, Germany is the largest consumer market in 
the European Union, with a population of 81.3 million in 2015. U.S. exports to 
Germany in 2015 were $49.9 billion.  ix 
 The primary US export and import  commoditites  to Germany (the latest 
available data is from 2013) are: apparel, chemical goods, electrical equipment, 
beverages, machinery, and cars and car parts.  
 
■ Tip  The PDF report  Doing Business in Germany: 2015 Country Commercial Guide for U.S. 
Companies (  http://www.export.gov/germany/build/groups/public/@eg_de/documents/
webcontent/eg_de_087922.pdf/  ) offers a look at how to sell US products and services to 
Germany; the leading business sectors for US export and investment; and trade regulations, 
customs, and standards. If you are interested in moving to Germany, try Expatica (  http://www.
expatica.com/  ), an online portal of news and information for the international community. 
Women should try the Berlin International Women’s Club (  http://www.biwc.de/ ). 
 7.  Netherlands  
 The total exports from the United States to the Netherlands at this point in 
the year are $13.3 billion (2.8 percent of export trade). The Netherlands is a 
smart choice to export to because it is considered Europe’s largest port of 

Exporting
537
entry, making the country a gateway to Europe. The Netherlands is an ideal 
European starting point for new-to-export companies looking for their first 
European distributor. The United States is the largest foreign investor in the 
Netherlands, and its largest bilateral trade surplus is with the country.  x 
 The Netherlands offers excellent business opportunities for qualified US firms, 
especially those operating in such key sectors as agriculture (seafood prod-
ucts, food preparations, tree nuts, vegetable oils, and planting seeds) and com-
mercial clean technology; computer and communications equipment; cyber 
security services; energy; healthcare technology/medical devices; biotechnol-
ogy; renewable energy; marine supplies and pleasure boats; seaport security 
equipment and systems; automotive parts and accessories; aerospace; aircraft 
parts and associated equipment; airport security equipment; and systems and 
software.  
 
■ Tip  For a comprehensive look at what it’s like to do business in the Netherlands, access 
the  Doing Business in the Netherlands: 2016 Country Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies at 
  http://www.export.gov/ccg/netherlands090862.asp . 
 8.  South Korea  
 The total exports from the United States to South Korea to this point in the 
year are $12.7 billion (2.7 percent of export trade). The United States is the 
third largest exporter worldwide to Korea. US firms are in a stronger com-
petitive situation to sell more made-in-the-USA goods, services, and agricul-
tural products to Korean customers following the United States-Korea Free 
Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA).  xi 
 The leading sectors for exports from the United States to Korea include: 
aerospace, agricultural products, cosmetics, defense, ecommerce, education 
services, energy (new and renewable), entertainment and media, environmen-
tal, medical equipment and devices, semiconductors, and travel and tourism.   
 
■ Tip  For more information on how to do business with Korea, access  Doing Business in Korea: 
2016 Country Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies from   http://www.export.gov/ccg/
korea090824.asp  . 

Chapter 29 | The Top Ten Export Business Markets
538
 9. Belgium 
 The total exports being delivered to Belgium year to date from the United 
States are $11.1 billion (2.4 percent of export trade). Belgium is strategically 
situated in Europe, and home to many European Union institutions, such as 
NATO, making it an extremely attractive place to do business. It also enjoys 
the highest per capita income in Europe. With its major ports (Antwerp is 
the second largest port in Europe) and excellent logistical infrastructure, a 
significant portion of bilateral trade either originates in, or is destined for, 
other countries in Europe.  xii The best prospects for US exports include: aero-
space and defense, agricultural products, civil nuclear energy, ecommerce and 
mcommerce, medical devices, renewal fuels and biomass wood pellets, safety 
and security, and travel and tourism.  
 
■ Tip  To access the latest (2015) report  Doing Business in Belgium: 2015 Country Commercial 
Guide for U.S. Companies , visit   http://www.export.gov/ccg/belgium090679.asp  . 
 10. Hong  Kong  
 The total exports being delivered to Hong Kong from the United States 
are $10.8 billion (2.4 percent of export trade). Some reasons the country is 
good for US exporters are that Hong Kong offers a great base from which 
to enter China; it has a fairly reliable financial and legal infrastructure; and it 
has experienced local trilingual (English, Mandarin, and Cantonese) executives 
and consultants that can be hired, making it easier to establish and conduct 
business there. More important, “Hong Kong is a  free port   that does not levy 
any customs tariff and has limited excise duties.”  xiii The best prospects for US 
exports include: electronic components; medical equipment and pharmaceuti-
cals; environmental technologies and services; aviation and airport equipment; 
transportation infrastructure; environmental technologies; safety and security 
equipment; financial services; education and training services; travel and tour-
ism services; retail; and consumer goods, such as  packaged food  , wine, cosmet-
ics, and toiletries.  xiv   
 
■ Tip  To access the latest (2016) report  Doing Business in Hong Kong and Macau: 2016 Country 
Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies , visit   http://export.gov/ccg/hongkongmacau09068 
0.asp  . For more details on import/export policies in Hong Kong, visit   http://www.gov.hk/en/
business/global/importexport/index.htm  .  

Exporting
539
 Summary 
 Before you take on America’s ten best export-trading markets, check with 
your state trade office to see what kind of exporting support it provides and 
find out if any  trade agreements  are in effect. You will want to enter these 
exciting markets in a practical, effective, and cost-conscious fashion. And don’t 
be discouraged if you don’t see your products or services listed in the hot 
prospect lists. By the time this book goes to press, the markets will have 
changed, offering new and different opportunities that might present a bet-
ter fit for your capabilities. If you want to get your products and services 
into these markets, you must anticipate having to work hard. But you can 
also anticipate transforming your business into a profitable export enterprise 
where you own, and are proud of, the result. 
 To succeed as an exporter, you must apply fortitude and practice—by starting 
to do—what you have learned. But before getting started, you should take 
into consideration what others have done in the export marketplace to over-
come challenges and become successful. To gain some inspiration from some 
star exporters, turn to the next chapter.  
 Notes 
  i.   “U.S. Top Trading Partners—April 2016,” United States 
Census Bureau, accessed June 13, 2016,   https://www.
census.gov/foreign-trade/statistics/high-
lights/toppartners.html  . 
 The source for the listing is provided by the US Census 
Bureau News, Foreign Trade, U.S. Top Trading Partners.  
  ii.   Ibid.  
 iii.   Ibid.  
 iv.   “The People’s Republic of China,” export.gov, accessed 
June 14, 2016,    https://ustr.gov/countries-regions/
china-mongolia-taiwan/peoples-republic-china  . 
  v.   “Doing Business in Japan,” export.gov, last modified 
December 15, 2015, accessed June 14, 2016,    http://
export.gov/japan/doingbusinessinjapan/index.
asp  . 
 vi.   “Fear of Dying Alone: The State of Japan’s Aging Population,” 
The Wall Street Journal, accessed June 14, 2016,   http://
blogs.wsj.com/japanrealtime/2015/06/16/fear-
of-dying-alone-the-state-of-japans-aging-popu-
lation/  .  

Chapter 29 | The Top Ten Export Business Markets
540
 vii.   “The World Factbook; Europe: United Kingdom,” Central 
Intelligence Agency, last modified October 29, 2013,  
  https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/
the-world-factbook/geos/uk.html  . 
 viii.   “United Kingdom Market Overview,” export.gov, last 
modified April 17, 2016,    http://apps.export.gov/
article?id=United-Kingdom-Market-Overview  . 
 ix.   “Welcome to the U.S. Commercial Service Germany,” 
export.gov, last modified May 17, 2016, accessed June 14, 
2016,    http://www.export.gov/germany/ . 
 x.   Netherlands Country Commercial Guide , US Commercial 
Service, last modified April 17, 2016, accessed 
June 14, 2016,   http://apps.export.gov/article?
id=Netherlands-Market-Overview  . 
 xi.   “New Opportunities for the U.S. Exporters Under the 
U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement,” Office of the United 
States Trade Representative, accessed June 14, 2016, 
  http://www.ustr.gov/trade-agreements/
free-trade-agreements/korus-fta  . 
 xii.   “Belgium Market Overview,” export.gov, last modified 
April 17, 2016, accessed June 14, 2016,   http://apps.
export.gov/article?id=Belgium-Market-Overview  . 
 xiii.   “Doing Business in Hong Kong,” export.gov, last modified 
September 7, 2015,   http://export.gov/hongkong/
doingbusinessinhongkong/index.asp  . 
 xiv.   Ibid.  

P A R T
 Export Mastery 
 
VIII

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_30
C H A P T E R 
Export Success
Real-Life Accounts of Successful Export 
Businesses
We’ve come a long way in our journey, and now it’s time to learn from other 
small business owners on how they overcame challenges and became suc-
cessful exporters. In this chapter, you’ll find personal experiences supported 
by sound advice about what it takes to run a successful exporting business.
Success Stories and Key Lessons
World Blazer: Run Your international Division like  
it is a Start-up (Even if it isn’t)
Here’s a deep dive into World Blazer Consulting LLC (http://www.world-
blazer.com) founder Alison Larson’s way of thinking, and a look at insights 
from her 26 years of international business experience in the apparel industry. 
Larson served as vice president, Global Business Development for Carter’s, 
the No. 1 children’s wear brand in the USA, where she was instrumental in 
taking Carter’s from a label with little international recognition to a brand 
exceeding 20 percent international growth per year.
Prior to Carter’s, Alison worked as managing director, international for 
OshKosh B’Gosh, where, for 15 years, she helped build the brand from its 
international infancy to a premier children’s brand selling apparel, accessories, 
and other related product categories in top retail locations around the world.
30

Chapter 30 | Export Success
544
I interviewed Larson to find out what it takes to be successful developing an 
international brand.
Laurel Delaney: To put things in perspective, give us an idea of what annual sales 
for OshKosh were at the time you started, and what percent was interna-
tional? What countries were you selling to?
Alison Larson: In 1990, OshKosh company sales were approximately $323M 
(wholesale and retail). International was about $22M (wholesale and licensed) 
or 6 percent of company sales. At the time, OshKosh was doing a small amount 
of export and licensed business in Europe, Asia/Pacific, the Caribbean, Mexico, 
Canada, and the Middle East. The business had been managed by the US sales 
team until about a year before I joined. When I came on board, there was only the 
general manager of international and a customer service rep out of Wisconsin.
Delaney: What were some of the first initiatives you took to develop an inter-
national presence for OshKosh?
Larson: One of the first things we did was create brand development manuals 
so we could ensure that we established a high-quality, consistent brand image 
for OshKosh around the world. We developed an international retail concept 
for freestanding stores and shops and a corresponding do-it-yourself manual 
so our international partners could implement the concept locally under our 
specifications. Along with that, we developed a merchandising manual and video 
that showed our partners exactly how to present and merchandise our prod-
ucts at retail. We also created an international marketing manual that outlined 
specific guidelines for implementing our advertising layouts, images, and mes-
sage around the world. The ads were adapted slightly for international markets 
and were updated every season. We also put together approval procedures in 
marketing, product development, retail, and quality control in order to make 
sure that we protected our brand image and were consistent in all markets.
Delaney: What was the single greatest challenge you faced in getting the 
OshKosh brand accepted, recognized, and established on a global scale? What 
was your greatest success while building the OshKosh brand globally?
Larson: In the early nineties, the US was behind many of the major markets 
in terms of fashion trends and quality standards. Our US designers would 
often go to Europe for design inspiration, so the trends that we incorporated 
were typically a year behind Europe. Therefore, international buyers, especially 
those in Europe, would complain that our designs were out of trend. We 
also were offering poly/cotton tops when many of the international markets 
wanted 100 percent cotton. As a result, we found that certain aspects of the 
Oshkosh line had to be adapted in order to meet the high standards of the 
European and often Asian consumer.
I believe that our greatest success in building the OshKosh brand globally was 
being able to position it at a more premium level as compared to our business in 
the United States. The international consumer was looking for brands that were 

Exporting
545
more upscale and could be sold in higher-end department stores. In the US, we 
were selling to a few mid-level department stores, but much of our business was 
being done in outlet centers. This meant that we had to upgrade everything we 
did: product, store design, marketing materials, etc. As a result, our brand image 
around the world was higher than that in the US, and our stores and shops 
internationally looked better than any of the stores we had in the United States.
Delaney: Can you share a failure and how you turned it into a powerful learn-
ing lesson going forward?
Larson: At the very beginning of my career, OshKosh wanted to explode its 
European business and decided to enter into a joint venture (JV) with a com-
pany in France. In Europe, OshKosh's bib overall was very well-known, as both 
Princes William and Harry of the UK were photographed often wearing the 
overalls when they were children. At the time, OshKosh was exporting a mod-
est amount of product throughout Europe but recognized that adaptations to 
the product, marketing, and retail concept would have to be made in order to 
better satisfy the needs and requirements of the European consumer. The JV 
company opened subsidiaries in Germany, the UK, and France and serviced 
the rest of Europe through the Paris headquarters. To make a long story short, 
OshKosh ended up having to buy out the JV partner a couple of years later 
and formed a wholly owned subsidiary.
The venture was a disaster from the beginning. The organization that was estab-
lished was for a company with an international business the size of Levi's, not for 
a medium-sized company like OshKosh with a small international business. Also, 
the general manager of Europe was not experienced enough to run such a com-
plicated business. Moreover, we adapted the product so much for Europe that 
it lost much of its midwestern American heritage and became a very upscale 
European brand. The product costs and corresponding retail prices were so 
high that the company had difficulties selling everything but the bib overall and 
couldn't make enough profit to cover the high overhead of the company.
Unfortunately, millions of dollars later, when the decision was finally made 
to close down the company, many people lost their jobs, including my boss 
at the time. I was very fortunate, as I had been able to spend a great deal of 
time in Europe, working in the offices and the stores and at trade shows. The 
European experience I gained and the lessons I learned were invaluable and 
shaped my career for years to come.
Delaney: Did you have a companywide commitment to grow the international 
business for Carter’s?
Larson: In the beginning, there was not a real companywide commitment to grow 
the international business at Carter's. The CEO at that time really wanted to 
focus on the US business. It was very difficult because we had the lowest priority 
in the company when it came to resources and visibility. If the company was short 
product, it came from international orders. If there were delays, international was 

Chapter 30 | Export Success
546
shipped last. There was a very small budget allocated to international develop-
ment. We had a skeleton staff and had to develop most of our materials ourselves. 
Our partners suffered the most because, although they were investing heavily in 
beautiful stores, their voices were never heard. Compared to the size of the US 
business, their businesses were too small to matter.
The great thing was that it forced us to be very resourceful and creative and 
focus on building a strong foundation for the Carter's brand and great rela-
tionships with our international partners. We were left alone by corporate 
and could develop what we felt the business really needed.
When the next CEO took over, things began to change. The company realized 
that international would be an important growth vehicle for the company and 
therefore decided to give our division more visibility, more priority, and more 
resources.
Delaney: Based on your global business experience, what are some critical 
errors that companies make when going global?
Larson: A common mistake that companies make is going with the first com-
pany that approaches them. There usually is little to no research done, no 
strategy developed, and no other partners considered. They quickly launch in 
a foreign market and then eventually pull out when the business fails to make 
money and becomes a big distraction to the team. They then spend the next 
year or two cleaning up the market and trying to rebuild their reputation.
Another common error I see is companies going global before they are ready. 
When things are difficult in their home market and they need to increase 
sales, they look to international for growth. This is a bad approach, as prob-
lems typically get magnified when entering a new market. A company that is 
financially strong with a solid business in its home market almost always has 
a much greater chance of success in international expansion than a company 
that is struggling at home.
Delaney: When developing an international strategy and conducting competi-
tive assessments on a brand, how much focus should be placed on competi-
tors who appear to be successful?
Larson: I believe that a thorough competitive analysis is one of the most impor-
tant parts of the market assessment process and the company's ultimate suc-
cess in the country. It is critical that a company look at competitors in their 
industry and specific category in order to succeed internationally. And, while 
I feel that it is important to look at brands or companies that have been suc-
cessful in that particular country, it is probably equally if not more important 
to look at those that have been unsuccessful. After all, why repeat the same 
mistakes that others have made before you if you don't have to?
Delaney: Many companies talk about the importance of forming partnerships 
to grow their business internationally. What’s the best way to decipher a good 
partner from a bad partner?

Exporting
547
Larson: In my opinion, the partner that you choose will be the most important 
determinant of whether you will be successful in a foreign market. This is not 
a process that should be rushed through, yet the majority of companies that 
I come across enter international markets by accident, not by design. They 
often go with the first company that approaches them without doing signifi-
cant research on the market or the partner. Choosing the wrong partner can 
damage your company or brand's reputation, cost you significant amounts of 
money, and set you back years in a market.
In the vetting process, I typically use the following criteria in evaluating a com-
pany. First, you should look at the quality of the other brands they carry. The 
best brands get the best partners, but there are also good companies that 
carry lesser known but quality brands as well. The company’s reputation in 
the market is also very important. If possible, one should check a company’s 
references by calling one or two of the brands that the company represents.
Good partners must be strong financially so they can invest in the business. 
Make sure that you always do a credit check on the company before signing 
a contract to make sure that they are financially sound. Having a strong dis-
tribution network is key in getting your brand placed with the right retailers. 
Many companies will list a bunch of retailers that they will sell your product 
to, but often they have no idea whether the retailer will even take your brand, 
especially if they are not already doing business with them.
A product and cultural fit with your company is critical when selecting a good 
partner. The company’s brands and product lines should be complementary to 
yours and not compete directly. When determining cultural fit, you want to 
make sure that your two companies have the same values and vision for the 
future of your brand or product. You also need to establish mutual trust. If you 
do not fully trust the company or seem to have a lot of disagreements dur-
ing the negotiating process, chances are this company is a bad cultural fit. And 
lastly, make sure that the business plan the company submits to you is realistic 
and well thought out. Aggressive business plans with big numbers look great 
on paper but often do not get executed.
Delaney: Is there such a thing as an inability to adapt a product for an interna-
tional market?
Larson: Yes. For smaller brands, localizing can be particularly difficult, if not 
impossible, due to an inability to reach production minimums. Often, a brand 
must wait until it has developed a significant volume in its core business before 
it can realistically begin to adapt any of its products for international markets. 
With that said, design, spec, and other product adaptations can put a lot of 
pressure on the supply chain, so it is critical that there is enough need and 
demand for the new product. Minimums need to be met and product costs, 
margins, and pricing must make financial and commercial sense.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
548
I also see brands that refuse to adapt their product for international markets 
due to ego or the desire to keep the authenticity of the brand. Sometimes, 
when a brand is very strong in its home market, it assumes that the product 
will work around the world without any tweaks. The problem is that fashion 
can be especially difficult to cross borders because consumers' preferences 
vary considerably in terms of design, color, silhouettes, and fit.
While I do believe that localizing products for certain international markets 
may be necessary, the decision to do so should not be taken lightly. Not every 
trend works for every brand, and not every style works in every country. 
The most successful brands are those that can tweak their offering without 
the consumer ever really knowing that changes have been made because the 
product looks and feels like the original.
Key Lessons
Larson offers a plethora of insights. Make sure your brand and company have a 
strong foundation before you go global. Adapt your strategy to each new mar-
ket. Do your homework, take a long view, and legally protect your brand at all 
costs. Choose your overseas partner with the same care and attention as you 
would selecting a personal partner, because it can make or break your success.
Philip Pittsford, Chairman of the National District 
Export Council: Learn the Rules of the Export Road
What is the key to success in cracking open an international market? What 
are the challenges? Have trade agreements fueled export opportunity for busi-
nesses? These are among some of the questions I asked Philip Pittsford, chairman 
of the National District Export Council (http://districtexportcouncil.
org). Pittsford served as Vice President of International Sales for Corr-Jensen for 
one year, and prior to that he spent 15 years as International Sales Manager at 
NOW Health Group, where he oversaw operational issues, including a network 
of in-country distributors active in more than 60 countries. Pittsford has won 
numerous awards for exporting excellence, namely the President’s E-Award for 
Export Excellence, and the Illinois Governor’s Export Awards.
Laurel Delaney: What is the key to success in cracking open international 
markets?
Philip Pittsford: Commitment. Determination. Focus. Patience. There must be a 
true commitment in pursuit of international markets. This commitment should 
include being open to making changes to your products so that they comply 
with local and/or regional requirements in your targeted market(s). Have a 
determination to follow through on the commitment to ensure that your  
products can be legally imported and sold into the market. Focus on  

Exporting
549
providing the documents needed for market entry and/or compliance. A great 
deal of international commerce succeeds or fails on the documents available. 
Whether they are related to product registration, a specific certification, or 
customs entry, much of the difficulty in exporting is due to having the proper 
documentation. Paper drives a lot of international commerce, and the fact 
that a company is willing and able to produce the required documents or 
pursue a license needed to enter a market is what separates it from the rest. 
In the case of nutritional supplements, these documents will pertain to reg-
istrations, product specifications, and certain product licenses for the import 
and/or export of the item. For industrial goods, they could include specific 
product certifications. Without these licenses or certifications, your product 
will not enter the market. These behind-the-border obstacles can keep you 
from entering the market. Patience comes into play because gathering the 
necessary documents takes time, and submitting for review for a license or 
registration in a foreign market also takes time. 
Delaney: On the opposite side of the spectrum, what is the single greatest inter-
national growth expansion challenge for companies and how is it overcome?
Pittsford: The biggest challenge is getting the full commitment of the owner and 
senior management to what is needed to fully take advantage of the opportu-
nities that international markets offer. Oftentimes there need to be changes in 
formulations and label text, for example. Not all small- to medium-sized busi-
nesses (SMEs) are in a position to offer these product adaptations.
Delaney: Have trade agreements fueled new overseas market entries for 
companies?
Pittsford: The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) offers great promise for many 
SMEs in that it will bring down many of the behind-the-border obstacles that 
can keep companies from gaining access to new markets. TPP addresses prod-
uct standards and it offers a unique opportunity for the US to contribute the 
establishment of many of the standards that will be used for years to come. 
This would do away with much of the additional testing and applications that 
many companies must go through as they are trying to enter new markets. 
These add significantly to the cost of doing business overseas, adding to the 
price at which companies must sell their products in order to be profitable. 
TPP also brings down tariffs. Imagine having an additional duty of 20%, 30%, 
or 60% added to the cost of your products upon clearing customs in a for-
eign market. In many cases, your product just went from being competitive 
to becoming more expensive and possibly no longer competitive. TPP will be 
good for American manufacturers and exporters in opening up a large and 
growing market for American companies. There are currently about 350 mil-
lion middle-class consumers, and it is believed that this number will exceed 3 
billion by the year 2030.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
550
Delaney: What action should a business owner take when international sales 
stall as a result of a strong dollar or competitive pressure?
Pittsford: In the industries in which I have been working, raw materials are 
sourced from all over the world, and as a result exchange rates have an impact 
on costs, whether they go up or down. However, with few exceptions, the 
impact is not enough to lead to a change in prices. The cost of labor and pack-
aging can far outweigh the cost of the actual product itself. A strong dollar 
has had the biggest impact on product prices at retail. I refrain from offering 
discounts based on the strength of the dollar, based on the above reasons. In 
the past I have worked to offer smaller package sizes—in this way you are 
offering a less expensive product to meet certain market conditions without 
having to lower your prices.
Delaney: Is there a lesson you have learned the hard way on international sales 
expansion?
Pittsford: Take a hard look in the mirror and ask yourself if you are ready to go 
international. Export sales should not be approached as a last desperate act 
to save your company, nor should international markets be considered as the 
dumping ground for excess inventory or sub-standard product. Consumers 
overseas are sophisticated and they read labels. If you are successful in your 
home market, your business is solid, and you have excess capacity, you should 
consider exports with the understanding that it is a long-term commitment. 
Do not just jump in. Take a hard look at what will be required for you to enter 
targeted markets and choose your targets carefully. Most exporters are “acci-
dental” in that they were approached by a foreign buyer and took the order. 
This can work for a while, but it is not the way to build an export business.
Delaney: Any major trend you see around the corner that will impact how all 
of us will conduct business globally?
Pittsford: The Internet has already changed the face of retail in terms of how, 
when, and where consumers shop and what they expect as customers. 
Companies today must have an online presence at all levels. They also need 
to have a web strategy so that they have some control of over pricing. We 
can suggest retail prices, but we cannot dictate what companies charge their 
customers. As a result, you should carefully consider your pricing when looking 
at a multi-channel strategy. A well-planned and executed strategy should allow 
you to pursue both online and brick and mortar sales. Be sure that your web 
site is mobile friendly, as a lot of consumers now buy from their mobile devices. 
Key Lessons
The takeaway from Pittsford’s advice is to be open to making changes to your 
products. Make sure export documentation is prepared accurately and that 
your product can be legally sold in a market you are about to enter. Look into 

Exporting
551
active trade agreements such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement to 
see how you might benefit from it. Above all else, be patient. In the case of 
exporting, it is truly a virtue.
Paulson Manufacturing: Listen to Your Customers 
and Take the Long View
Think that the face shields for firefighters’ helmets, the riot shields for police 
helmets, and the body shields worn by police are difficult to export? Not for 
Roy Paulson, president of California-based Paulson Manufacturing (http://
www.paulsonmfg.com) and director of Paulson International in Germany, who 
makes these trademarked products and exports them all across the planet. 
Paulson Manufacturing’s total sales for 2017 are projected to be $20 million, 
with international sales at 25 percent.
Paulson’s business is very similar to that of the millions of small businesses in the 
United States that are eager to export. I spoke with him to find out how he’s 
become successful and what tips he can offer newcomers to the export industry.
Laurel Delaney: What’s the secret sauce to your international success?
Roy Paulson: What’s set us apart is that we have concentrated on develop-
ing our exports and rechanneling the innovations from all the international 
contacts into products for our domestic markets. We build our products in 
California, prioritize the use of domestic materials and, hence, we are able to 
successfully sell all around the world. 
Delaney: Are you globally competitive on everything you manufacture?
Paulson: It is selected product items that sell the best internationally. We find 
that the most innovative products sell the best internationally, and it is very 
important to listen to what the customer wants. Don’t shove what you have 
down their throats; your business will not grow and you will be resented.
Delaney: How do you gauge what new product or new market to take on 
next?
Paulson: The feedback from our international sales team is very important to 
developing our international product line and business plans. We consider the 
feedback precious, good or bad news—does not matter—we take it all in and 
use it to our advantage. In the end it is to the advantage and benefit of our 
customers.
Delaney: Where can a small business owner get blindsided in his export 
activities?
Paulson: It is very important to make sure that everyone is making money in 
the entire supply chain. Otherwise, the business will be short term. This is the 
responsibility of the US exporter.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
552
Delaney: What about the product side of pricing at a profit?
Paulson: Price rarely comes up, unless there is a large Request for Quotation 
(RFQ) or a competitive situation. My position is to not sell on price, but rather 
to sell on innovation.
Delaney: Where are you putting your energy these days to squeeze out or fuel 
growth for your business?
Paulson: We have placed tremendous efforts on developing new markets. We 
now have ten distributors in India. We are taking the long view, as we all know 
that it takes time to develop these advanced export markets. By taking this 
point of view and avoiding getting distracted with short-term, one-time sales, 
we are building for the future.
Delaney: What factors have been challenging for you at Paulson Manufacturing? 
Paulson: While we have continued to grow our sales, the value of the US dollar 
has created a significant headwind. Along with the value of the dollar, the drop 
in the price of oil created a loss of sales in many areas of the world.
Delaney: What’s the work-around, or how do you navigate through such trying 
times?
Paulson: We have lowered prices, increased inventories for faster delivery, and 
hired additional salespeople to visit our customers on a regular basis.
Delaney: What’s helped you sleep at night? In other words, tell me what export 
solutions you have put into play that have worked.
Paulson: In general, we are making a physical visit to every customer four times 
per year. These efforts have kept the exports sales growing, and we are con-
tinuously looking for more customers and new markets to counter the next 
headwind that may blow in at any time.
Delaney: What other advice can you provide relative to what you’ve learned 
on the road to exporting success?
Paulson: I have two more critical points: First, visiting customers in their own 
country is one of the keys to exporting success. These visits must be on a 
regular basis and within the time frame expected of the customer. We have 
the tendency to rush in and out. This will not work in export development. 
When you visit your customers, take your time and stay a while. You will get 
more business simply because of your attitude.
Second, I have traveled the world, selling our products and developing rela-
tionships with my customers, and discovered the key to achieving export sales 
is relationship selling. There is a simple formula I use related to developing 
exports. In domestic sales, for example, we cherish and defend a transac-
tional selling method where the prioritization is on price, quality, and delivery. 
Domestic sales are typically 75 percent transactional and only 25 percent 

Exporting
553
relational. With export sales, relational selling is 75 percent of the equation 
with 25 percent being transactional. This is the key to developing export sales 
and achieving long-term export success.
Key Lessons
The takeaway from Paulson’s advice is to listen to your customers and take 
the long view to build for the future. Make sure the entire supply chain is 
making money. Don’t sell on price; sell on innovation. Visit your customers in 
person and on a regular schedule that the customer expects to keep exports 
growing. Continuously look for new customers and new markets to counter 
the next headwind that may blow in at any time. When you sell, develop the 
relationship and then focus on the transaction.
Roberts & Company: Get Things in Writing
Taking companies global helped Barbara Robertsi increase her revenue. 
Before it was sold to Getty Images, FPG (Freelance Photographers Guild) 
International, the company that Roberts was formerly the president of, was 
already one of the largest stock photography companies. The company sold 
the rights to use its photographs in local advertising and editorial products 
internationally. It did this by finding a local stock photography company and 
contracting with it to allow the company exclusive licenses of FPG’s photo-
graphs in its country.
The other company that Roberts served as president of, Acoustiguide, is 
the supplier of audio tours, equipment, and staff for museums and historical 
sites around the world. At the time she was president, Acoustiguide supplied 
these audio tours through direct sales, joint ventures in a specific country, and 
wholly owned subsidiaries.
With both of these companies, international business grew to account for 
between 30 and 40 percent of revenues. I talked with Roberts (Roberts & 
Company [http://www.brobertsco.com]) to find out what she learned 
when she took these products global.
Laurel Delaney: What did you learn from your exporting experience that you 
can share? 
Barbara Roberts: First, you cannot go international without having a lot of things in 
writing. In both of these companies, the product that we were selling was intel-
lectual property. Accordingly, legal work and documents were a critical part of 
our process and success or failure. For successfully selling this type of product, 
putting all details, expectations, rules, and obligations in a contract was necessary 
for success. This was of course important doing business in the US, but if there 
are language barriers in verbal discussions, it is even more critical to have very 
detailed written documents that can be translated into any necessary language.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
554
Second, you will be more successful in international sales if you have the right 
local partner or employee. In my experience, people who found me often 
worked out better than people I actively sourced. Potential international part-
ners who had found me typically had done research on me and our company 
and had carefully thought through how we fit into their strategy and market. 
They had a much better understanding of how we fit than we ever could have 
understood as an outsider. The process to come to an agreement often went 
faster and more smoothly. You also need to be easy to find, so the develop-
ment of a strong web presence and attending and speaking at international 
conferences in one’s industry are good starting steps to developing an inter-
national business. You want to be known and easy to find.
Third, when going global, you may find that collecting money is easier than 
firing [overseas] staff. Many business people are hesitant to go global because 
of the fear of collecting money. In my experience, if one sets up the right legal 
structure, this is not a common problem. A bigger learning point for me was 
the fact that many countries have much more stringent rules and financial 
penalties for firing people or closing unsuccessful operations than we experi-
ence in the US. If you hire local people or start a local operation, it is critical 
to learn up front what the local rules and financial penalties are for firing 
someone or closing an operation.
Lastly and most important, you should see going international as an exciting 
learning adventure. One cannot be successful internationally without a willing-
ness to suspend judgment and be open to accepting that everyone carries a 
cultural bias. Licensing photographs internationally and developing audio con-
tent to explain local cultural institutions particularly demanded the willingness 
to always assume one could get something very wrong. For instance, simple 
things like the number of golf balls in a photo or the color of the scarf some-
one wore could instantly make a photograph that earned thousands of dol-
lars in the American market worthless in another country. One had to learn 
different numbers mean bad luck in different countries and the color red in 
particular has very different connotations worldwide.
However, I do want to comment on the fact of increased personal risk for 
business people who internationally travel. I experienced a kidnapping attempt 
in Venezuela and do recommend that if one does international business travel 
that you are thoughtful and deliberate about your personal security. 
Key Lessons
What you should take away from Roberts’s advice is to get things in writing. 
You also need to hire the right people, make yourself easy to be found on the 
web, set up the right legal structure, and enjoy the adventurous ride!

Exporting
555
Marlin Steel: Translate Your Web Site to be Foreign 
Friendly
“We were once a company nearly felled by cheap steel from China. We’re now 
a thriving business that exports to thirty-six countries,” says Drew Greenblatt, 
president of Marlin Steel (http://www.marlinsteel.com), about his compa-
ny’s explosion into exporting. Exports constitute about one-fifth of the com-
pany’s sales. Marlin Steel exports steel products to Argentina, Australia, Austria, 
Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Columbia, Costa Rica, the Czech 
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Guinea, Hungary, Iraq, 
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, the 
Philippines, Poland, Puerto Rico, Saint Thomas, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Taiwan, the United Kingdom, and Uruguay. 
I asked Greenblatt his thoughts on why exporting is a valuable business deci-
sion for American companies.
Laurel Delaney: Why should American small business owners look to export?
Drew Greenblatt: Free trade agreements get some bad publicity—that they’ll 
cost American jobs—but export businesses create a lot of jobs. About 95 per-
cent of the world’s potential clients live outside the United States. That market 
is becoming wealthier and will require services and products. There’s a grow-
ing world of customers beyond our borders. And the waves of activity that 
occur in your niche in America may have nothing to do with the same niche in 
Japan or Canada or Germany. Your local economy could be in the doldrums, 
while your prospects halfway around the world could be good. Export jobs 
typically also pay better—20 percent more on average.
Delaney: What’s been challenging or troublesome for you since we last 
connected?
Greenblatt: Since 2014, exports to Europe have taken a beating due to the 
strength of the U.S. dollar, which is up 25 percent and makes our products 
way too pricey in that market right now. However, to make up for that sales 
shortfall, sales in Canada and Mexico, markets close in proximity to the United 
States, have been strong and showing an appreciable savings on freight. Further, 
companies in these markets are seeking high-quality products.
Delaney: What’s been an “aha” or awakening for you on export growth avenues?
Greenblatt: American-based companies that we do business with are referring 
new potential export business to Marlin Steel. For example, Toyota, Ford, and 
General Motors, due to operating on a global scale, refer new business to 
Marlin Steel on an as-needed basis. They begin to serve as an evangelist for 
Marlin Steel. We no longer have to sell ourselves.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
556
Delaney: Have you changed any of your payment methods as a result of tight-
ening your belt?
Greenblatt: In addition to Exim bank, we now pursue the path of cash in advance 
where it works so we don’t rely so heavily on financing organizations. We 
extend credit where we can but prefer the cash in advance payment method.
Delaney: What tips can you provide to help a small business get started with 
exporting?
Greenblatt: After receiving initial expressions of interest from overseas and 
a major order from Asia several years ago, Marlin Steel expanded its export 
business plan with help from the Baltimore Export Assistance Center. The 
US Department of Commerce International Trade Administration runs similar 
centers around the country. It helps connect businesses with trade promotion 
events, trade missions, and other programs.
Our state of Maryland is very helpful in opening doors to trade for our organi-
zation. For example, Maryland Economic Development Corporation (MEDCO; 
http://www.medco-corp.com) pays fifty percent of overseas expenses for 
pre-qualifying export companies ($10,000, for example, to translate a web site) 
and the Baltimore Development Corporation (BDC) in Baltimore, Maryland 
(http://baltimoredevelopment.com) helps businesses grow.
That said, we’ve done several things to grow in the international marketplace. 
We translated our Web site to be friendlier to foreign customers. We now 
have versions in Japanese, German, Spanish, and Korean. You have to make it 
easier for those customers to find you.
We’ve also tapped several government programs that have been helpful. 
One of those is, as mentioned earlier, the Export-Import Bank of the United 
States’ guarantee of receivables. When we shipped wire forms to an electron-
ics maker in Singapore, the Export-Import Bank provided the guarantee for 
a small insurance premium. I’d never heard of the electronics company and 
neither had my banker, but we were both able to sleep at night because the 
transaction was covered. The government kept 0.5 percent of the deal for the 
coverage; I got the other 99.5 percent. Not to be overlooked, my employees 
got some overtime out of the contract and a local producer received my steel 
order. Many manufacturers are probably not aware of the program. It could 
help lessen some of their anxiety about exporting.
Another helpful program is the Gold Key Matching Service by the US 
Commercial Service of the Department of Commerce. For a nominal fee, the 
service prequalifies prospective companies to meet with overseas and provides 
a translator and a driver (important in places where you can’t read the street 
signs). The service covers about seventy nations that constitute most export 
markets for US business. I used the service when I visited Korea on a trade 
mission with the governor of Maryland in 2011 and I intend to do another trip 
to Spain and Germany in 2016 through the help of the Gold Key Program.

Exporting
557
Delaney: What other insights are we overlooking or missing that might help 
small businesses get started with exporting?
Greenblatt: Nurture and cultivate your key accounts, for you never know 
where your re-orders might come from, and the only way to find out is to 
stay on top of your game. Learn about other projects from customers or key 
people in your supply chain. Expand the relationship, visit customers, and get 
your customers to serve as evangelists for your business so you never have 
to do the selling yourself.
Delaney: What did you learn the hard way?
Greenblatt: The paperwork thicket can still be frustrating. While we need only a 
few minutes to fill out the requisite forms when we ship to Canada or Mexico, 
it takes twenty minutes per form when shipping to a non-NAFTA country. A 
few years ago, we took a photograph of two Marlin Steel employees standing 
beside the cartons that held our files to respond to regulations; the stack was 
three feet taller than they were.
There are cultural issues to recognize as well. The exchange of a business card 
with Japanese and other Asian prospects requires more formality and proce-
dure, for example, than that same act between American businesspeople.
Although some folks have gotten cynical and don’t always give it its due, “Made 
in the USA” remains a coveted brand worldwide. American businesses are 
missing opportunities by not taking more advantage of that.
Key Lessons
The most important lesson here is to nurture and cultivate your key accounts 
(you never know where your re-orders might come from, and the only way to 
find out is to stay on top of your game); translate your web site to be friendlier 
to foreign customers; learn about other projects from customers or key peo-
ple in your supply chain; expand the relationship; visit customers; and get your 
customers to serve as evangelists for your business so you never have to do 
the selling yourself. Also, take advantage of governmental programs for export 
assistance, allow time to prepare shipping documentation, be sensitive to cul-
tural differences, and be proud of and promote the “Made in the USA” brand.
Summary
Operating in the export marketplace is an exciting learning adventure and an 
avenue to a brighter and more prosperous future. By following the advice of 
the small business exporters I communicated with, your chances for success 
will increase dramatically.

Chapter 30 | Export Success
558
Now it’s time to discover my personal basic truths for achieving export suc-
cess and to keep our conversation going. I will put you in the MOOD (massive 
open online dialog)! Turn the page to learn more and get involved.
Note
	i.	 https://www8.gsb.columbia.edu/entrepreneur-
ship/sites/entrepreneurship/files/barbara%20
roberts%202014%20entrepren%20residence.pdf.

© Laurel J. Delaney 2016 
L. J. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8_31
C H A P T E R 
Essential Keys to 
Export Success
And the only way to do great work is to love what you do. If you haven’t 
found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle. As with all matters of the heart, 
you’ll know when you find it.
—The late Steve Jobs, founder of Applei
Getting to the future first is not just about outrunning competitors bent on 
reaching the same prize. It is also about having one’s own view of what 
the prize is. There can be as many prizes as runners; imagination is the 
only limiting factor.
—Management consultants Gary Hamel and  
the late C. K. Prahaladii
The ability to learn faster than your competitors may be the only 
sustainable competitive advantage.
—Arie De Geus, Head of Planning, Royal Dutch/Shelliii
In this chapter, I introduce you to a group I established at LinkedIn and provide 
my sixteen basic truths to achieving export success. Each one represents the 
culmination of the learnings and insights in this book. There are many more, 
but I have found that by paying attention to these sixteen, you are pretty close 
to export nirvana.
31

Chapter 31 | Essential Keys to Export Success
560
	1.	 Develop a global mindset. Set aside time to think about 
and determine whether you are cut out for exporting. 
Look back at Chapter 1.
	2.	 If you love what you do, once you decide to export, 
pick one core capability (a product or service)—it’s the 
answer that wells up within you that matters the most—
stay fully committed to it, and show some heart (care) at 
every step of the way. Refer to Chapters 1, 2, and 11.
	3.	 Put in the homework up front (learn the market and dis-
tribution network for a particular country, for example) 
and use your export dream team throughout the journey. 
Get a company-wide commitment before you begin to 
take full advantage of opportunities international markets 
offer. Review Chapters 3, 12, 17, and 30.
	4.	 Generate cash flow and always watch your profit margins. 
The single more important consideration in an export 
business or any business is cash flow. It is the difference 
between success or failure of an enterprise. Be creative. 
Conserve cash at all costs. Ask for advance payment or 
delay a payment whenever you can. We touched on this 
in Chapters 2, 20, 21, 23, and 30.
	5.	 Target a market and adapt to it on an as-needed basis; 
that includes modifying products and services to custom-
ers’ needs. See the discussion in Chapters 12, 13, and 14.
	6.	 Find customers and nurture them to death. Customers 
are the lifeblood of a business. Without them, there is no 
business. “The value of your company is based upon the 
value of your present and future customer relationships,” 
says best-selling author of The Customer Revolution Patricia 
B. Seybold.iv Look back at Chapter 16.
	7.	 Stop treading warily around technology, and dive right in. 
Embrace computers, digital devices, and social media as early 
as possible in your export activities, because you are going 
to have to get out there online and sell yourself and your 
business to get ahead. Refer to Chapters 2, 6, 9, and 14.
	8.	 Learn how to work effectively with others and treat your 
customers, employees, and anyone else who matters like 
royalty. Be reliable. This is discussed in Chapters 4 and 24.
	9.	 Develop and follow an export plan, even if it is scribbled 
on the back of a napkin, because that will help make your 
export dream a reality. You can adjust your plan as you 

Exporting
561
go along, so the details don’t have to be perfect, but to 
truly shape your export universe you must set aside time 
to do some focused thinking on how you will get there. 
After all, what you are doing is planning your actions for 
the most advantageous time for your export business. 
What will that look like? Take another look at Chapter 2.
	10.	 Leverage trade agreements to access new markets, 
reduce costs, increase flow of goods, create competitive 
pricing opportunities, and maximize your bottom line. We 
discussed this in Chapters 2, 3, 25, 29, and 30.
	11.	 Keep your finger on the pulse, not just in terms of com-
petition but of industry trends in general, where sudden, 
massive changes or improvements can disrupt or create 
a whole new market space at the bat of an eye. And don’t 
play in your competitor’s sandbox. Build your own. That’s 
what Steve Jobs did at Apple, and it worked. Refer to 
Chapters 23, 25, and 30.
	12.	 Define and create a superior online presence that reso-
nates with the world. Online interactions support offline 
networking. The bulk of your customers will do most of 
their buying online. See Chapters 5, 6, 7, and 8.
	13.	 Get paid on export transactions—no ifs, ands, or buts—
and make a profit—always. Re-read No. 4 and go back to 
the discussion in Chapter 20.
	14.	 Plan for success, give it all you’ve got, and don’t forget 
to give to others your help when they need it or ask 
for it. Take a long view because it takes time to develop 
advanced export markets. This was part of the discussion 
in Chapter 30.
	15.	 Stick to what you know. It makes it easier to go forward 
when you are knowledgeable about something. Learn to 
see everyday problems not as obstacles, but as possible 
business opportunities—and encourage your custom-
ers, employees, and suppliers to work together to set 
up ventures or create new products to solve them. See 
Chapters 6, 27, and 30.
	16.	 Stay fresh, take risks, and do something—anything—that 
gets you one step closer to your exporting goal. You 
never want to be crippled by fear of failure. Success rarely 
comes to those who play it safe. We discussed this in 
both Chapter1 and 30.

Chapter 31 | Essential Keys to Export Success
562
If you aspire to act on these key points, you are guaranteed to succeed with 
your export business. They will allow you to get to the top and stay there.
Summary
Success in exporting largely boils down to you. You must want to export and 
then take the initiative to do so. At this point, based on the knowledge you 
have acquired, you should be at the 99.9-percent-ready-to-export state. Now 
go make the world your business.
And One More Thing . . .
I want to leave you with an invitation to join the Export Guide Group (MOOD), 
a massive open online dialog that I established on LinkedIn. It’s where you will 
find me and everyone else, like you, who has read this book and has a relent-
less desire to keep learning and growing. There, we connect and answer ques-
tions, process new ideas, and exchange best practices in exporting. I liken this 
practice to a radical export revolution. Come join the conversation: http://
tinyurl.com/kpgbdwf. See you there!
■
■Note  Should you get stuck, feel free to e-mail me at ldelaney@globetrade.com. I may not be 
able to get to and answer every question you pose, but I most certainly will try.
Notes
	i.	 Steve Jobs, “‘You’ve Got to Find What You Love,’ Jobs 
Says,” Stanford commencement address, June 2005, 
http://news.stanford.edu/news/2005/june15/
jobs-061505.html.
	ii.	 Gary Hamel and C. K. Prahalad, Competing for the Future 
(Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 1996), 27.
	iii.	 As quoted in Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline: The Art & 
Practice of the Learning Organization (New York: Doubleday 
Currency, 1990), 4.
	iv.	 Patricia B. Seybold, with Ronni T. Marshak and Jeffrey 
M. Lewis, The Customer Revolution (New York, Crown 
Business, 2001), 77.

I
 A 
 Aakash (table computer) , 147 
 AccessAmerica , 534 
 Action plan creation , 224–225 
 Adapting your product , 228 
 adaQuest , 272 
 Ad valorem duties , 45 
 Advertisement 
 affiliate and performance-based 
marketing , 302 
 display ads , 303 
 PR , 176 
 retargeting , 302 
 search engine ads , 302 
 Adyen , 402 
 Affiliate marketing , 166 
 Afilias (Web site) , 153 
 Air transport , 337–338 
 air cargo containers , 337 
 air cargo pallets , 337 
 IATA , 337 
 Alibaba , 115–117, 128, 289 
 Alliance, forming , 317 
 All-risks policy , 415 
 Ally Commerce (AC) , 349 
 Amazon  . See also  eBay 
 full monty (marketplace) , 108 
 global shipping , 107 
 marketplace , 107 
 payments , 400 
 services , 348  
 web sites , 106  
 Webstore , 109  
 American Express OPEN 
Forum , 498  
 American manufacturing , 128  
 American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI) , 217  
 American Translators Association 
(ATA) , 274  
 America’s best export 
markets , 532–538  
 AntiCounterfeiting Coalition site , 535  
 A Pocket Guide to Doing Business 
in China , 534  
 Apps 
 benefits , 155  
 Desk.com , 155  
 Evernote Business , 155  
 global shipping , 158  
 Google Translate , 156  
 international trade , 158–159  
 QuickBooks , 156  
 series of questions , 154  
 skype , 155  
 Square reader , 157  
 WebEx , 157   
 Architectural, construction, and 
engineering services , 244  
 Association of Language 
Companies (ALC) , 274  
 Ang, Soon , 452  
 Index 
© Laurel J. Delaney  2016 
L. Delaney, Exporting, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2193-8

564
Index
 Authorize.Net , 403 
 Automated clearing house (ACH) 
network , 400 
 Automated Commercial Environment 
(ACE) , 346 
 Automated Export System (AES) , 429 
 B 
 Back-of-the-napkin export 
business plan , 20 
 Banker’s acceptance , 385  
 Barletta, Marti , 498 
 Bartering , 390 
 Bigcommerce , 138, 144 
 Bill me latter , 400 
 Binational societies, councils, and 
trade associations , 223, 300 
 Bing Translator , 260 
 BizTradeShows , 299 
 Blab , 100 
 Blakely, Sara , 499 
 Blog 
 contain , 81 
 facts , 84 
 feature stunning graphics , 83 
 labels , 84 
 main stage , 82 
 market , 84 
 post frequent and consistent , 82 
 provide links-better inform 
readers , 83 
 purpose of , 80 
 readers , 82 
 readers intellectual and 
emotional level , 84 
 services , 85 
 thoughtful comments , 83 
 web log , 80 
 Blue Sky Consulting Services , 241 
 Bongo International , 348 
 Boomerang Carnets , 421 
 Boost sales improvement methods , 350 
 Born-global companies , 13 
 Bowes, Pitney , 139, 347  
 Bradley University , 219  
 Braintree (a PayPal Company) , 404  
 Brazil , 513 
 business guide , 525  
 gross domestic product , 516  
 hot tip, exporting , 516  
 imports , 516  
 inflation rate , 516  
 internet usage , 515  
 languages , 515  
 online payment method , 516  
 per capita GDP , 516  
 population , 515  
 population growth rate , 515  
 services trade , 516  
 trading partners , 516  
 Break-bulk shipments , 340–341  
 crates , 341  
 pallets , 341  
 slipsheets , 341  
 Bribery , 466 
 BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, 
and South Africa) , 513–514  
 common characteristics , 514  
 emerging economies , 514  
 GDP growth rates , 515  
 BrightStar , 324  
 Building brand recognition 
 blog creation , 171  
 convert site traffic , 171  
 evaluate, refine, and improve 
strategies , 173  
 mobile devices , 173  
 nurture leads , 172  
 optimize , 172  
 recommend action , 174  
 set objectives , 170  
 social media , 171  
 Web site , 170  
 Bulk-hatch containers , 343  
 Bulk loading , 341  
 Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(BEA) , 223, 524  
 Bureau of Export Administration 
(BXA) , 428  

565
Index
 Business Guide, BRICS , 525 
 Business intelligence companies , 220, 296 
 Business-to-business (B-to-B) , 126, 283 
 Business-to-consumer (B-to-C) , 126, 283 
 Business-to-government (B-to-G) , 127, 283 
 Business USA , 217 
 Business worldwide  . See also  Marketing 
tactics and promotional elements; 
Traditional marketing channels 
 classical marketing , 164 
 international marketing plan 
 building brand recognition , 170 
 key question , 168 
 OBC , 169 
 Internet 
 affiliate marketing , 166 
 content marketing , 168 
 display ads , 166 
 e-mail marketing , 166 
 inbound marketing , 167 
 mobile marketing , 168 
 referral marketing , 167 
 SEM , 165 
 SMM , 167 
 overview , 164 
 Byte Level Research , 257, 273 
 C 
 CafePress , 112 
 Canada , 532 
 Carnet , 421 
 Carter , 543 
 Carton markings , 411  
 description , 413 
 gloomy warehouse , 412 
 identification of number , 414 
 in English , 413 
 phrases and symbols , 414 
 return address label , 412 
 shipping address label , 412 
 sides , 414 
 Weight and measurement , 414 
 Cash flow , 560 
 C Corporation , 36 
 Certificate of Origin, NAFTA , 424 
 CFR , 367 
 Chambers of Commerce , 300  
 Chambre Nationale des Entreprises de 
Traduction (CNET) , 274  
 Characteristics of women 
entrepreneurs , 504  
 collaborative approach , 506  
 education , 507  
 family circle , 504  
 foreign colleagues , 505  
 glass ceiling , 507  
 intuitive knowledge , 505  
 language and cultural barriers , 504  
 social behavior , 505  
 still a novelty , 506  
 Checklist–export , 229–231  
 China , 513, 533  
 access America , 534  
 business guide , 526  
 commercial service , 534  
 courteous , 521  
 create desirability , 520  
 export prospects , 522  
 E-to-China.com , 534  
 fierce competitor , 521  
 Forbes.com , 520  
 GDP growth rate , 520  
 gross domestic product , 519  
 imports , 520  
 inflation rate , 520  
 intellectual property , 521  
 languages , 519  
 National Bureaus, statistics , 534  
 national HQ , 521  
 negotiating strategy , 520  
 per capita GDP , 520  
 population growth rate , 519  
 population , 519  
 preferred online payment 
method , 519  
 relationships negotiating 
strategy , 520  
 top-quality products , 520  
 China Law Blog , 285  
 Chubb Group of Insurance 
Companies , 491  
 Cisco , 146  

566
Index
 Clark, Maxine , 499 
 Classical marketing , 164 
 Cloud computing and storage , 152 
 Cloud drive , 160 
 Cloud storage and computing , 153, 159 
 benefits , 159 
 box , 160 
 cloud drive , 160 
 Dropbox , 160 
 Google cloud platform , 160 
 iCloud , 160 
 SkyDrive , 160 
 SugarSync , 160 
 Collaborative sales , 314 
 GSA (see  Global strategic 
alliance (GSA) ) 
 partnership , 315 
 Collins, Robert , 521 
 Commerce Control List 
(CCL) , 428, 430 
 Commercial, professional, technical 
and business services , 244 
 Commercial Service China , 534 
 Common Sense Advisory 
(CSA) , 258, 273 
 Community moderator , 362 
 Competitive analysis 
(market and customer) , 26 
  Competitive shipping rate 
 best freight forwarder , 365 
 cartons , 363 
 CIF , 366–367  
 CNF , 367 
 commodity number , 362 
 containers , 363 
 domestic sale , 362 
 ex-factory , 368 
 export license , 364 
 export quotation worksheet , 366 
 FAS , 367 
 FOB , 368 
 freight forwarder , 364  
 pro forma invoice , 369  
 terms of shipment , 366 
 Compound/mixed duties , 45 
 Consignment , 390  
 Consumer-to-consumer 
(C-to-C) , 126, 283  
 Container loading , 342–344  
 Content marketing , 168  
 Corporate, legal, financial and logistical 
considerations , 29–30  
 Corrupt countries , 471  
 Corruption , 472–473  
 Cost, insurance, and freight 
(CIF) , 366   
 Councils , 300 
 Countertrade transactions , 390  
 Country Commercial Guide 
 Belgium , 538  
 Brazil, Russia, India, China and 
South Africa , 525  
 Canada , 532  
 China , 533, 535  
 Germany , 536  
 Hong Kong , 538  
 Japan , 535 
 Mexico , 533  
 Netherlands , 536  
 South Korea , 537  
 United Kingdom , 535  
 Country riskline report , 286  
 Credit cards 
 Mastercard PayPass , 397, 402  
 PayAnywhere , 398  
 Square , 398  
 Visa payWave for Mobile , 398  
 Cross-cultural learning 
 cultural intelligence , 451  
 culture affects , 452  
 global edge , 454  
 intelligence/literacy , 452  
 quick intercultural tips , 458  
 real-life example , 460–461  
 resources for , 454  
 target market , 453  
 training , 457–458  
 Crowd-funding site , 503  
 Cultural 
 awareness , 453  

567
Index
 Diversity , 447 
 intelligence , 451 
 literacy , 451 
 Currency fluctuations , 361 
 Custom Border Patrol (CBP) , 486 
 Customer contacts , 292–293 
 Customers, cross-border , 282 
 definition , 282 
 distributor/importing 
wholesaler , 283 
 case of , 285 
 characteristics , 283 
 distributors , 286 
 questions , 284 
 e-Commerce , 291 
 finding , 281 
 overseas agent/representative 
(importer) , 289 
 overseas end user , 290 
 overseas retailers , 290 
 red flags , 377–378 
 trading company , 290–291 
 service , 444–449  
 CyberSource , 401 
 D 
 Datamyne , 220, 297 
 Datawind , 147 
 Debit cards , 399 
 Dell , 503 
 Department of Commerce 
(DOC) , 183, 215–216 
 Desk.com , 155 
 DHL 
 Activetracing , 158 
 logistic experts , 345 
 direct exporting 
 advantages , 306 
 disadvantages , 307 
 Display ads , 166, 303 
 Distributor , 283–285 
 DLA Piper’s FranCast Series , 325 
 Documentation  . See  Export 
documentation  
 Documents, OECD’s (Bribery in 
International Business 
conference) , 473  
 Doing Business , 221  
 Brazil, Russia, India, China, 
South Africa , 526  
 BRICS , 525  
 Donaldson, Thomas , 465  
 Dropbox , 160  
 Drucker, Peter F , 355, 531  
 Dwolla , 401–402  
 E 
 Earhart, Amelia , 497  
 eAtlas of Global Development , 222  
 eBay , 109–110 
 EC21 , 289  
 eCertify , 424  
 e-Commerce , 104, 122,291  . See 
also  Global supply chain 
 big commerce , 138  
 B-to-B and B-to-C , 126  
 C-to-C and B-to-G , 126  
 factors to consider , 134  
 find manufacturers , 127  
 growing scope , 123  
 Intuit , 138  
 Magento , 138  
 measurment , 141  
 NetSuite , 138  
 Pitney Bowes , 139  
 platforms , 137, 139  
 online storefronts  
(see  Amazon), 105 
 revolution , 122  
 selling goods, services and unique 
creations online , 104  
 Shopify , 139  
 stand-alone e-commerce site , 126  
 store and shopping cart solution , 109  
 store for , 133  
 trustworthiness , 140  
 Volusion , 139  
 Education and training services , 244  
 Edwards Global Services , 240  

568
Index
 Electric Current Abroad , 234 
 Electronic Export Information 
(EEI) , 346, 409, 433 
 E-mail blasts-purchased lists , 175 
 E-mail marketing , 166 
 eMarketer , 124 
 Emerging markets 
 Brazil 
 gross domestic product , 516 
 hot tip, export , 516 
 imports , 516 
 inflation rate , 516 
 internet usage , 515  
 languages , 515 
 online payment method , 516 
 per capita GDP , 516 
 population , 515 
 population growth rate , 515 
 services trade , 516 
 trading partners , 516 
 BRICS 
 common characteristics , 514 
 emerging economies , 514 
 GDP growth rates , 515 
 business guide, BRICS , 525 
 China  (see  China ) 
 cookie-cutter approach , 526  
 exporting, BRICS 
 be patient , 524 
 distinctive quality product , 523 
 goals , 525 
 high ranking , 523  
 potential business partners , 525 
 tipping point , 524 
 Frontier markets/next-generation , 527 
 host of challenges , 526 
 India  (see  India ) 
 revenue growth , 514 
 Russia 
 export prospects , 518 
 GDP growth rate , 517 
 gross domestic product , 517 
 hot tip, export , 517 
 imports , 517 
 inflation rate , 517 
 internet usage , 517 
 languages , 517 
 ninth-largest economy , 517 
 online payment method , 517  
 per capita GDP , 517  
 population , 517  
 population growth rate , 517  
 South Africa 
 export prospects , 523  
 GDP growth rate , 522  
 gross domestic product , 522  
 imports , 522  
 inflation rate , 522  
 internet usage , 522  
 languages , 522  
 online payment method , 522  
 per capita GDP , 522  
 population growth rate , 522  
 population , 522  
 Entertainment and media , 244  
 Environmental services , 244  
 Eriksen Translations , 271  
 Escrow , 395 
 Essential keys 
 core capability , 560  
 effective work , 560  
 export dream , 560  
 find customers , 560  
 focused thinking , 561  
 global mindset , 560  
 market target , 560  
 paid transactions , 561  
 pulse , 561 
 stay fresh , 561  
 success plan , 561  
 superior online presence , 561  
 Ethical ground rules , 468  
 bribes and corruption , 472–473  
 conduct , 465  
 gold standard code , 468  
 certification and reporting 
violations , 471  
 mail and wire fraud , 470  
 money laundering , 470  
 tax violations , 470  
 travel act , 469  
 honest export business , 471  
 rules and regulations , 472  
 Ethics , 467 
 E-to-China.com , 534  

569
Index
 Etsy , 111–112 
 Euromonitor International , 222 
 European Language Industry 
Association (ELIA) , 274 
 Euroscript , 271 
 EventsEye , 299 
 Evernote Business , 155  
 Exchange rates , 365  
 Exhibiting at trade shows , 178, 180 
 Experian.com , 287 
 Export 
 Abroad , 297 
 awaits , 3 
 born-global companies , 13 
 definition , 4 
 foreign (overseas) markets , 7 
 global mindset 
 assessment , 9 
 local business model , 11 
 self-awareness , 10 
 Internet , 3 
 local marketing service , 6 
 overview , 3 
 product and service 
 export process , 8 
 people power drives , 9 
 product business , 4 
 social networks , 4 
 Export Administration Regulations 
(EAR) , 428 
 Export Assistance Centers 
(EACs) , 215, 434, 532  
 Export business plan 
 development , 17 
 express and experience , 28 
 market conditions , 19 
 overview , 15 
 pointers for development , 18 
 purposes for , 16 
 types 
 back-of-the-napkin , 20 
 components , 20 
 LEBP , 25 
 traditional business plan , 21 
 Export control classification 
interactive tool , 430 
 Export documentation , 420  
 bills of lading , 425  
 clean , 426  
 onboard , 426  
 shipper’s order (negotiable) , 426  
 straight (nonnegotiable) , 425  
 certificate of origin , 420, 423  
 commercial invoice , 420–422  
 consular invoices , 420, 427  
 destinations and commodities , 420  
 dock and warehouse receipts , 421, 434  
 export sale , 420  
 health inspection certificate , 421, 435  
 IATA , 421, 435  
 import and export licenses , 427–428  
 general license , 428, 432  
 import license , 432  
 port-of-destination 
requirements , 432  
 validated license , 428, 433  
 import/export license , 420  
 insurance certificate , 421, 434  
 minor documentation , 436  
 NAFTA , 424  
 original ocean/air bills , 420  
 packing list , 420, 422–423  
 payment instruments , 420, 426  
 quality-inspection certificate , 420, 427  
 Export dream team (EDT) , 30  
 accountant , 31  
 banker and logistics expert , 31  
 business bank account , 41  
 corporate considerations 
 advantages and liabilities , 33  
 C corporation , 36  
 LLC , 38  
 partnership , 35  
 sole proprietorship , 34  
 subchapter S corporation , 37  
 effective financial planning right , 43  
 foreign sales corporation , 46  
 IC-DISC , 46  
 lawyer , 30  
 legal considerations 
 intellectual property , 39  
 labor laws, contracts and 
agreements , 41  
 online environment , 40  
 start small , 32  

570
Index
 tax benefits for multinational 
business , 43 
 trade and customs duties , 44 
 Export enterprise 
 functional team creation , 51 
 outsource process 
 core competencies , 67 
 freelancers and independent 
contractors , 59–61 
 hiring plan , 66 
 in-house employees , 65 
 job search web sites , 61 
 key question , 57 
 schools and universities , 64 
 overview , 49–50 
 Export enterprise  . See  Good global hire  
 Export express loan program , 391 
 Export financing , 391–392 
 Export.gov , 299 
 Export Guide Group , 562 
 Export-Import Bank of the United States 
(Ex-Im Bank) , 218, 393, 556 
 Exporting a service , 242–243 
 Exporting, BRICS 
 be patient , 525 
 distinctive quality product , 523 
 goals , 525 
 high ranking , 523 
 potential business partners , 525 
 tipping point , 524 
 Exporting services , 239 
 Export management companies 
(EMCs) , 289, 307  
 Export market data 
 additional instant resources , 223 
 binational societies, councils and 
trade associations , 223 
 Bureau of Economic Analysis , 223 
 business intelligence companies , 220 
 colleges and universities , 219 
 Doing Business site , 221 
 eAtlas of global development , 222 
 Euromonitor International , 222 
 export practitioner , 221 
 federal exports 
 additional resources , 219  
 Export-Import Bank (US) , 218  
 FAS , 219  
 foreign trade , 221  
 International Trade Statistics 
Yearbook , 222  
 physical locations , 214  
 DOC , 215  
 SBA , 214  
 US commercial service , 216  
 small municipal-branch library , 220  
 US and World Population 
Clock , 222  
 web sites (trade statistics) 
 BusinessUSA , 217  
 market research index , 217  
 TradeStats express , 217  
 United States International Trade 
Commission , 218  
 USA Trade Online , 217  
 USEmbassy.gov , 218  
 WTO , 218  
 World Bank Atlas method , 222  
 World Factbook , 222  
 Export markets 
 America , 532  
 Canada , 532  
 China 
 access America , 534  
 commercial service , 534  
 E-to-China.com , 534  
 National Bureaus statistics , 534  
 export plan , 560  
 Germany 
 largest market , 536  
 primary US exports , 536  
 Hong Kong 
 free port , 538  
 packaged food , 538  
 Illinois Department , 532  
 Japan , 535 
 Mexico , 533  
 Netherlands , 536  
 opportunities , 531  
 practitioner , 221  
 sales agreements , 201  
 South Korea , 537  
Export dream team (EDT) (cont.)

571
Index
 United Kingdom 
 categories , 536 
 international trading power , 535 
 Export service 
 absence of complaints , 449 
 communicate , 442 
 customer care , 443 
 customer service , 442, 444 
 experience creation , 446 
 high standard creation , 447 
 mother ship service counter , 445 
 overview , 441 
 pay attention-details , 444 
 philosophies , 442 
 status quo , 447 
 time benefits , 447 
 treat customers , 445 
 Export working capital program , 391 
 Express insurance , 395 
 F 
 Facebook , 88–89, 91, 94, 114, 232, 275  
 Fast Company , 502 
 FedEx , 158 
 small business center , 345 
 Finance (export transaction) , 375 
 Financing assistance 
 export express loan program , 392 
 export-import bank, united states , 393 
 capital guarantee , 394 
 capital loans and guarantees , 395 
 export credit insurance , 394 
 global credit express , 394 
 letter of interest , 394 
 requirements , 393 
 trade credit insurance , 395 
 export working capital program , 391 
 foreign agricultural service , 392 
 international trade loan program , 391 
 MBDA , 392 
 OPIC , 392 
 options , 375 
 regular business loan program , 392 
 service export , 244, 247 
 small business investment companies , 391  
 USTDA , 393 
 Finding cross-border customers , 281  
 binational societies, councils and 
trade associations , 300  
 business intelligence companies , 296  
 customer contacts , 292  
 find customers through advertising  
(see  Advertisement ) 
 GKMS  (see  Gold Key Matching 
Service (GKMS) ) 
 government-sponsored trade 
mission , 299  
 IBP , 296  
 IPS , 296  
 platinum key service , 295  
 snag customers worldwide  (see  Snag 
customers worldwide ) 
 tap local clients , 301  
 trade leads database , 295  
 US Export Assistance Centers , 295  
 Finding cross-border customers  . See 
 Customers, cross-border  
 Firestone, Marsha , 502  
 Flat-rack containers , 343  
 Flexport , 346  
 Flight survival 
 expedited screening , 486  
 first-class service , 487  
 reading materials , 488  
 refreshments , 488  
 seat selection , 487  
 Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) , 219, 392  
 Foreign and Commonwealth Office , 480  
 Foreign-based e-commerce platforms , 139  
 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) , 466  
 Foreign Office , 326–327  
 Foreign sales corporation (FSC) , 46  
 Foreign trade zones (FTZs) , 45  
 Fostering competitiveness , 241  
 Four Ps (classical marketing) , 164–165  
 Franchising World , 325  
 Free alongside ship (FAS) , 367  
 Free on board (FOB) , 368  
 Freight Forwarder , 344–345  
 selecting , 365  

572
Index
 shipping rate , 364–365 
 international transportation , 345 
 Freightos , 346 
 Frontier markets , 527 
 Fulfillment by Amazon (FBA) , 107 
 options , 346–347 
 part , 347 
 Fulfillrite , 349 
 G 
 Gale Book , 128 
 Garment containers , 343 
 George, Bill , 465 
 Germany 
 largest market , 536 
 primary US exports , 536 
 Geus, Arie De , 559 
 Global Credit Express , 394  
 globalEDGE (DIBS) , 454 
 Global Entrepreneurship and 
Development Institute 
(GEDI) , 499 
 Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor (GEM) , 499 
 Global ethics  . See also  Ethical 
ground rules 
 export world’s rule , 465  
 FCPA , 466 
 poor ethics , 467 
 Global freight forwarder , 344 
 Global Gender Gap Report , 501 
 Globalization and Localization 
Association (GALA) , 274 
 Globalization partners , 263 
 Globalization Partners International 
(GPI) , 271 
 Global strategic alliance 
(GSA) , 315, 320 
 advantageous alliances , 317 
 advantages , 318 
 autonomy and independence , 320–321 
 business/geographic market , 315 
 consideration , 321 
 cost of , 316  
 disadvantages , 318–319  
 negotiations , 320  
 small business , 316  
 Global supply chain 
 management , 130  
 short, simple and manageable , 131  
 suppliers , 133  
 Global Trade Magazine , 221  
 Global travelers , 479  
 Global Verification Network , 287  
 Globe-Trotters , 497  
 GloBIS , 287 
 Gloomy warehouse , 412  
 GoEcart , 138 
 Gold Key Matching Service 
(GKMS) , 182  
 benefits , 293  
 help us , 293  
 in India , 294  
 Goldman Sachs , 525  
 Good global hire 
 answer , 53  
 hiring scenarios , 51  
 key questions , 53  
 world-class team 
 administrative/office manager , 55  
 business development manager , 54  
 customer service , 55  
 development , 54  
 export operations , 54  
 international money , 54  
 international sales strategy , 56  
 international legal counsel , 54  
 internet technology , 55  
 logistics or supply chain , 55  
 marketing and social media , 55  
 HR manager , 55  
 web designer , 55  
 Google+ , 97 
 analytics , 268  
 Cloud Platform , 160  
 Translate , 156, 260  
 Wallet , 402  
 Government- and trade industry-
sponsored programs , 182  
Freight Forwarder (cont.)

573
Index
 catalog exhibitions , 184 
 contact-list services , 184 
 DOC , 183 
 gold key matching service , 182 
 international partner search , 182 
 matchmaking services , 183 
 search engine , 183 
 TLD , 184 
 trade intermediaries , 183 
 US embassies , 183 
 US exporters , 183 
 WTCs , 184 
 Government-Sponsored 
Trade Mission , 299 
 Greenblatt, Drew , 555 
 Grow Smart, Risk Less , 326 
 H 
 Hamel, Gary , 559 
 Hand loading , 341 
 Harris, Dan , 285 
 Harvard Business Review Blog 
Network , 508 
 Harvard Business School , 258 
 Hazardous materials/goods , 336 
 Health tips , 493 
 Ackerman Group , 494 
 hotel concierge , 493 
 International SOS , 493 
 Hershey , 229 
 Hewlett-Packard’s Application and Content 
Globalization (HP ACG) , 271 
 High-cube containers , 343 
 Hong Kong 
 free port , 538 
 packaged food , 538  
 Hot export markets , 531 
 HSBC (international banks) , 454 
 HS Code Handbook , 158 
 Huntington Bank , 240 
 I 
 IBM , 503 
 iCloud , 160 
 Illinois Department of Commerce and 
Economic Opportunity , 532  
 Import-Export Bank of the 
United States , 503  
 Import Genius , 220, 297  
 Importing wholesaler , 283–285  
 Inbound marketing , 167  
 Incoterms , 158, 366  
 In-country factors , 312  
 India , 513  
 business guide , 526  
 export prospects , 519  
 GDP growth rate , 518  
 gross domestic product , 518  
 imports , 518  
 Indian society , 519  
 inflation rate , 518  
 internet usage , 518  
 languages , 518  
 online payment method , 518  
 per capita GDP , 518  
 population , 518  
 population growth rate , 518  
 IndiaMART , 128  
 Indirect exporting , 307  
 advantages , 309  
 conference/trade , 308  
 disadvantages , 310  
 EMC , 307  
 export trading company , 309  
 freight forwarders , 308  
 international division , 308  
 local trade association , 308  
 small business assistance 
center , 308  
 Ingram Micro , 349  
 Instagram , 96  
 Intellectual property , 553  
 Intercultural tips , 458, 460  
 Interest-charge domestic 
international sales 
corporation (IC-DISC) , 46  
 International Air Transport Association 
(IATA) , 337, 435  
 International Business Ethics 
Institute , 468  

574
Index
 International business travel tips 
 business relationship , 477 
 flight survival 
 expedited screening , 486 
 first-class service , 487 
 reading materials , 488 
 refreshments , 488 
 seat selection , 487 
 global territory , 478 
 hotel choosing 
 business centers , 486 
 location , 485 
 miscellaneous conveniences , 486 
 rooms and suites , 485 
 money management 
 baggage handlers , 489 
 baggage transport fees , 489 
 global features activation , 490 
 international ATMs , 489 
 transportation costs , 489 
 Scouting territory 
 bank’s international department , 481 
 Chamber of Commerce , 481 
 climate/wheather , 481 
 Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office site , 480 
 logistics , 480 
 STEP , 480 
 Travel.State.Gov site , 479 
 US Embassy site , 481 
 security tips  (see  Security tips ) 
 smart packing 
 ditching possessions , 483 
 garments appropriation , 483 
 natural impulse , 482 
 weeklong business trip , 483 
 additional passport copy , 483 
 business essentials , 484 
 health-related items , 485 
 Incidentals , 485 
 play clothes , 484 
 stockings , 484 
 suits , 483 
 super-compact umbrella , 484 
 women needs , 494 
 International Buyer Program (IBP) , 296 
 International Chamber of Commerce , 366 
 International Company Profile (ICP) , 287 
 International Finance Corporation , 224  
 International Franchise Association , 325  
 International franchising , 326  
 benefits , 323–324  
 definition , 323  
 examples of , 324  
 get started , 325  
 resources , 325  
 Internationalization and localization 
services , 263  
 International Maritime Organization , 336  
 International marketplace , 556  
 International Partner Search (IPS) , 296  
 International supply chain  . See  Global 
supply chain  
 International Trade Association of 
Greater Chicago , 532  
 International Trade Centers , 532  
 International Trade Loan Program , 391  
 International trade shows , 299  
 International Trade Statistics 
Yearbook , 222  
 International travel , 495  
 Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN) , 40  
 Intuit Payment Network , 138, 402  
 ISO certification , 127  
 ITC Global Translations , 274  
 J 
 Japan , 535 
 Japan External Trade Organization 
(JETRO) , 535  
 Jobs, Steve , 559  
 Joint venture , 322  
 Journal of Commerce 
(JOC) , 220, 297  
 K 
 Kern, Louise M , 288  
 Kerrigan, Karen , 509  
 Kompass , 128 

575
Index
 L 
 Language Line solutions , 272 
 Language Services Associates , 273 
 Launch service , 250–251 
 Larson, Alison , 286, 543 
 Laurel export business plan (LEBP) 
 company description , 26 
 competitive analysis (market and 
customer) , 26 
 executive summary , 25 
 financials (export budget) , 27 
 future development , 27 
 information technology plan , 27 
 introduction , 25 
 logistics plan , 27 
 management structure , 27 
 marketing and sales plan , 26 
 operations plan , 27 
 strategic leadership , 26 
 strategy implementation , 28 
 target export market , 26 
 Letter of credit (L/C) , 376, 380, 409  
 advance payments , 387 
 assignment of proceeds , 385 
 back-to-back setup , 386 
 buyer, businesspeople , 381–382 
 commercial invoice , 382 
 deferred payments , 387  
 discounted payments , 387–388 
 fax/e-mail , 381 
 installment payments , 387 
 irrevocable , 383 
 mixed drawings , 388 
 opening bank , 381 
 paying bank , 381 
 pro forma invoice process , 381 
 progress payments , 387 
 red clause , 387 
 revocable , 384 
 revolving , 386 
 securing payment , 380 
 seller, businesspeople , 381 
 standby , 386 
 timetables , 384 
 banker’s acceptance , 385 
 sight-draft payment , 384 
 time-draft payment , 384 
 transferable , 385  
 types , 383  
 irrevocable , 383  
 revocable , 384  
 Letter of Interest , 394  
 Levitt, Theodore , 258, 498   
 Lewis, Randall , 288  
 LexisNexis , 287  
 License , 328  
 export , 427–433  
 general , 428, 432  
 import , 427–433  
 validated , 428, 433  
 Limelight , 261  
 Limited liability company (LLC) , 33, 38  
 LinkedIn , 91–94  
 Lionbridge , 272  
 Localization , 263  
 Logistics options  . See also  Third-party 
logistics company (3PL); Third-
party suppliers (3PLs) 
 boost sales improvement methods , 
350–351 
 freight forwarders , 344–345  
 improvement methods , 350  
 startup companies , 346  
 UPS, FedEx, DHL, and TNT , 345  
 M 
 MAC attack (mobile, apps and cloud) , 151  
 applications (apps) , 151  
 cloud computing and storage , 152  
 mobile , 151  
 Magellan’s , 455  
 Magento , 138  
 Maker’s Row , 128  
 Marine insurance 
 discover damage/loss of cargo , 416  
 financial responsibility , 416  
 insurance coverage , 415  
 paper trail , 416  
 Market barriers , 248–249  
 Marketing data , 215  . See also  Export 
market data 

576
Index
 affiliate marketing , 166  
 content marketing , 168 
 display ads , 166 
 e-mail marketing , 166 
 inbound marketing , 167  
 mobile marketing , 168 
 myopia , 258 
 referral marketing , 167 
 SEM (see  Search engine 
marketing (SEM) ) 
 SMM , 167 
 Marketing plan 
 building brand recognition 
 blog creation , 171 
 convert site traffic , 171 
 evaluate, refine and improve 
strategies , 173 
 mobile devices , 173 
 nurture leads , 172  
 optimize , 172 
 recommend action , 174 
 set objectives , 170 
 social media , 171 
 Web site , 170 
 key question , 168 
 OBC , 169 
 Marketing tactics and promotional 
elements 
 advertising/PR , 176 
 e-mail blasts-purchased lists , 175 
 media outreach campaign , 177 
 networking , 175 
 opt-in lists , 176 
 outsourced telemarketing , 176 
 personal selling , 176 
 public-speaking events , 174 
 referral marketing , 177 
 Market research 
 action plan creation , 224 
 customers , 206 
 foreign market , 205 
 market conditions , 210 
 market research , 207  
 pleasure, profit, competitive 
advantage/challenge , 208 
 search , 213 
 segmentation , 209 
 Market Research Index , 217  
 Marlin Steel , 555–557  
 Massive open online dialog 
(MOOD) , 562  
 Media outreach campaign , 177  
 Mercent , 349  
 Methods of exporting , 306  
 collaborative sales , 314  
 GSA  (see  Global strategic 
alliance (GSA) ) 
 joint venture , 322  
 partnership , 315  
 direct exporting  (see  Direct 
exporting ) 
 factors , 305  
 foreign office/acquiring , 326  
 in-country factors , 312  
 indirect exporting  (see  Indirect 
exporting ) 
 international franchising 
 benefits , 323–324  
 definition , 323  
 examples of , 324  
 get started , 325  
 resources , 325  
 licensing , 328  
 questions , 310  
 Mexico , 533  
 MFG.com , 129 
 Michigan State University , 219  
 Million Dollar Database (MDDI) , 286  
 Minority Business Development 
Agency (MBDA) , 392  
 Mobile, apps, and cloud computing 
(MAC) , 146  
 Mobile marketing , 168  
 Mobile payments , 375  
 Mobile world ,145 . See also  MAC attack 
(mobile, apps and cloud) 
 devices , 146  
 harnessing mobile business 
opportunities , 147  
 Internet , 146  
 low-cost Internet device , 147  
 MAC , 146 
Marketing data (cont.)

577
Index
 overtake desktop access , 152 
 valuable business tools  ( see also   Apps ) 
 cloud storage and computing , 159 
 Web site , 153 
 MobiReady , 153 
 Money laundering , 470 
 Money management , 489–490 
 baggage handlers , 489 
 global features activation , 490 
 international ATMs , 489 
 transportation costs , 489 
 Moravia , 272 
 N 
 Nagel, Doris , 241 
 Nasty Gal , 508 
 National Association of Japan-American 
Societies (NAJAS) , 223 
 National Association of Manufacturers 
(NAM) , 128 
 National District Export Council 
(DEC) , 218, 548–550 
 Negotiating a deal , 320 
 Netherlands , 536 
 NetSuite , 138 
 Networking , 175 
 Networking tools ,175 . See also  Social 
media and networking tools  
 NIVEA.com , 264 
 Non-vessel-operating common carriers, 
and shipper’s (NVOCCS) 
associations , 339 
 North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) , 424, 532–533 
 O 
 Ocean transport , 338 
 Office of the US Trade Representative , 219 
 Office of Women’s Business Ownership, 
SBA Web site , 503 
 OneDrive , 160 
 Onfido , 287 
 Online environment 
 domain name protection , 40  
 fundamentals  (see  Blog; Web site ) 
 ICANN , 40  
 Online marketplaces , 117  
 Online payment methods 
 e-commerce , 399, 401–402, 404  
 m-commerce , 399, 401–402, 404  
 Open-top containers , 343  
 Opt-in lists , 176  
 Organic Berry Company (OBC) , 169  
 Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD) , 219  
 OshKosh , 544  
 Outsource process 
 core competencies , 67  
 freelancers and independent 
contractors , 59  
 elance , 60  
 freelancer , 61  
 Guru , 60  
 TaskRabbit , 61  
 Virtual Assistance.com , 60  
 hiring plan , 66  
 in-house employees , 65  
 job search web sites , 61  
 CareerBuilder , 61  
 Craigslist , 62  
 Dice , 62  
 Experience , 62  
 FlexJobs , 62  
 GetHired.com , 62  
 Glassdoor , 62  
 Indeed , 63  
 Internships.com , 63  
 Ladders , 64  
 LinkUp , 63  
 ManpowerGroup , 63  
 Monster , 63  
 SimplyHired , 63  
 StartUpHire , 64  
 USAjobs , 64  
 Vault , 64  
 key question , 57  
 schools and universities , 64  
 telemarketing , 176  

578
Index
 Overseas marketplace , 227 
 account cultural sensitivities , 230 
 Agent , 289 
 bilingual label , 232 
 CE mark , 231 
 Chinese consumers , 229 
 competition , 233 
 cultural environment affects , 235 
 cultural significance , 233 
 customers , 231 
 electrical products , 234 
 end user , 290 
 export country’s expectations , 230 
 extend current product applications , 234 
 foreign market’s local language , 229 
 handle warranties, guarantees, 
consignment sales and service 
calls overseas , 234 
 local product regulations , 235 
 overall packaging and labeling 
design , 230 
 packaging and product , 228 
 packaging material , 233  
 physical environment affects , 234 
 picture tells , 233 
 purchases online , 231 
 standardized products and 
services , 228 
 weights and measurements , 231 
 Overseas Private Investment 
Corporation (OPIC) , 219, 392 
 Overseas retailer , 290 
 Ozone Holdings , 518 
 P 
 Packing, checklist , 483–485  
 Panjiva , 297 
 Partnership , 315 
 Paulson, Roy , 551 
 manufacturing , 551–553 
 Payment methods , 375 
 advance payment , 379–380 
 big-ticket deficits , 389 
 e-Commerce and M-Commerce , 396 
 credit cards  (see  Credit cards ) 
 debit cards , 399 
 global prepaid cards , 399  
 online payment , 396  
 third-party providers  (see  Third-
Party providers ) 
 e-Commerce site/mobile device , 375  
 factors , 378–379  
 financing assistance  (see  Financing 
assistance ) 
 instruments , 426  
 international conglomerate , 389  
 L/C (see  Letter of credit (L/C) ) 
 noncash payment considerations , 
390–391 
 bartering , 390  
 consignment , 390  
 countertrade , 390  
 open account transaction , 388  
 red flags , 377  
 sight draft , 384  
 structures 
 advance payments , 387  
 deferred payments , 387  
 discounted payments , 387–388  
 installment payments , 387  
 mixed drawings , 388  
 progress payments , 387  
 red clause , 387  
 time-draft , 384  
 PayPal , 400 
 Periscope , 100 
 Perka , 156 
 PerMondo , 274  
 Peters, Tom , 441, 498  
 Pew Research Center , 148, 506  
 Phrases and symbols , 414  
 Pick the best foreign market  . 
See  Market research  
 PIERS , 220, 297 
 Pinterest , 97 
 Pittsford, Philip , 548–550   
 Platinum Key Service (PKS) , 295  
 PNC , 504 
 Polaris , 156 
 Potential partner , 554  

579
Index
 Prahalad, C. K , 524, 559 
 Prairie Nursery , 251 
 Pricing 
 cost plus , 361, 372 
 export product , 355 
 market , 373 
 competitors vary , 373 
 customers vary , 373 
 markets vary , 373 
 markup , 360–362 
 penetration , 361 
 product exports , 356–360,362  
( see also   Product exports ) 
 service exports , 370–371 
 fundamentals , 370 
 pricing model , 372 
 strategy , 373 
 Product exports 
 accounting methods , 360–361 
 adaptation , 228 
 chocolate manufacturer , 359 
 community moderator , 362 
 export sales agreements , 201 
 establishment , 360 
 finding product , 193 
 key drivers , 361 
 manufacture company , 190, 356 
 celebrity , 359 
 competition , 358 
 cost , 357 
 customer contact , 357 
 direct/indirect sale , 358 
 government policies , 358 
 newness , 357 
 product positioning , 358 
 others , 191 
 quality , 357 
 uniqueness , 357 
 Vosges Haut-Chocolat , 192 
 relationship 
 customer demand , 195 
 domestic manufacturer , 194 
 focus, explain, emphasize, 
and stroke , 199 
 phone script creation , 196 
 working life , 196 
 overview , 190 
 sell choosing , 194 
 Product  vs. service (difference) , 242  
 Profit margins , 560  
 Public-speaking events , 174  
 Q 
 QuickBooks , 156  
 Quick response (QR) code , 151  
 Quotation, reading , 366  
 Quotations 
 competitive shipping rate , 362  
 best freight forwarder , 365  
 cartons , 363  
 CIF , 366–367  
 CNF , 367  
 commodity number , 362  
 containers , 363  
 domestic sale , 362  
 ex-factory , 368  
 export license , 364  
 export quotation worksheet , 366  
 FAS , 367  
 FOB , 368  
 freight forwarder , 364  
 pro forma invoice , 369  
 terms of shipment , 366  
 R 
 Referral marketing , 167, 177  
 Refrigerated containers , 343  
 Regular Business Loan Program , 392  
 Request for proposal (RFP) , 127  
 Responsive web design (RWD) , 136  
 Retail and wholesale trade , 245  
 Retargeting , 302  
 Risk oriented, innovative, and 
proactive (RIP) , 502  
 Roberts, Barbara , 553–554  
 Ross, Alex , 257  
 Russia , 513  
 business guide , 525  
 export prospects , 518  
 GDP growth rate , 517  
 gross domestic product , 517  
 hot tip, export , 517  

580
Index
 Imports , 517 
 inflation rate , 517 
 internet usage , 517 
 languages , 517 
 ninth-largest economy , 517 
 online payment method , 517 
 per capita GDP , 517 
 population , 517 
 population growth rate , 517 
 S 
 Sajan , 272 
 Sandberg, Sheryl , 275 
 Scripting call to manufacturer , 196–199 
 SDL International , 272 
 Search engine ads , 302 
 Search engine marketing (SEM) , 165 
 Search engine optimization (SEO) , 74 
 Second-tier countries , 527 
 Security tips , 490 
 avoid high-value items , 492 
 be aware, scams , 492 
 beverages , 492 
 health tips 
 Ackerman Group , 494 
 hotel concierge , 493 
 international SOS , 493 
 money protection , 490  
 pictures , 491 
 strangers , 491 
 Segmentation product , 209 
 Senge, Peter M , 465 
 Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE) , 214 
 Service export 
 architectural, construction and 
engineering services , 244 
 bottom line , 253 
 commercial, professional, technical and 
business services , 244  
 demand worldwide , 244  
 destination volume , 246 
 education and training services , 244 
 entertainment and media , 244 
 environmental services , 244  
 finances , 247  
 financial services , 244  
 fostering competitiveness , 241  
 Huntington Bank , 240  
 internet markets , 252  
 launch service 
 acquisition, joint venture, 
partnership/franchise , 250  
 approach foreign companies , 250  
 existing domestic clients , 250  
 seek representatives/agents , 251  
 target market , 251  
 virtual consultant 
(teleconsultant) , 251  
 working relationships , 250  
 overcoming market barriers , 248  
 cultural differences , 249  
 economics , 249  
 government , 248  
 local practice and custom , 248  
 overview , 239  
 people power drives , 243  
 product-export business , 247  
 product  vs. service (difference) , 242  
 retail and wholesale trade , 245  
 supply chain and distribution , 245  
 telecommunications and information 
services , 245  
 transportation, shipping, distribution 
and logistic services , 245  
 travel and tourism , 245  
 wildflower-nursery business , 251  
 Service exports , 442–443  
 fundamentals , 370  
 pricing model , 372  
 Seybold, Patricia B , 560  
 Shipmentation insurance 
 booking 
 legitimate order , 408  
 letter of credit (L/C) , 409  
 SED , 409–410  
 steamship line , 409  
 definition , 415  
 insurance coverage , 415  
 all-risks policy , 415  
 types , 415  
 labeling , 412–414  
Russia (cont.)

581
Index
 marine insurance , 415 
 discover damage/loss of cargo , 416 
 financial responsibility , 416 
 insurance coverage , 415 
 paper trail , 416  
 marking , 411–414 
 overseas , 410 
 Shipper’s Export Declaration 
(SED) , 409, 433 
 Shipping address label , 412 
 Shipping lines 
 conference , 339 
 independent , 339  
 Shipwire , 348 
 Shopify , 139 
 Simplified Network Application Process 
Redesign (SNAP-R) , 430 
 Single Buyer Insurance , 395 
 Skunkworks , 266 
 SkyDrive , 160 
 Skype , 156 
 Slack , 100, 157  
 Small- and medium-sized businesses 
(SMEs) , 501 
 Small Business Administration 
(SBA) , 214 
 Small Business and Entrepreneurship 
Council (SBE Council) , 509 
 Small Business Investment Companies , 391 
 Small Business Multi-Buyer Export 
Credit Insurance , 394 
 Smartling , 275 
 Smart packing 
 ditching possessions , 483 
 garments appropriation , 483 
 natural impulse , 482 
 Smart Traveler Enrollment Program 
(STEP) , 480 
 Snag customers worldwide , 298 
 domestic (local) trade shows , 298 
 international trade shows , 299 
 SnapChat , 99 
 SNAP-R , 433 
 Social media and networking tools 
 big shift , 88  
 digital-export rock 
 Facebook and users , 94  
 Google+ , 97  
 Instagram , 96  
 LinkedIn , 92  
 Pinterest , 97  
 Twitter and users , 95  
 YouTube and viewership , 95  
 digital-export success , 89  
 digital road map 
 Blog , 99  
 Facebook , 98  
 Google+ , 99  
 Instagram , 98  
 Pinterest , 98  
 Twitter , 98  
 YouTube , 98  
 Internet , 91  
 overview , 87  
 Social media marketing (SMM) , 167  
 Social media sites  . See  e-Commerce  
 South Africa , 513  
 business guide , 526  
 export prospects , 523  
 GDP growth rate , 522  
 gross domestic product , 522  
 imports , 522  
 inflation rate , 522  
 internet usage , 522  
 languages , 522  
 online payment method , 522  
 per capita GDP , 522  
 population growth rate , 522  
 population , 522  
 Southern Illinois University 
Edwardsville , 219  
 South Korea , 537  
 Square reader , 157  
 Stand-alone e-commerce site , 126  
 Starbucks , 316, 446  
 STAR Group , 272  
 Statista , 260  
 Steamship line , 409  
 STELA , 433  

582
Index
 Stripe , 403 
 Subchapter S Corporation , 37 
 Subway system , 478 
 Success stories 
 Marlin Steel 
 business plan , 556 
 Export-Import Bank , 556 
 Gold Key Matching Service 
program , 556 
 Greenblatt, Drew , 555 
 international marketplace , 556 
 requisite forms , 557 
 shipping document , 557 
 thriving business , 555 
 National District Export 
Council , 548–550 
 Paulson Manufacturing , 551 
 Pittsford, Philip , 548–550  
 Roberts and Company 
 business risk , 554 
 Getty Images , 553 
 intellectual property , 553 
 learning adventure , 554 
 money collection , 554 
 photographs , 553 
 potential partner , 554 
 Roberts, Barbara , 553 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) , 549 
 World Blazer 
 Carter , 543 
 Larson, Alison , 543–547 
 OshKosh , 544, 545 
 SugarSync , 160 
 Supply chain and distribution , 245 
 Sun, Shelly , 324 
 System for Tracking Your Export License 
Application (STELA) , 430 
 T 
 Tariff , 337 
 Tax violations , 470 
 Telecommunications and information 
services , 245 
 The Art of the Global Gateway , 271 
 The FCPA Blog , 473 
 The International Language of ISO 
Graphical Symbols , 414  
 The Journal of Commerce (JOC) , 343  
 The National Bureaus of Statistics 
of China , 534  
 The Sinocism China Newsletter , 534  
 The United States Department of Justice’s 
information on the Foreign 
Corrupt Practices Act , 472  
 Third-party logistics company (3PL) , 346  
 Third-Party providers 
 ACH payments , 400  
 Authorize.Net , 403  
 Bill Me Later , 401  
 Braintree , 404  
 CyberSource , 401  
 Google Wallet mobile app , 402  
 Intuit Payment Network , 402  
 MSC , 404–405  
 PayPal , 400  
 Stripe , 403 
 Third-party suppliers (3PLs) , 347  
 Amazon services , 348  
 Bongo International , 348  
 Fulfillrite , 349  
 Ingram Micro , 349  
 Mercent , 349  
 Pitney Bowes , 347  
 Shipwire , 348  
 Speed Commerce , 349  
 UPS , 348  
 ThomasNet , 128  
 Timetables 
 banker’s acceptance , 385  
 sight-draft payment , 384  
 time-draft payment , 384  
 TNT 
 express mobile , 158  
 logistic experts , 345  
 Top 10 internet markets , 252  
 Top-level domain (TLD) , 266  
 Top Ten Basics of Foreign Corrupt Practices 
Act Compliance for the Small 
Legal Department , 472  
 Towson, Jeffrey , 521  

583
Index
 Trade agreements , 539, 561 
 Trade and customs duties , 44 
 Trade Associations , 300 
 Trade Compliance Center , 472 
 Trade Finance Guide , 393 
 Trade in Service Agreement (TISA) , 371 
 TradeKey , 289 
 Trade leads database (TLD) , 184, 295 
 Trade missions , 182–184, 300 
 Trade Show News Network , 298–299 
 Trade Stats express , 217 
 TradeUp WorldBlazer , 392 
 Trading company , 290–291 
 Traditional Export Business Plan , 21 
 Traditional marketing channels 
 exhibitions , 178  
 advantages , 178 
 attending a trade show , 181 
 drawbacks , 178 
 local buyer expect , 180 
 points , 179–180 
 government- and trade industry-
sponsored programs , 182 
 catalog exhibitions , 184 
 contact-list services , 184 
 DOC , 183 
 gold key matching service , 182 
 international partner search , 182 
 matchmaking services , 183 
 search engine , 183 
 TLD , 184 
 trade intermediaries , 183 
 US embassies , 183 
 US exporters , 183 
 WTCs , 184 
 Translations.com , 272 
 Translators Without Borders , 274 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) 
Agreement , 532, 549 
 Transparency International , 473 
 TransPerfect , 272 
 Transport 
 motorbridge (trucking) service , 340 
 NVOCCs , 339  
 shipping lines , 339  
 start-to-finish transport , 339  
 Transportation, shipping, distribution, 
and logistic services , 245  
 Transport options 
 air transport , 337  
 ocean transport , 338–344  
 Travel Act , 469  
 Travel and tourism , 245  
 Travel.State.Gov , 479  
  Third-party logistic providers 
(3PLs) , 405  
 Twitter and users , 95  
 Types and Uses of Letters of Credit 
 assignment of proceeds , 385  
 back-to-back setup , 386  
 irrevocable , 383  
 revocable , 384  
 revolving , 386  
 standby , 386  
 transferable , 385  
 U 
 Ulmart , 518  
 Unilever , 235  
 United Kingdom 
 categories , 536  
 international trading power , 535  
 United States International Trade 
Commission , 218  
 United States Manufacturer Directory , 128  
 United States Postal Service , 351  
 United States Trade and Development 
Agency(USTDA) , 393  
 Unit loading , 341  
 UPS , 348 
 global trade , 345  
 mobile , 158  
 US Agency for International 
Development (USAID) , 219  
 USA Trade Online , 217  
 US Census Bureau , 221  

584
Index
 US-China Business Council , 223 
 U.S. Commercial Service’s International 
Company Profile , 287 
 US commercial service (USCS) , 216 
 U.S. Cuba Business Council , 223 
 US Department of Commerce and 
Economic Opportunity , 532 
 US Department of the Treasury , 219 
 US Embassy , 218, 286, 481  
 US Export Assistance Centers 
(EAC) , 295, 503 
 US-India Business Council , 223 
 U.S. service exports , 240 
 U.S. Translation Company , 273 
 V 
 van Dyne, Linn , 452 
 Vented containers , 343 
 Volusion , 139 
 Vosges Haut-Chocolat , 192–193, 446 
 W, X 
 Walton, Sam , 441 
 Wanelo , 100 
 Web design , 257 
 eighth continent , 260 
 Internet users , 261 
 multiple platforms and devices , 260 
 globalization , 258, 261–262 
(see  Web globalization ) 
 online social platform/apps , 258 
 site translate , 259 
 WebEx , 157 
 Web globalization , 259 
 approach , 262 
 consult companies 
 additional considerations , 273 
 byte level research , 273 
 cost of , 274–275 
 CSA , 273 
 external guidance , 271 
 great global web site , 264 
 internationalization and 
localization services , 263  
 optimization , 263  
 report card , 264  
 service providers , 271–272  
 step-by-step process , 264  
 build for growth , 266–267  
 get start translation , 268  
 go beyond translation , 270  
 hire (right people/service 
provider) , 265–266  
 measure specific results , 270  
 need to , 267  
 schedule , 269  
 skunkworks project , 266  
 target market , 265  
 test , 270  
 track metrics , 268  
 translation process simple , 269  
 user experience and 
search , 269–270  
 welcome gateway , 268  
 Web Globalization Report Card , 264  
 Web log  . See  Blog  
 Web site globalization  . See also  
Web globalization 
 breed visitor participation , 78  
 CareerBuilder , 61  
 content current, accurate and 
relevant , 72  
 country-code-specific domains , 78  
 Craigslist , 62  
 culturally customized , 75  
 customer care , 76  
 Dice , 62 
 domain name , 79  
 Experience , 62  
 FlexJobs , 62  
 GetHired.com , 62  
 Glassdoor , 62  
 global audience , 77  
 growth , 79  
 Indeed , 63  
 Internships.com , 63  
 Ladders , 64  
 LinkUp , 63  
 maintain , 73  

585
Index
 ManpowerGroup , 63 
 message , 73 
 Monster.com , 63 
 newsletter , 76 
 online customers , 72 
 review sites , 73 
 SEO case study , 74 
 SimplyHired , 63  
 StartUpHire , 64 
 two-way communication , 78 
 unique keyword message , 74 
 USAjobs , 64 
 Vault , 64 
 visitors to buy , 75 
 Web translation , 257  
 Welde, Jack , 275 
 Welocalize , 272 
 Wildflower-nursery business , 251 
 Women business owners , 498 
 advantages , 508 
 business model , 508 
 council , 498 
 global business and servicing , 502 
 global economy , 498 
 Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor’s , 499 
 globe-trotting women , 498 
 Harvard Business Review Blog 
Network , 508 
 RIP , 502 
 SMEs , 501 
 social/e-commerce platforms , 507 
 special characteristics , 504 
 collaborative approach , 506 
 education , 507 
 family circle , 504 
 foreign colleagues , 505 
 glass ceiling , 507 
 intuitive knowledge , 505 
 language and cultural barriers , 504 
 social behavior , 505 
 still a novelty , 506 
 special financing programs , 503 
 training , 503 
 Wall Street Journal , 508 
 WBENC , 503 
 women-centric online community 
forums , 503  
 women entrepreneurs energize 
economies , 501  
 women-owned firms , 500  
 Women Entrepreneurs GROW 
Global (WEGG) , 502–503  
 Women Impacting Public Policy 
(WIPP) , 503  
  Women-owned businesses , 501  
 Women Presidents’ Organization 
(WPO) , 502  
 Women’s Business Development 
Center (WBDC) , 503  
 Women’s Business Enterprise National 
Council (WBENC) , 503  
 Women’s entrepreneur initiatives , 503  
 Women take on the world , 499, 501  
 Working Capital Guarantee , 394  
 Working Capital Loans and 
Guarantees , 395  
 World Bank Atlas Method , 222  
 World Bank Group , 224, 523  
 WorldBlazer Consulting LLC , 286, 543  
 World Citizens Guide , 468  
 World Economic Forum , 501  
 World Factbook , 222  
 WorldPay , 402  
 World Trade Centers Association 
(WTCs) , 184  
 World Trade Organization 
(WTO) , 218, 472, 526  
 WorldTraveler.com , 455  
 Y 
 Yaldi , 157  
 Yunker, John , 257  
 YouTube and viewership , 95  
 Z 
 Zazzle (web site) , 113  

