Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
E X P O S E D
www.Ebook777.com


E X PO S E D
desire and disobedience
in the digital age
Bernard E. Harcourt
harvard univer sit y press
cambridge, massachusetts
london, en gland
2015

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Copyright © 2015 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First printing
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
Harcourt, Bernard E., 1963– 
Exposed : desire and disobedience in the digital age / 
Bernard E. Harcourt.
pages 
cm
ISBN 978-0-674-50457-8 (cloth)
1. Information technology— Social aspects. 
2. Privacy, 
right of. 
I. Title.
HM851.H3664 2015
303.48'33— dc23 
 
 
2015012788
www.Ebook777.com

To Isadora
To Léonard
To Mia


contents
 
 Th e Expository Society 
1
 
part one Clearing the Ground 
29
 
1. George Orwell’s Big Brother 
31
 
2. Th e Surveillance State 
54
 
3. Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon 
80
 
part two Th e Birth of the Expository Society 
105
 
4. Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion 
107
 
5. A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic 
141
 
6. Th e Eclipse of Humanism 
166
 
part three Th e Perils of Digital Exposure 
185
 
7. Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society 
187
 
8. Th e Mortifi cation of the Self 
217
 
9. Th e Steel Mesh 
234

 
part four Digital Disobedience 
251
 
10. Virtual Democracy 
253
 
11. Digital Re sis tance 
262
 
12. Po liti cal Disobedience 
280
 
notes 
285
 
ac know ledg ments 
347
 
index 
349
viii  Contents

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
E X P O S E D
www.Ebook777.com


Every keystroke, each mouse click, every touch of the 
screen, card swipe, Google search, Amazon purchase, Instagram, “like,” 
tweet, scan—in short, everything we do in our new digital age can be 
recorded, stored, and monitored. Every routine act on our iPads and 
tablets, on our laptops, notebooks, and Kindles, offi  ce PCs and smart-
phones, every transaction with our debit card, gym pass, E- ZPass, bus 
pass, and loyalty cards can be archived, data- mined, and traced back 
to us. Linked together or analyzed separately, these data points consti-
tute a new virtual identity, a digital self that is now more tangible, 
authoritative, and demonstrable, more fi xed and provable than our 
analog selves. Our mobile phones communicate and search for Wi- Fi 
networks even when cellular data is turned off . Our MetroCards and 
employee IDs leave traces with each swipe and tap. Every ATM with-
drawal, web search, secured- building entry or elevator  ride, every mo-
bile payment leaves a mark that makes it possible for others to know 
our whereabouts at every moment, to track us at will, and to reconsti-
tute our every action. In sum, today every single digital trace can be 
identifi ed, stored, and aggregated to constitute a composite sketch of 
what we like, whom we love, what we read, how we vote, and where 
we protest.
Th e social media and web browsers we use—or accidentally visit— 
constantly collect a trove of our personal data. Our telecommunication 
the expository society

2  Th e Expository Society
companies record everything they can, as do other telecoms that, unbe-
knownst to us, route, switch, redirect, and retransmit our communica-
tions. Our intimate data are stockpiled by signals intelligence ser vices 
in the United States and abroad, and by local law enforcement— but 
also by the retailers we use, by data brokers  we’ve never heard of, 
by hackers, and simply by the curious among us using free network 
sniff ers or stalking us on the web. Most of our digital information is 
available one way or another— for purchase by advertisers or for re-
view by insurance companies, for supervision by our employers, for 
examination by the security apparatus, for capture by keystroke log-
gers, or for a quick peek on anonymous online message boards. Google 
and Facebook aggressively compete over who has more of our sensi-
tive data to share with their users and to sell to advertisers. Free off - 
the- shelf sniffi  ng programs allow anyone to read others’ emails and 
see their web browsing on unsecured networks. Law enforcement 
agencies secretly collect, pool, and share as much of our digital infor-
mation as possible. And the National Security Agency (NSA), the 
British Government Communications Headquarters, the French Di-
rection Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure, the Chinese and Rus sian 
signals intelligence agencies, and practically every other intelligence 
ser vice around the world share the ambition to know everything, to 
map the Internet universe, to be able to identify every end device con-
nected to the Internet—in short, to know everything digital, every-
where, and at every moment.
Most of us are aware of this, although many of us put it out of our 
minds. We have read the Guardian articles and the New York Times 
and heard the investigative journalism on the radio. We have watched 
video clips of the congressional hearings. We’ve repeatedly seen the 
telltale advertisements popping up on the ribbon of our search screen, 
reminding us of our immediately past Google or Bing query. We’ve 
received the betraying emails in our spam folders. We’ve even scruti-
nized the top- secret NSA PowerPoint slides and other documents 
leaked by Edward Snowden. But it is one thing to know, and quite an-
other to remember long enough to care— especially when there is the 
ping of a new text, the fl ag desktop notifi cation of a new email, the 

Th e Expository Society  3
fl ash of a new like on our Instagram photo, the doorbell noise of a new 
Facebook message, or just the simple desire to know how many people 
have seen our Snapchat story or commented on our blog post. It is 
quite another thing to pay attention in the face of the stimulating dis-
tractions and sensual pleasures of the new digital age— the constant 
news feeds and friend messages, the newest Vine or viral YouTube 
video, the access to every bit of information online, the ability to Google 
anything and everything. Th e anticipation, the desire for something 
new and satisfying, that sensation we get when we receive a bit of good 
news in our email in- box— how easily this distracts us from what we 
actually know about the breathtaking scope and ubiquity of these new 
forms of digital surveillance, data mining, profi ling, and monitoring. 
We so easily get sidetracked by the most minor digital stimulus— and 
so oft en go there to avoid the emotional re sis tance of writer’s block or 
the discomfort of a diffi  cult thought or unpleasant interaction. How 
quickly, how instinctively we put our thumb on our smartphone, check 
email, read the Twitter feed, swipe to Facebook. What ever. We’ve al-
ready put it out of our mind and are consumed with a new Snapchat, a 
viral wall post, or Assassin’s Creed Unity. We ignore what we suspect 
or even know about being tracked and exposed. We put it out of our 
minds. But we do so at our peril.
•  •  •
Th e Wall Street Journal broke the story in May 2011, well before the 
name Edward Snowden meant anything to anyone.1 Th e revelation 
did not draw much attention, though. It concerned those little icons 
on most websites— the thumbs-up of Facebook’s like button, the little 
birdie of Twitter’s tweet button, the multicolor Google+ widget, those 
small icons that line and populate websites, YouTube videos, news ar-
ticles, travel websites, search ribbons, and so on.
It turns out that those little icons allow Facebook, Twitter, or 
Google to track our Internet browsing on the websites where the icons 
are placed, regardless of whether we are logged onto those social net-
works. As long as someone uses those social networks and has been 

4  Th e Expository Society
logged onto them within the past month (and did not actively log out), 
their Internet surfi ng on other sites that carry those icons is tracked 
and reported back to Facebook, Twitter, or Google. In fact, you don’t 
even need to be a user of social media— you can be tracked back from 
the other websites even if you mistakenly click onto one of those social 
media sites. And it turns out that those little icons are on lots of web-
sites. Back in 2011, for instance, 33 percent of the top 1,000 most pop-
u lar websites had the Facebook like button, 25  percent had the 
Google+ widget, and 20 percent had the Twitter tweet button. Th e 
icons are embedded in millions of websites today.2
Th e sequence is simple: logging onto any of those social media— 
Facebook, Twitter, Google+— will install soft ware on your web 
browser that remains active even if you turn off  your computer or shut 
down the browser. It only turns off  if you affi  rmatively log out of the 
social media—if you intentionally click the “log out” button. Once ac-
tivated, that soft ware will then report back to the social media any-
time you are on any other website that carries the little icon, regard-
less of whether you click or touch the little icon. Just being on a website 
with those like and tweet buttons embedded in them will allow those 
social media to track your Internet browsing.
Th e Wall Street Journal noted in passing, “Facebook says it still 
places a cookie on the computer of anyone who visits the Facebook . com 
home page, even if the user isn’t a member.”3 So one’s browsing history 
may be made available to others, even for those of us who do not have 
a Facebook account. Th e article goes on to report: “Until recently, 
some Facebook widgets also obtained browsing data about Internet 
users who had never visited Facebook . com, though Facebook  wouldn’t 
know their identity. Th e company says it discontinued that practice, 
which it described as a ‘bug,’ earlier this year aft er it was disclosed by 
Dutch researcher Arnold Roosendaal of Tilburg University.” 4
To be more exact, this is precisely how the tracking works. Ac-
cording to detailed communications dating from 2011 between reporters 
for USA Today and Facebook executives— Arturo Bejar, Facebook’s 
 engineering director, Facebook spokesmen Andrew Noyes and Barry 

Th e Expository Society  5
Schnitt, engineering manager Gregg Stefancik, and corporate spokes-
woman Jaime Schopfl in— these are the technical specifi cations:
•  “Th e company compiles tracking data in diff erent ways for mem-
bers who have signed in and are using their accounts, for members 
who are logged- off  and for non- members. Th e tracking pro cess 
begins when you initially visit a facebook . com page. If you choose to 
sign up for a new account, Facebook inserts two diff erent types of 
tracking cookies in your browser, a ‘session cookie’ and a ‘browser 
cookie.’ If you choose not to become a member, and move on, you 
only get the browser cookie.
•  “From this point on, each time you visit a third- party webpage 
that has a Facebook Like button, or other Facebook plug-in, the 
plug-in works in conjunction with the cookie to alert Facebook of 
the date, time and web address of the webpage you’ve clicked to. 
Th e unique characteristics of your PC and browser, such as your 
IP address, screen resolution, operating system and browser ver-
sion, are also recorded.
•  “Facebook thus compiles a running log of all your webpage visits 
for 90 days, continually deleting entries for the oldest day and 
adding the newest to this log.
•  “If you are logged-on to your Facebook account and surfi ng the 
Web, your session cookie conducts this logging. Th e session 
cookie additionally rec ords your name, e- mail address, friends 
and all data associated with your profi le to Facebook. If you are 
logged- off , or if you are a non- member, the browser cookie con-
ducts the logging; it additionally reports a unique alphanumeric 
identifi er, but no personal information.” 5
In case the minutiae got too tedious, it may be worth repeating  here 
that, according to its engineers and spokesmen, Facebook links and 
ties all the information that it gleans from your web surfi ng back to 
“your name, e- mail address, friends and all data associated with your 
profi le to Facebook.” 6

6  Th e Expository Society
Th at was 2011. By 2014, this type of tracking soft ware was old news, 
especially in the advertising business. Users  were fi nding ways to dis-
able cookies or clear them. Worse, cookies do not interface well with 
smartphones, and everyone is now spending more and more time on 
their mobiles. In the words of one tech expert, “Th e cookie is failing 
the advertising industry.”7 Facebook itself openly recognized the 
shortcomings of the cookie, acknowledging that “today’s technology 
for ad serving and measurement— cookies— are fl awed when used 
alone. Cookies don’t work on mobile, are becoming less accurate in 
demographic targeting and  can’t easily or accurately mea sure the cus-
tomer purchase funnel across browsers and devices or into the offl  ine 
world.”8
On September  29, 2014, Facebook launched a solution: “people- 
based marketing” via the new and improved Atlas product. “People- 
based marketing solves these problems,” Facebook boasted.9 Th e new 
technology is simple: take all of the data that Facebook has, including 
all the data it can mine through our smartphone apps, and share all 
that information with anyone who’s willing to pay, so that they can 
then target users on all their other platforms at all times. In an appro-
priately titled article, “With New Ad Platform, Facebook Opens Gates 
to Its Vault of User Data,” Vindu Goel of the New York Times explains 
that Atlas “will allow marketers to tap [Facebook’s] detailed knowl-
edge of its users to direct ads to those people on thousands of other 
websites and mobile apps.”10 By tapping into Facebook’s trove of data, 
advertisers can then push products on all of the diff erent devices and 
platforms accessed by the user, including video sites, game apps, Insta-
gram, et cetera. Plus, Facebook can also then mea sure success and 
provide feedback to advertisers as to which ads are more eff ective. For 
instance, Facebook vaunts, “Instagram—as a publisher—is now en-
abled with Atlas to both mea sure and verify ad impressions. And for 
Atlas advertisers who are already running campaigns through Insta-
gram, Instagram ads will be included in Atlas reporting.”11
Facebook is the second- biggest digital advertising platform, aft er 
Google, but it has a par tic u lar advantage over most others in one im-
portant respect: users check Facebook on their mobile devices. As 

Th e Expository Society  7
the New York Times explains, “Th e Facebook login is most useful on 
mobile devices, where traditional web tracking tools like cookies and 
pixel tags do not work. If a person is logged into the Facebook app on a 
smartphone, the company has the ability to see what other apps he or 
she is using and could show ads within those apps.”12 Or, as another 
tech expert explains: “As long as you are logged in to Facebook on 
your device, Atlas tracks activity even in apps that don’t use a Face-
book login.”13 Facebook boasts about this new technology. It is not 
hiding anything. On the contrary, it is trying to take over the digital 
advertising business— its revenue depends on it—so it is up front and 
explicit: “Atlas delivers people- based marketing, helping marketers 
reach real people across devices, platforms and publishers. By doing 
this, marketers can easily solve the cross- device problem through 
targeting, serving and mea sur ing across devices. And, Atlas can now 
connect online campaigns to actual offl  ine sales, ultimately proving 
the real impact that digital campaigns have in driving incremental 
reach and new sales.”14
Social media has become, in the words of one analyst describing 
Google’s Gmail and other ser vices, “a massive surveillance operation 
that intercepts and analyzes terabytes of global Internet traffi  c every 
day, and then uses that data to build and update complex psycholog-
ical profi les on hundreds of millions of people all over the world— all 
of it in real time.”15
•  •  •
Th e Associated Press (AP) broke this other story in 2014, leading Sen. 
Patrick Leahy of Vermont, chairman of the Senate Appropriations 
Committee’s State Department and Foreign Operations Subcom-
mittee, to hold hearings and substantiate the details in the spring 
of 2014. Th e episode, which dates back to 2009, involved another trove 
of data: a large database consisting of half a million telephone num-
bers of cell phone users in Cuba—or, more precisely, a trove of data 
and a few entrepreneurial offi  cials and subcontractors at the United 
States Agency for International Development (USAID), the agency 

8  Th e Expository Society
that delivers billions of dollars of aid and humanitarian assistance to 
needy countries.16
It all started when an employee at Cubacel, the Cuban state- owned 
cell phone provider, surreptitiously slipped half a million cell phone 
numbers to a Cuban engineer living in Spain. Th at Cuban expat then 
turned the database over, “free of charge” according to the documents 
reviewed by the AP, to offi  cials at USAID and to a for- profi t Wash-
ington, D.C., company, Creative Associates International. (Creative 
Associates had received millions of dollars in contract business from 
USAID.) A manager there got, well, as the company’s name would sug-
gest, creative: with an associate in Nicaragua, she hatched the idea of 
sending bulk text messages from diff erent countries to the Cuban cell 
phone users. It was a creative way to circumvent the strict state control 
of the Internet in Cuba. A way to kick- start a basic type of social media, 
on the model of Twitter.17
Th e idea was to surreptitiously set up from scratch a social network 
for Cubans, a rudimentary “Cuban Twitter,” with the long- term goal 
of fomenting po liti cal dissent. Top USAID administrators deny that 
was the intent— but the documentary evidence belies any such dis-
avowals.18 As the AP reported, aft er carefully reviewing more than 
1,000 pages of documents: “Documents show the U.S. government 
planned to build a subscriber base through ‘non- controversial con-
tent’: news messages on soccer, music and hurricane updates. Later 
when the network reached a critical mass of subscribers, perhaps 
hundreds of thousands, operators would introduce po liti cal content 
aimed at inspiring Cubans to or ga nize ‘smart mobs’— mass gatherings 
called at a moment’s notice that might trigger a Cuban Spring, or, as 
one USAID document put it, ‘renegotiate the balance of power be-
tween the state and society.’ ”19
Th ey gave the undertaking the name ZunZuneo, which means, 
in Cuban slang, a hummingbird’s tweet. They then drew on user 
reactions and responses to start profi ling the Cuban subscribers. One 
USAID contractor was tasked with categorizing the subscribers as 
either “pro- revolution,” “apo liti cal,” or “anti- revolution” based on their 
answers to prompts.20 According to the AP, this contractor “collected 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Expository Society  9
a sample of more than 700 responses and analyzed them according 
to two variables. Th e fi rst was the level of interest in the messages re-
ceived, and the second was the po liti cal nature of the response. She 
wrote in her report that 68 percent of responses showed mild interest 
in the texts.”21
In another operation, “USAID divided Cuban society into fi ve 
segments depending on loyalty to the government. On one side sat the 
‘demo cratic movement,’ called ‘still (largely) irrelevant,’ and at the 
other end  were the ‘hard- core system supporters,’ dubbed ‘Talibanes’ 
in a derogatory comparison to Afghan and Pakistani extremists.”22 
Th e key objective of the overarching project, according to the AP, was 
to “move more people toward the demo cratic activist camp without 
detection.”23 A close parsing of the USAID documents reveals that 
“their strategic objective in Cuba was to ‘push it out of a stalemate 
through tactical and temporary initiatives, and get the transition pro-
cess going again toward demo cratic change.’ ”24
At one point, in March  2011, ZunZuneo had about 40,000 sub-
scribers. None of the subscribers had any idea that the social media 
was created, sustained, or fed by USAID operatives. None of them 
realized that their texts  were profi led by USAID contractors to deter-
mine their po liti cal allegiance. None of them realized that the mes-
saging was intended to motivate them po liti cally.
To hide all this, USAID set up “a byzantine system of front companies 
using a Cayman Islands bank account, and recruit[ed] executives who 
would not be told of the company’s ties to the U.S. government,” ac-
cording to the AP investigation.25 Th ey had a British company set up a 
corporation in Spain to run ZunZuneo. Th ey set up a companion web-
site to the cell phone texting ser vice so that the cell phone users could 
subscribe, off er feedback, and themselves send texts for free.26 And, 
the documents reveal, they discussed how to make this all seem legiti-
mate: “Mock ad banners will give it the appearance of a commercial 
enterprise,” a document reads.27 Most important, as the AP reported, 
“ ‘there will be absolutely no mention of United States government in-
volvement,’ according to a 2010 memo from Mobile Accord, one of the 
project’s contractors. ‘Th is is absolutely crucial for the long- term 
www.Ebook777.com

10  Th e Expository Society
success of the ser vice and to ensure the success of the Mission.’ ”28 Th e 
ZunZuneo team even hired a Havana- born satirical artist to write 
Twitter- like messages that had a Cuban fl avor.29
ZunZuneo shut down in mid-2012 when the USAID money dried 
up. Aft er the program was exposed, Senator Leahy of Vermont began 
holding hearings in Congress in the spring of 2014. Th e Senate hear-
ings confi rmed the story.
•  •  •
Launched in 2007, the PRISM program allows the NSA to access data 
from Google, Facebook, Microsoft , Yahoo, Paltalk, YouTube, Skype, 
AOL, Apple, and more— for a mere $20 million per year, a trifl ing sum 
for an intelligence program.30 In conjunction with other soft ware, 
such as the XKeyscore program, PRISM “allows offi  cials to collect 
material including search history, the content of emails, fi le transfers 
and live chats”; they can extract a person’s email contacts, user activi-
ties, and webmail, as well as all contacts listed in the to, from, CC, and 
BCC lines of emails.31 Using other programs and tools, such as DNI 
Presenter, they can “read the content of stored emails,” “read the con-
tent of Facebook chats or private messages,” and “learn the IP ad-
dresses of every person who visits any website the analyst specifi es.”32 
Moreover, the NSA has “developed methods to crack online encryp-
tion used to protect emails, banking and medical rec ords” giving it 
access to all our private and legally protected information.33 Th e pos-
sibilities and the amounts of data are simply staggering. Th e Wash-
ington Post reported back in 2010 that “every day, collection systems at 
the [NSA] intercept and store 1.7 billion emails, phone calls and other 
type of communications.”34
Th e PRISM program gives the government access to an individu-
al’s emails, photos, videos, attachments, VoIP, and so on. At practi-
cally no cost, the government has complete access to people’s dig-
ital selves. And although the NSA denied that it has immediate 
access to the data, the NSA documents leaked by Edward Snowden 

Th e Expository Society  11
state that the agency “claims ‘collection directly from the servers’ of 
major US ser vice providers.”35 Bart Gellman of the Washington 
Post, aft er fully reinvestigating the PRISM program, affi  rms that 
“from their work stations anywhere in the world, government em-
ployees cleared for PRISM access may ‘task’ the system and receive 
results from an Internet company without further interaction with 
the company’s staff .”36 Th e trajectory of cooperation is illustrated in 
a classifi ed NSA training slide leaked by Snowden in June 2013 (see 
Figure 1).
As Glenn Greenwald of the Guardian reported, “Th e Prism pro-
gram allows the intelligence ser vices direct access to the companies’ 
servers. Th e NSA document notes the operations have ‘assistance of 
communications providers in the US.’ ”37 Th e Guardian explained, 
based on an NSA document dating to April 2013: “Th e Prism program 
allows the NSA, the world’s largest surveillance organisation, to ob-
tain targeted communications without having to request them from 
the ser vice providers and without having to obtain individual court 
orders. With this program, the NSA is able to reach directly into the 
servers of the participating companies and obtain both stored com-
munications as well as perform real- time collection on targeted users.”38 
Th is allows the NSA to obtain all kinds of data—as illustrated in an-
other classifi ed NSA training slide leaked by Snowden to the Guardian 
in June 2013 (see Figure 2).
According to the Guardian, there is no warrant requirement or the 
need for individual authorization under the Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Act for any of these collection and analysis activities so long 
as the analyst searching the communications had “reasonable suspi-
cion that one of the parties was outside the country at the time the 
rec ords  were collected by the NSA.”39 Th e program is apparently 
leading to exponential rates of growth of search queries. “Th e docu-
ment highlights the number of obtained communications increased 
in 2012 by 248% for Skype— leading the notes to remark there was ‘ex-
ponential growth in Skype reporting; looks like the word is getting 
out [among intelligence analysts] about our capability against Skype,’ ” 

12  Th e Expository Society
figure 1 Top- secret NSA PowerPoint slide on PRISM program history (2013)
Source: “NSA Slides Explain the PRISM Data- Collection Program,” Washington Post, 
June 6, 2013.
figure 2 Top- secret NSA PowerPoint slide on PRISM program details (2013)
Source: “NSA Slides Explain the PRISM Data- Collection Program,” Washington Post, 
June 6, 2013.

Th e Expository Society  13
the Guardian reports. “Th ere was also a 131% increase in requests for 
Facebook data, and 63% for Google.” 40
In our digital frenzy to share snapshots and updates, to text 
and videochat with friends and lovers, to “quantify” ourselves, we are 
exposing ourselves— rendering ourselves virtually transparent to 
anyone with rudimentary technological capabilities. We are exhib-
iting ourselves through petabytes of electronic traces that we leave 
everywhere, traces that can be collected, linked together, and amalgam-
ated, traces that, paradoxically, although they are virtual, have become 
more tangible, more provable, more demonstrable, and more fi xed than 
our analog selves. Ernst Kantorowicz spoke of the king’s two bodies, but 
the meta phor is more applicable today to the subject’s—or, rather, the 
liberal demo cratic citizen’s— two bodies: the now permanent digital 
self, which we are  etching into the virtual cloud with every click and 
tap, and our mortal analog selves, which seem by contrast to be fading 
like the color on a Polaroid instant photo.
For many of us, we have brought this upon ourselves willingly, 
 enthusiastically, and with all our passion: through our joyful and 
fulfi lling embrace of social media and online shopping, through our 
constant texting to loved ones and our Google searches. Many of us 
give ourselves away and expose our innermost being with all our pre-
dilections and lust; our yearning for more attention and the costless-
ness of publicity combine in this toxic way and lead many of us to 
share our most intimate details on Facebook, to display our resumés 
and accomplishments on personal websites, to share our personal 
photos and travels on Instagram and Tumblr, to avow our po liti cal 
faith on virtual walls and digital protest sites. Not everyone, of course, 
and not always so willingly. By November 2014, Facebook could boast 
a community of 1.35 billion people, but there remain a number of us 
who continue to resist.41 And there are many more who are ambiva-
lent about the loss of privacy or anonymity, who are deeply concerned 
or hesitant. Th ere are some who anxiously warn us about the dangers 
and encourage us to maintain reserve.42 Th ere are many of us who are 

14  Th e Expository Society
confused and torn between, on the one hand, the desire to share our 
lives with loved ones and friends, to videochat on Skype from any-
place on earth, to freely share photos on Flickr, and, on the other hand, 
the discomfort of seemingly undressing ourselves in public or entering 
our private data on commercial websites. And yet, even when we hesi-
tate or are ambivalent, it seems there is simply no other way to get 
things done in our new digital age. No other way to reserve the hotel 
room or seat on the plane, to fi le the IRS form, to recall the library 
book, or to send money to our loved one in prison. No other way to do 
it but online. Even when we do not will it, so many of us hesitantly ex-
pose ourselves despite all our reservations and care.
And by exposing ourselves, we make it so easy, so tempting, so cheap 
to watch us, to monitor us, to target us—as well as to track us, to detain 
us, and, for some, to extract and punish us. We make ourselves virtually 
transparent for everyone to see, and in so doing, we allow ourselves to 
be shaped in unpre ce dented ways, intentionally or unwittingly. Our 
selves and our subjectivity— the very subjectivity that embraces the 
digital apps, platforms, and devices— are themselves molded by the rec-
ommender algorithms and targeted suggestions from retailers, the spe-
cial off ers from advertisers, the unsolicited talking points from po liti cal 
parties and candidates. Th rough the fl ood of suggestions and recom-
mendations, through our own censorship and self- governance in the 
face of being watched, we are transformed and shaped into digital sub-
jects. We are brought into being through the pro cesses of digital expo-
sure, monitoring, and targeting that we embrace and ignore so readily. 
And we give ourselves up to new forms of subjectivity and social order, 
marked by unpre ce dented restrictions on privacy and anonymity and 
by seemingly unlimited levels of monitoring and surveillance.
Our digital cravings are matched only by the drive and ambition of 
those who are watching. One data broker, Acxiom, boasted in 2014 that 
it had 3,000 points of data on practically every consumer in the United 
States.43 Th e Global Access Operations unit of the NSA collected data, 
in a single month in 2013, on more than 97 billion emails and more than 
124 billion telephone calls from around the globe.44 Facebook’s ef-
fort to become the biggest digital advertising platform means it col-

Th e Expository Society  15
lects gargantuan amounts of personal data. Google’s ambition to map 
every street and vacuum up every bit of Wi- Fi traffi  c with its Street View 
cars and to digitize every book in the world is colossal. Th e NSA has set 
out to map, know, and tap into the entire Internet universe: according to 
NSA documents leaked by Snowden and viewed by Der Spiegel, the NSA 
and the British signals intelligence agency are working together to, in the 
words of the secret document, “map the entire Internet— [a]ny device, 
anywhere, all the time.” 45 Th e program, called Trea sure Map, seeks to 
identify and make visible “every single end device that is connected to 
the Internet somewhere in the world— every smartphone, tablet and 
computer.” 46 Today, the drive to know everything, everywhere, at 
every moment is breathtaking.
We live today in a new po liti cal and social condition that is radi-
cally transforming our relations to each other, our po liti cal commu-
nity, and ourselves: a new virtual transparence that is dramatically 
reconfi guring relations of power throughout society, that is redrawing 
our social landscape and po liti cal possibilities, that is producing a dra-
matically new circulation of power in society. A new expository power 
constantly tracks and pieces together our digital selves. It renders us 
legible to others, open, accessible, subject to everyone’s idiosyncratic 
projects— whether governmental, commercial, personal, or intimate. 
It interpellates us into digital subjects born into a new culture “that 
allows an airline or a politician to know more about us than our 
mothers or our lovers do.” 47 And it does so with our full participation. 
Th ere is no conspiracy  here, nothing untoward. Most oft en we expose 
ourselves for the simplest desires, the pleasures of curiosity, a quick 
distraction— those trifl ing gratifi cations, that seductive click the 
iPhone “shutter” makes, the sensual swoosh of a sent email. Th at, and 
the con ve nience and apparent costlessness with which we can shop 
online, renew a subscription, deposit a check via our mobile phone, 
carry a library on our e- reader. For those of us who hesitate at fi rst, the 
allure and effi  ciency of costless storage on Dropbox, of gratis transfers 
of megabytes of data on WeTransfer . com, of free calendaring have 

16  Th e Expository Society
made exposure practically irresistible. We know, of course, that none 
of this is “free” and that we pay for it by giving complete access to our 
personal data.48 We pay for it also with our attention and distraction.49 
But those costs do not feel expensive or prohibitive, or suffi  ciently so, 
at the moment we have our fi nger on the mouse.
In the wake of the two grand jury decisions to refuse to indict police 
offi  cers in the hom i cides of Michael Brown in Ferguson and Eric Garner 
in Staten Island, a protest was or ga nized for Saturday, December 13, 
2014, in New York City. Th e organizers of the Millions March set up a 
Facebook page, where, by the night before, more than 45,000 people 
had RSVPed. It was posted as a public event on Facebook, so everyone 
and anyone could see who had signed up to attend— providing ev-
eryone and anyone, including the social media unit of the New York 
City Police Department, a costless, pristine list of all the individuals 
who feel so strongly about the problem of police accountability that 
they are willing to identify themselves publicly.
It takes little imagination to think of the ways that such a list could 
be exploited: As a background check during a police- civilian en-
counter or stop- and- frisk. As a red fl ag for a customs search at the air-
port, or a secondary search at a random checkpoint. As part of a larger 
profi le for constructing a no- fl y list, or for attributing a lower priority 
to a 911 emergency call. For more aggressive misdemeanor arrests in 
neighborhoods that have higher concentrations of protesters. As part 
of a strategy to dampen voter turnout in certain precincts. For a cavity 
search in case of arrest. Th ere are myriad creative ways to misuse the 
data; our imagination is the only limit. And with a single click, a 
prying eye can learn everything about each of the digital selves that 
signed up for the protest on Facebook; using a simple selector, an in-
telligence analyst could collect all of the digital information about any 
one of those signatories, read all their emails, attachments, wall posts, 
and comments, decipher their po liti cal opinions and engagements, 
scan their photos and texts, target their videochats, track them by cell 
phone location—in sum, follow their every movement and digital ac-
tion throughout every moment of their day. Once we are identifi ed, 
we can be relentlessly monitored across practically every dimension of 

Th e Expository Society  17
our daily routine—by means of the GPS on our phones, our IP ad-
dresses and web surfi ng, our Gmail contacts, MetroCards, employee 
IDs, and social media posts.
We face today, in advanced capitalist liberal democracies, a radi-
cally new form of power in a completely altered landscape of po liti cal 
and social possibilities. Earlier models of sovereign power, character-
ized by dramatically asymmetric and spectacular applications of brute 
force, do not quite capture this moment. We have moved far beyond 
the juridical relations of ruler to subject that characterized Th omas 
Hobbes’s Leviathan, we no longer depend on the éclat of spectacular 
ordeals and tortures— even if residues and traces remain.50 For the 
most part, there is no longer as much need today for the stunning dis-
play, nor for the snitch or mouchard of the ancien régime, nor for the 
Stasi in for mant. Th ere is hardly any need for illicit or surreptitious 
searches, and there is little need to compel, to pressure, to strong- arm, 
or to intimidate, because so many of us are giving all our most inti-
mate information and whereabouts so willingly and passionately—so 
voluntarily.
Th ere is also little need today to discipline us. We are no longer 
forced to follow strict timetables and work routines, to walk in straight 
lines, stand at attention, or stay seated behind rows of school desks. 
No need to confi ne us to observation and examination. No, we have 
been liberated from all that. We are free to keyboard on our laptops in 
bed or dictate an email at the beach, to ask Siri a question at the dinner 
table, to text while riding a bike. Although the digital transparence at 
times feels panoptic, there is in truth little need for bars and cells and 
watchtowers— there is little need to place the subject in a direct line of 
sight. Th ere is little need to extract information, because we are giving 
it out so freely and willingly, with so much love, desire, and passion— and, 
at times, ambivalence or hesitation.
We have also moved beyond biopower or securitarian logics— 
those modalities live on, yes, but do not fully account for the new 
forms of power circulating today. Th e new recommender algorithms 
that profi le us do not concern themselves with populations or even 
groups. Th ey do not seek an equilibrium, nor to maximize outcomes 

18  Th e Expository Society
under cost constraint, in large part because the cost analysis is entirely 
diff erent today: those who govern, advertise, and police are dealing 
with a primary resource— personal data— that is being handed out for 
free, given away in abundance, for nothing. And rather than optimize 
at reduced cost levels, those who are mining the data can seek to con-
struct perfectly unique matches for each person’s individuality. Th ey 
can seek to know every device and every user, at a paltry price. Th e fact 
that the PRISM program only costs the NSA $20 million is telling: we, 
digital subjects, are providing the information for a pittance. Virtual 
transparence is now built into the technology of life, into the very 
techniques of living, and it makes possible an individually targeted 
gaze that pierces through populations.
No, we are not so much being coerced, surveilled, or secured today 
as we are exposing or exhibiting ourselves knowingly, many of us will-
ingly, with all our love, lust, passion, and politics, others anxiously, 
ambivalently, even perhaps despite ourselves— but still, knowingly 
exposing ourselves. Th e relation of power is inverted: we digital sub-
jects, we “data doubles,” we Homo digitalis give ourselves up in a mad 
frenzy of disclosure.51 Many of us exhibit our most intimate details 
in play, in love, in desire, in consumption, in the social, and in the po-
liti cal throughout our rich digital lives— through our appetites, in our 
work, for our po liti cal convictions, to become ourselves. Even those of 
us who do not partake of the seductive world of social media most 
oft en have no alternative but to share our intimate lives and po liti cal 
views in emails, texts, and Skype conversations— knowing that we are 
exposing ourselves.
For many of us, our digital existence has become our life— the 
pulse, the bloodstream, the current of our daily routines. For adoles-
cents and young adults especially, it is practically impossible to have a 
social life, to have friends, to meet up, to go on dates, unless we are 
negotiating the various forms of social media and mobile technology. 
Th e teens that danah boyd interviews give voice to this: if you’re not 
on social media, one of the girls explains, “you don’t exist.” 52 Social 
media communications are necessary for most youths today in ad-
vanced capitalist democracies, necessary to have a fulfi lling social life. 

Th e Expository Society  19
Writing about one of her in for mants, a sixteen- year- old girl, boyd ob-
serves: “For Heather, social media is not only a tool; it is a social life-
line that enables her to stay connected to people she cares about but 
cannot otherwise interact with in person.” 53 For many of us, these 
digits have become our social lives, and to fi t in, we have to be wired, 
plugged in, online. It’s not so much a question of choice as a feeling of 
necessity.
Guy Debord spoke of the “society of the spectacle.” 54 Michel Fou-
cault described instead the panoptic society, the disciplinary society—
or what he referred to as the “punitive society.” 55 “Our society is one 
not of spectacle,” Foucault declared, “but of surveillance.” 56 Gilles De-
leuze went further and prefi gured the “societies of control.” 57 But it 
seems as if today we live, rather, in a society of exposure and exhibition. 
We live in what I would call the expository society.
In this expository society, so many of us—or at least those of us on 
this side of the digital divide, enmeshed in a constant digital pulse— 
have become dulled to the perils of digital transparence. Dulled 
by   de cades of blind faith in the virtues of entrepreneurialism, self- 
interest, and self- centeredness, and in the illusion of free markets. 
Dulled by the deafening simplicity of that neoliberal mantra: “Would 
you prefer to have the government running innovative companies or 
would you rather have the private sector running them?”—as if those 
 were the only two options or, even, real choices.58 Dulled by de cades 
of militaristic homeland security, national “terror” alerts, and massive 
overincarceration— and the belief that these have made us so much 
safer. Dulled by the mortifi cation of the analog self that the loss of pri-
vacy, autonomy, and anonymity have brought upon us. In short, dulled 
into not caring because there is “nothing to hide” and “no place to 
hide”— perhaps the ultimate stage of mortifi cation.59 Numb to the 
risk of digital transparence, or simply overwhelmed by the seductive 
pleasures of the red jelly beans and green chiclets of Candy Crush, the 
new emoticon of a doll or a smoking pipe, the paper- crumpling “noise” 
a document makes when it is trashed, the surprisingly perfect book 

20  Th e Expository Society
recommendations by Amazon . com, or the color options of the new 
iPhone. Simply distracted by all these— while the power and scope of 
the commercial interests that seduce us, profi le and track us, watch 
our every e- motion, and compile every slightest detail of our intimate 
lives grow far more awesome, day by day, than the East German gov-
ernment could ever have dreamed.
And as we play with our Xbox consoles, Android phones, and Apple 
Watches, our digital lives begin to converge with a form of electronic 
monitoring that increasingly resembles correctional supervision. Th is is 
a double movement, a pas de deux: on the one hand, our daily routines 
gravitate from the analog to the digital, with all of the accompanying 
data collection and mining by social media, advertisers, commercial in-
terests, and government surveillance; on the other hand, our punish-
ment practices, at least in the West, themselves also eerily gravitate 
from the analog to the digital, from the brick- and- mortar and iron bars 
of the prison to electronic monitoring and GPS tracking. Th e costs of 
massive overincarceration, especially during recent times of economic 
and fi nancial crisis, have pushed us, in advanced capitalist liberal de-
mocracies, to turn increasingly to supervised parole and probation, to 
the electronic bracelet and the CCTV, to methods of digital monitoring 
of supervised correctional populations in the free world. Th roughout 
the United States, the use of GPS monitoring has grown exponentially 
during the twenty- fi rst century, and other Western Eu ro pean countries 
have also turned increasingly to open supervision. Th e major reform of 
the French penal code in 2014, for instance, centered with much fanfare 
on replacing physical detention with le suivi— digital monitoring in the 
free world.60
Some of us are forced to wear electronic ankle bracelets, others lust-
fully strap Apple Watches onto their wrists, but in both cases, all of 
our daily motions, activities, and whereabouts become easily acces-
sible to those with rudimentary technology— that is, when we are not 
actively broadcasting our heartbeat to our loved ones, living reality on 
camera, or tweeting our lives minute by minute. Th e Samsung smart 
TV that we proudly display in our den rec ords and shares our private 
conversations as if it  were an electronic monitoring device—or a 

Th e Expository Society  21
telescreen that we gleefully hooked to the wall.61 In these ways, ordi-
nary life is uncannily converging with practices of punishment: Th e 
see- throughness of our digital lives mirrors the all- seeingness of the 
penal sphere. Eventually there may be no need for punishment since 
we will be able to monitor every movement and action— and perhaps 
intervene remotely with similar know- how to the Google driverless 
car or drone technology. No need to distinguish ordinary life from the 
supervised correctional condition, since we will be watched, tracked, 
analyzed, and known at every moment of the day.
“Not to punish less, but to punish better”: we have now overcome 
discipline, freed ourselves of the institutional straitjacket, reached a 
privileged space of utter freedom where we get to do everything we 
desire—to tweet, to write in emoticons, to work remotely from our 
beds, to text and sext, to play Candy Crush on the subway or in the 
classroom, to stalk our friends and lovers on Facebook.62 It is a free 
space where all the formerly coercive surveillance technology is now 
woven into the very fabric of our plea sure and fantasies. In short, a 
new form of expository power embeds punitive transparence into our 
hedonist indulgences and inserts the power to punish in our daily 
pleasures. Th e two— pleasure and punish— can no longer be decou-
pled. Th ey suff use each other, operate together. Th ey have become in-
extricably intertwined.
We are inundated today with talk of “datafi cation”: with the idea 
that amassing large data sets, mining and analyzing them will reveal 
new truths about society and ourselves that we would never have 
known before and which will allow us to fi nd solutions to problems 
that we might never have discovered. All we have to do, we are told, 
is “let the data speak.” We are surrounded by a kind of veneration and 
mystifi cation of the new digital mediums, the connected things, the 
Internet of Th ings. And, no doubt, there exist situations where the 
analysis of large data streams has identifi ed or brought to our attention 
signifi cant events before we would otherwise have noticed them. We are 
oft en reminded of how Google searches can forecast fl u epidemics.63 

22  Th e Expository Society
New studies reveal that digital monitoring may have a dampening 
eff ect on police use of force— although the videos of excessive force 
continue to stream in.64 At times the new digital medium allows us to 
self- present more carefully and may even momentarily enhance our 
self- esteem.65
Today, the dominant self- image of datafi cation is that it can reveal 
truth and solve problems. But the digital realm does not so much give 
us access to truth as it constitutes a new way for power to circulate 
throughout society. It is less a means to truth than an exercise of 
power. It does not so much reveal truths about society and ourselves 
as produce them. Digital capabilities have fundamentally shift ed the 
way power fl ows in our advanced capitalist democracies, producing a 
new digitized way of life with a unique recommender rationality that 
dominates this side of the digital divide— with its rich circuit of texts, 
tweets, and emails, digital photos, scans and PDFs, Skype calls, Face-
book posts, Google searches and Bings, pings and Snapchats, Venmo 
payments, Vimeos and Vines. Embedded in all these platforms, there 
is a technology of virtual transparence that allows for pervasive data 
mining, digital profi ling, facial recognition, Amazon recommenda-
tions, eBay special off ers, Netfl ix algorithms, and NSA surveillance. It 
enables a new circulation through which we expose ourselves and 
our most intimate desires, inescapably, to the technological knowhow 
of the market and the state, and in the pro cess become marketized 
subjects in marketized democracies, increasingly oriented by our dig-
ital rankings, ratings, and scores as consumers, less and less connected 
to our po liti cal status as citizens and private analog subjects.
Th e expository society— such is our new po liti cal, social, and inti-
mate condition. Not new in the sense that pervasive surveillance 
of citizens is in any way novel in liberal democracy. No, collecting 
intelligence on one’s own has been a core function of the security 
apparatus of demo cratic regimes since their inception. In fact, the sur-
veillance practices that predated the republican revolutions  were 
inscribed into the very fabric of liberal democracies at their birth 
during moments of crisis and survival.66 Creating networks of in for-
mants, compiling biometric databases (whether physical descriptors, 

Th e Expository Society  23
fi ngerprints, or DNA), maintaining fi les (from the crude mug book 
fi lled with head shots to refi ned facial recognition techniques)— the 
fact is, domestic security agencies have depended on data gathering 
since the early days of the Republic. State surveillance of our ordinary 
lives, even illegal spying on ordinary fellow citizens, is by no means 
new in liberal democracy.
Not new either in the sense that these awesome digital intelligence 
capabilities have just been discovered or that the data- mining prac-
tices  were previously unknown. No, astute observers sounded the 
alarm bell many years ago, minutely describing these new digital capa-
bilities in best- selling books that read more like dystopian science 
fi ction than journalistic reporting— all of that long before Edward 
Snowden even imagined leaking any secret documents.67
Nor, fi nally, is anything new about the desire to know. In a pre-
vious time—in the actuarial age of the early twentieth century, for 
instance— the same drive to know prevailed: the security apparatus 
tried to collect as much data as possible and predict behaviors using 
actuarial instruments. Parole boards rummaged through an inmate’s 
jacket, collecting facts and predicting the likelihood of reoff ending if 
released; sentencing judges culled every detail from the presentence 
report to estimate the future dangerousness of a convict; insurance 
companies collected background information to better tabulate life 
expectancy. But the tools  were crude, rough estimates, with lots of 
error. Predicting future dangerousness, even among high- risk of-
fenders, was a tricky business. We had big dreams of perfect surveil-
lance, but we didn’t have the means. We do now, and the eff ects are 
dramatic. Not just for the cosmopolitan elites, who are glued to their 
latest iPhones and iWatches, but across the socioeconomic spectrum 
in advanced capitalist democracies.68
New, then, in that power circulates today in a manner radically dif-
ferent from what we had grown accustomed to in the recent past. Fed 
by corporate surveillance and data- mining programs of social media, 
Internet, and retail giants, and replenished by our own curiosity and 
pleasure— retweeted, friended, shared, and reposted— the new digital 
capacities expose us and shape our subjectivity in unpre ce dented 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
24  Th e Expository Society
ways. One website, called Insecam, has taken upon itself to broadcast 
the live feed from private security cameras of anyone who has, either 
intentionally or inadvertently, failed to change the default password 
on her security camera. Th e result is that “Insecam is streaming over 
11,000 cameras in the US, nearly 2,500 in the UK, six in Tanzania and 
others everywhere in between,” with “footage of people hanging out 
in living rooms, kids sleeping in their beds, garages, neighborhoods, 
businesses and more.” 69 Programs such as XKeyscore can instanta-
neously give an intelligence analyst access to all the content that a user 
types in an email, the websites she visits, the searches she performs, as 
well as all of her metadata—in short every keystroke, every touch, 
every click.70 Th ey provide access, as Glenn Greenwald documents, to 
“nearly everything a typical user does on the internet.”71 And they 
achieve this in massive quantities. In a single one- month period in 2012, 
the XKeyscore program “collected over 41 billion rec ords.”72 In 2012, 
the NSA was pro cessing “more than twenty billion communications 
events (both Internet and telephone) from around the world each 
day.”73 Th e data- mining capabilities exceed the basic level of meta-
data, allowing access to real- time content— though metadata alone 
is extraordinarily powerful. In the words of Gen. Michael Hayden, 
former director of both the NSA and the CIA: “We kill people based on 
metadata.”74 Google and Facebook follow our every digital move to ac-
cumulate troves of our personal data; as Eben Moglen reminds us, “If 
you have a Facebook account, Facebook is surveilling every single mo-
ment you spend there”— and elsewhere.75 Th e digital age has eff ectively 
inserted the surveillance capability into our everyday pleasures.
We can no longer aff ord to ignore this, wittingly or unwittingly. We 
can no longer disregard the unique ways in which digital technologies 
are reshaping relations of power in society. With the revelations by 
Edward Snowden, Wikileaks, and others, the investigative reporting 
of Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, Ewen MacAskill, and so many 
others, the critical writings and engagements of Julie Cohen, Kevin 
Haggerty, Larry Lessig, Eben Moglen, Torin Monahan, Frank Pasquale, 
Daniel Solove, and more, we have been pushed out of an analog po liti cal 
era and forced to face an altered po liti cal space that has radically trans-
www.Ebook777.com

Th e Expository Society  25
formed our social relations. Siva Vaidhyanathan writes in Th e Googl-
ization of Everything that “to search for something on the Web using 
Google is not unlike confessing your desires to a mysterious power.”76 
Th e aim of this book is to unpack that mysterious power, to lay it bare, 
to render it, too, transparent, and to decipher how this new form of 
expository power circulates today. To trace the emergence of this new 
way of life—of exhibition and watching. To identify and characterize 
its central features. To excavate the forms of complacency that have 
allowed it momentum. To grasp the mortifi cation of the self that it is 
producing. To see the evolving convergence with electronic moni-
toring and punitive practices. Th ese are the tasks that this study has 
set for itself. To be more precise:
1.  To trace the emergence of a new architecture of power rela-
tions throughout society, to excavate its antecedents, to ex-
plore what it is constructing. Th e new expository power circu-
lates by means of a new logic, a new form of rationality. It is a 
data- driven, algorithmic searchability that constantly seeks to 
fi nd, for each and every one of us, our perfect match, our twin, 
our look- alike, in order to determine the next book we want to 
buy, the person we would like to resemble, the perfect answer 
to our question, the conspiracy we intend to join. Th is new 
form of rationality— this digital doppelgänger logic— has a ge-
nealogy, with precursors in the actuarial methods of the early 
twentieth century and in the methods of systems analysis 
from the Cold War. With its recommender algorithms and 
tracking technologies, it is a unique logic that is allowing us to 
construct, for ourselves, the equivalent of a mirrored- glass 
and steel pavilion— a mesh of wireless digits, with “mirror re-
fl ections,” “uncanny eff ects,” virtual transparence, and “phe-
nomenal opacity.”77 An encasing that combines both the visi-
bility of the crystal palace and the steel cage of electronic 
monitoring.
2.  To document its eff ects on our po liti cal relations, on our con-
ceptions of self, and on our way of life. Digital technology is 

26  Th e Expository Society
breaking down what ever semblance of boundaries existed—
if they ever existed at all— between the state, the economy, 
and private existence, between what could be called governing, 
exchanging, and living.78 Th e consequences are far- reaching. 
By breaking down the boundaries, the aspiration to any liberal 
limits, or checks and balances, evaporates as well. Th e liberal 
ideal— that there could be a protected realm of individual au-
tonomy—no longer has traction in a world in which commerce 
cannot be distinguished from governing or policing or surveil-
ling or just simply living privately. Th e elision, moreover, funda-
mentally reshapes our subjectivity and social order: the massive 
collection, recording, data mining, and analysis of practically 
every aspect of our ordinary lives begins to undermine our 
sense of control over our destiny and self- confi dence, our sense 
of self. It begins to shape us, at least many of us, into mar-
ketized subjects—or rather subject- objects who are nothing 
more than watched, tracked, followed, profi led at will, and 
who in turn do nothing more than watch and observe others. 
In the pro cess, our digital lives eerily begin to resemble the 
electronically monitored existence of the carceral subject 
under supervision.
3.  To explore how to resist and disobey.
But before proceeding a step further, it is crucial fi rst to clear the 
ground conceptually—or at least to winnow the meta phors that so 
many of us have instinctively turned to. Th e stream of revelations— 
about the collection and mining of our personal information by social 
media, retail, and tech companies, about the widespread monitoring 
of our digital lives by the NSA, about the cooperation between do-
mestic and foreign signals intelligence agencies and large multina-
tional corporations— have provoked an array of criticisms drawing on 
a range of meta phors. Some critics invoke George Orwell’s novel 1984 
and draw parallels between our current po liti cal condition and the 
haunting menace of a Big Brother.79 Others contest the analogy with 
Orwell and turn instead to Franz Kafka, especially to the night-

Th e Expository Society  27
marish, suff ocating, bureaucratic “black box” at the heart of Kafk a’s 
novel Th e Trial.80 Still others have converged on the idea that we are 
now facing a new surveillance state, while others gravitate to the writ-
ings of Jeremy Bentham and Michel Foucault on the panopticon.81 
Some critics draw on all of these concepts at once.82
Big Brother, the surveillance state, the panopticon— these are all, 
to be sure, compelling analogies and frightening meta phors. In cer-
tain respects, each works well and sheds some light on our situation. 
But they also tend to distort our understanding of the unique aspects 
of digital exposure. Th ey are, in a sense, ready- made, off - the- shelf, and 
in that respect they have the potential to hide important dimensions 
of our new situation. What we need is to carefully reexamine each of 
these concepts, and winnow them, to retain what might be enlight-
ening while discarding what is inapposite.
Th ese meta phors have signifi cant eff ects on how we interpret, char-
acterize, and eventually respond to the current condition. To give but 
one illustration: the controversy over whether the NSA or the private 
telecommunications companies should store our bulk telephony 
metadata under what is known as the Section 215 program.83 Th e meta-
data collection program, revealed by Edward Snowden in June 2013, 
triggered a robust public debate, spawned a number of federal court 
decisions, and resulted in the passage of the USA FREEDOM Act on 
June 2, 2015.84 Th e solution to the privacy problems enacted in the 
 legislation— a solution urged by President Obama’s advisers in their 
report Liberty and Security in a Changing World— was to have the pri-
vate telecommunications companies gather, hold, and store the data 
themselves, rather than have the NSA do it.85 Th is solution only makes 
sense, however, if the problem we are facing is that of a surveillance state. 
It does little to address the problem if it involves a larger amalgam of 
corporate, intelligence, and security interests, or, to use the words of 
James Bamford, a “surveillance- industrial empire” that includes those 
very telecommunication companies, as well as social media, retailers, 
and intelligence ser vices, among others.86 If the problem goes beyond 
a surveillance state, this solution— including paying the telecoms to 
hold the data—is nothing more than a fi g leaf. It would be, in eff ect, 

28  Th e Expository Society
the unfortunate consequence of a misleading meta phor, the product 
of not yet fully understanding our current digital condition.
No, we need to reexamine the meta phors closely. Meta phors matter. 
Th ey shape the way we understand the present. Th ey aff ect the way we 
respond. Th ey are powerful devices. And they need to be rethought. 
For, as it will soon become clear, our new po liti cal condition cannot 
entirely or properly be described through the lenses to which we have 
become accustomed. We are not just facing an Orwellian Big Brother. 
Nor are we wrestling primarily with a surveillance state. And Fou-
cault’s notion of panopticism also misses important aspects of our 
contemporary situation. None of those tried- and- true models fi t our 
new condition well. Th ey  were born in an analog age and are not en-
tirely adequate to the digital era. It is time, preliminarily, for some 
rethinking. Let me begin, then, by clearing the conceptual brush of 
some ambiguities and imprecisions.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
P A R T  O N E
Clearing the Ground
www.Ebook777.com


In the wake of the Edward Snowden revelations, interest in 
George Orwell’s novel 1984 soared, leading to an exponential rise in 
sales. Less than a week aft er the fi rst leaks  were revealed by the 
Guardian in June 2013, the Los Angeles Times reported that sales of Or-
well’s book had increased by nearly 6,000 percent.1 One edition in 
par tic u lar, which includes a foreword by Th omas Pynchon, increased 
in Amazon sales by nearly 10,000 percent, becoming “the third hottest 
book on Amazon,” according to its “Movers and Shakers” list.2
Editorialists across the globe instantly drew the connection. Alan 
Rusbridger, the Guardian’s editor in chief, announced that the “NSA 
surveillance goes beyond Orwell’s imagination,” while the newspaper 
quickly assembled letters to the editor under the headline “Orwell’s 
Fears Refracted through the NSA’s Prism.”3 At the New York Times, 
Nicholas Kristof jumped on Twitter to ask, “I wonder if NSA has to 
pay a licensing fee for its domestic surveillance program to the George 
Orwell estate. #1984.” 4 Even the International Business Times ran a story 
that read “NSA PRISM: 3 Ways Orwell’s ‘1984’ Saw Th is Coming.” 5
President Obama stoked the fi re, alluding to Orwell’s novel just 
two days into the revelations: “In the abstract, you can complain about 
O N E
george orwell’s big brother

32  Clearing the Ground
Big Brother and how this is a potential program run amok, but when 
you actually look at the details, then I think  we’ve struck the right 
balance.” 6 Edward Snowden refreshed the allusion in his Christmas 
2013 greeting, speaking directly into the TV camera from Moscow, 
telling anyone who would listen that the NSA surveillance capabili-
ties vastly surpass Orwell’s fears. “Th e types of collection in the book— 
microphones and video cameras, TVs that watch us— are nothing 
compared to what we have available today. We have sensors in our 
pockets that track us everywhere we go,” Snowden said. “Th ink about 
what this means for the privacy of the average person.”7 Glenn Green-
wald also invoked Orwell’s 1984, emphasizing that “the echoes of 
the world about which he warned in the NSA’s surveillance state are 
unmistakable.”8 And the meta phor continued to persist, with District 
of Columbia federal district court judge Richard Leon— who had been 
appointed by President George W. Bush— striking down the bulk te-
lephony metadata program in Klayman v. Obama, calling the NSA 
technology “almost- Orwellian”— technology that, in his words, “en-
ables the Government to store and analyze phone metadata of every 
telephone user in the United States.”9
Th ese constant references to 1984 have fueled a rich debate about 
whether the meta phor is apt— whether Orwell’s dystopian vision ac-
curately captures our po liti cal condition today, whether it exceeds or 
minimizes it, whether it is a useful lens with which to analyze the 
present.
For some, the similarities are practically perfect. Richard Jinman, 
in the British news magazine Th e Week, highlights fi ve matches: the 
environment of perpetual war in the fi ctional Oceania and the United 
States’ own perpetual “war on terror”; the “charismatic leader” of Big 
Brother and the pop u lar president Barack Obama; the two “anti- heroes,” 
Winston Smith and Edward Snowden; the “beautiful heroines,” Julia 
and Snowden’s girlfriend, Lindsay Mills; and “the sinister technology” 
and “the sinister language” of doublespeak present in government and 
corporate responses to the Snowden leaks.10
Ian Crouch at the New Yorker also highlights a number of symme-
tries between 1984 and the Snowden aff air.11 Crouch notes that Snowden 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  33
is much like Orwell’s Winston, especially had the latter “been a bit 
more ambitious, and considerably more lucky, and managed to defect 
from Oceania to its enemy Eastasia and sneak a message to the tele-
screens back home.” Second, the technological capabilities of NSA’s 
surveillance apparatus mirror those in Oceania in 1984— especially 
the “safe operating assumption” that most of our daily, non- face- to- 
face communications are capable of being recorded. Th is, despite the 
fact that the “technological possibilities of [the NSA’s] surveillance 
and data collection and storage surely surpass what Orwell imagined,” 
Crouch adds.12 Th ird, today’s language and words “are manipulated by 
the three branches of government to make what might seem illegal 
legal— leading to something of a parallel language that rivals Orwell’s 
Newspeak for its soulless, obfuscated meaning.”13 Crouch adds: “In-
deed, there has been a hint of something vaguely Big Brotherian in 
Obama’s response to the public outcry about domestic surveillance, as 
though, by his calm manner and clear intelligence, the President is 
asking the people to merely trust his benefi cence— which many of us 
might be inclined to do.”14 Nonetheless, Crouch does point out a key 
diff erence with 1984: “We are far from the crushing, violent, single- 
party totalitarian regime of Orwell’s imagination.” Th at is, our own 
po liti cal regime does not resemble the “boot stamping on a human 
face— forever” that Orwell described.15
Along the latter lines, Robert Colls at Salon . com argues that the 
world depicted in Orwell’s novel diff ers in key respects from the par-
ticularities of the current NSA surveillance programs. For one thing, 
Colls suggests, the means by which Orwell’s dystopian society was 
monitored  were far more visible and more encompassing than the 
NSA’s surveillance apparatus. Th e fi gure of Edward Snowden himself—
an individual employee, working at a private consulting fi rm, with ac-
cess to bulk data—is diff erent from the coercive fi gure of Big Brother, 
who listens in every possible way to every possible conversation 
(though Colls is careful to note that Snowden “leaves no one in doubt 
that in slightly less serious hands this infi nity of tapping could dis-
fi gure not only other people’s lives but other people’s countries too”). 
But “the decisive diff erence,” Colls asserts, between the reality of 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
34  Clearing the Ground
Snowden and Orwell’s depiction of Winston Smith “is that Snowden 
is not really alone.” Edward Snowden has forms of public support that 
 were not possible for Winston Smith:
When the New York Times, Der Spiegel, the Guardian, the Amer-
ican Civil Liberties Union, and some very infl uential legal and 
po liti cal opinion, including that of former President Jimmy Carter 
on the left  and libertarian lawyer Bruce Fein on the right, and 
infl uential Demo crats and Republicans like Patrick Leahy and 
Jim Sensenbrenner in the middle— when they and head of US 
Intelligence James Clapper all voice their various and diverse 
levels of support for a debate started by a man whom the other 
side calls an out and out traitor, then you know that unlike Win-
ston Smith, Edward Snowden will not be a traitor forever. Th e 
9th December statement by the giant American information 
companies is just as signifi cant. Apple, Google, Microsoft , Face-
book, and the rest are American brands as well as American cor-
porations. Money counts.16
Clearly, opinions are divided on the relevance of Orwell’s novel. 
Some emphasize the similarities with our present condition, others the 
stark diff erences. In this case, though, it may well be the diff erences 
that make the novel so relevant.
What makes Orwell’s novel 1984 such a precious meta phor 
today is precisely that Orwell was prophetic in so many ways, yet he 
got the most crucial dimension fl at wrong— namely, the role that de-
sire would play in enabling digital exposure today. It is precisely in the 
jarring contrast between the myriad aspects of the novel that are so 
prescient and this one thing that is so off — the place of pleasure— that 
the 1984 meta phor is so telling. What it highlights and brings out is 
the central operating mechanism of our own dystopian present: our 
fancies, our predilections, our simplest desires, all recommended, cu-
rated, and cultivated in this digital age.
www.Ebook777.com

George Orwell’s Big Brother  35
Across a range of dimensions, Orwell was clairvoyant: on the tech-
nologies and pervasiveness of surveillance, on the very idea of thought-
crime, on the form of punishment, especially on what and how we 
punish—or at least punished until recently. On everything analog, on 
the bars and the cinder blocks, on the physical, tangible reality of pun-
ishment, Orwell got it. But he misfi red at the core of the digital. Orwell 
got one key feature wrong, marvelously wrong— marvelously, because 
it sheds so much light on our current condition. In 1984, the funda-
mental po liti cal strategy of oppression—of Big Brother, of O’Brien, of 
what the fi ctitious traitor Emmanuel Goldstein described in his splendid 
book Th e Th eory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism— was to crush 
and eradicate desire. With their Ju nior Anti- Sex Leagues that “advo-
cated complete celibacy for both sexes” and their drive to abolish the 
orgasm, the central tactic was to hollow out the men and women of 
Oceania, to neutralize—in eff ect, to neuter— all their drives and pas-
sions, to wear them down into submission, with the smell of boiled 
cabbage and old rag mats, coarse soap, blue uniforms, and blunt razors. 
To eviscerate all desire and fi ll them instead with hate— with the 
“Hate Week” and the “Two Minutes Hates.”
Today, by contrast, everything functions by means of “likes,” 
“shares,” “favorites,” “friending,” and “following.” Th e drab blue uni-
form and grim gray walls in 1984 have been replaced by the iPhone 5C 
in all its radiant colors—in sharp pink, yellow, blue, and green. “Col-
orful through and through” is our marketing slogan today, and it is 
precisely the desire for color- fi lled objects, for shared photos on Insta-
gram, for vivid emoticons, for more “likes,” clicks, and tweets, that make 
us expose our most intimate desires and deliver ourselves to the sur-
veillance technologies.17
It is almost as if someone had learned from Orwell’s greatest error: 
it is far easier to tame men and women by means of their passions— 
even passions for the simplest things, like real tea, real coff ee, and real 
sugar for Winston and Julia, or for us, lattes, frappes, and free Wi- Fi— 
than it is by trying to quash desire and lust, by trying to defeat “the 
Spirit of Man.”18 Orwell’s misfi re, I would say, is so terribly revealing 
because it is precisely through our passions, desires, and interests— 

36  Clearing the Ground
nurtured, curated, and fed by Facebook, MySpace, Google, Instagram, 
Flickr, YouTube, and Snapchat— that we, at least in the United States, 
have become so transparent and so exposed today to pervasive (one 
might even say Orwellian) surveillance, not only by the government 
and the police, but by private corporations, social media, retailers, 
nonprofi t entities, foreign countries, and each other. It is our passions—
in tension with our ambivalences, anxieties, and discomforts, to be 
sure— that feed the expository society.
So, plainly, this is not to deny that there is much that is pre-
scient in the novel. Written in 1949, Orwell’s 1984 accurately prefi g-
ured a range of deep transformations that would take place in the area 
of crime and punishment, and in surveillance, over the course of the 
second half of the twentieth century.
Orwell’s novel foreshadowed a fundamental transformation in 
what we punish: instead of punishing people solely for the commission 
of acts, we began to punish people— and we punish them today— for 
who they are. As O’Brien exclaimed to Winston, “We are not interested 
in those stupid crimes that you have committed. Th e Party is not in-
terested in the overt act: the thought is all we care about” (253).19 Th e 
thought, or more precisely, the person: the habitual off ender, the sexual 
predator—in short, the dangerous individual. Th e invention of actu-
arial methods at the dawn of the twentieth century and the steady rise 
in their use over the past fi ft y years fundamentally transformed what 
we punish in the twenty- fi rst century— not just the act, but the char-
acter of the off ender, who he is, his age, his schooling, his employment 
record, his marital history, his prior treatments and incarcerations. 
And while I trace this shift  back to the implementation of the actuarial 
in American criminal justice rather than to discipline or governmen-
tality, I agree fundamentally with Foucault, who would write, twenty- 
fi ve years aft er Orwell, that judges have “taken to judging something 
other than crimes, namely, the ‘soul’ of the criminal.”20 To be sure, 
there remains today the requirement of an overt act in order to be con-
victed of a crime— though that, eff ectively, was also true in Orwell’s 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  37
1984. Lord knows that Winston engaged in overt acts. Buying that 
coral paperweight would surely have been considered a “voluntary 
act” in both Blackstone’s Commentaries on the Laws of En gland and the 
American Law Institute’s Model Penal Code.21 Yet what we punish has 
changed. Ian Crouch perhaps disagrees, emphasizing that the NSA “is 
primarily interested in overt acts, of terrorism and its threats, and pre-
sumably—or at least hopefully— less so in the thoughts themselves.”22 
But he fails to grasp that the mere trigger for culpability may not refl ect 
the object of our punishment practices, and also how easily thought 
crimes with overt acts, surprisingly even in the terrorism context, can be 
the product of entrapment.23
Orwell’s novel foreshadowed as well a fundamental transformation 
in how we punish—or, to be more exact, how we punished several de-
cades aft er Orwell wrote, though perhaps no longer really today: namely, 
by means of a form of subjective rewiring intended to  completely trans-
form the off ender into a diff erent being. “No!” O’Brien exclaimed when 
Winston said he assumed he was going to be punished. “Shall I tell 
you why we have brought you  here? To cure you! To make you sane! 
Will you understand, Winston, that no one whom we bring to this 
place ever leaves our hands uncured? . . .  We do not merely destroy our 
enemies;” O’Brien adds, “we change them” (253). Th at is precisely what 
prefi gured the rehabilitative model of the 1960s and early 1970s—so 
thoroughly and excruciatingly critiqued by the likes of Th omas 
Szasz, R. D. Laing, David Cooper, Foucault, and others.24
Orwell also captured brilliantly the psychoanalytic transference 
that would be necessary to eff ect such a cure. At an important juncture 
in his treatment, when Winston no longer knows what 2 + 2 equals, 
when he is practically sure he is about to be sent to his death, Winston 
begins to love his psychotherapist- torturer, O’Brien— his “tormentor,” 
“protector,” “inquisitor,” and “friend” (244). “If he could have moved,” 
Orwell writes, Winston “would have stretched out a hand and laid it on 
O’Brien’s arm. He had never loved him so deeply as at this moment. . . .  
In some sense that went deeper than friendship, they  were intimates” 
(252). Winston honestly believes that O’Brien feels the same way to-
ward him. Winston has been in O’Brien’s care, you will recall. “You 

38  Clearing the Ground
are in my keeping,” O’Brien explains. “For seven years I have watched 
over you. Now the turning point has come. I shall save you, I shall 
make you perfect” (244). Th is exact psychotherapeutic relationship 
would shape our punishment practices in the 1960s— ending, some-
what brutally, with the “nothing works” of the 1970s.
What we punish and how we punish, or punished— these are 
some of the remarkable insights Orwell had. Orwell even prefi g-
ured Foucault’s return to Bentham’s panopticon. Recall the picture 
fi xed to the wall of Winston and Julia’s little refuge above the antique 
store. Th e picture that hid the telescreen. Th e picture, in Orwell’s 
words, of “an oval building with rectangular windows, and a small 
tower in front” (97). A picture, indeed, of a panopticon that repeats, in 
an iron voice, “You are the dead.” Th e telescreen itself is also deeply 
panoptic: “Th ere was of course no way of knowing whether you  were 
being watched at any given moment,” Orwell writes (3). “How oft en, 
or on what system, the Th ought Police plugged in on any individual 
wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everyday 
all the time” (3). Th at is, aft er all, Foucault’s description of the panoptic 
prison: “Th e inmate must never know whether he is being looked at at 
any one moment; but he must be sure that he may always be so.”25 In 
eff ect, Winston’s apartment was a Foucauldian cell.
And that totalizing surveillance— the brutally omniscient and om-
nipresent nature of the capabilities— that too was prescient. O’Brien 
knew everything about Winston, even the fact that he had put that 
speck of white dust on his journal to verify that no one would touch it. 
“For seven years the Th ought Police had watched him like a beetle 
under a magnifying glass,” Orwell writes. “Even the speck of whitish 
dust on the cover of his diary they had carefully replaced” (276). O’Brien 
had seen and read everything Winston had written in his journal. He 
had seen Winston’s every bodily movement in his cubicle at work— 
even the hidden gesture, when he slipped the photo of the three heroes 
turned traitors down the memory hole (78–79). Orwell imagined 
“total information awareness” well before we did, and his vivid imagi-
nation would come true in today’s computer algorithms and programs, 
like XKeyscore and radio- frequency technology, that can capture and 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
George Orwell’s Big Brother  39
record every single keystroke and mouse click we perform on our 
computers.26
Total awareness accompanied by constant messaging: Winston was 
surrounded by telescreens—we today by digital billboards, smart 
TVs, electronic tickertapes, and LED displays streaming videos and 
announcements from CNN, MSNBC, and Fox News, and all their 
commentators and Skyped-in blogging heads from across the In-
ternet. Winston was surrounded by posters of Big Brother or Eurasian 
soldiers—we today by advertisements and commercials trying to sell 
products, to shape our desires, to seduce us at every turn.27 Cable news 
coming at us every moment, 24/7, interrupted every other minute by 
adverts, product placements in TV shows, a barrage of marketing and 
endless po liti cal propaganda.
And perhaps the most haunting idea connected with punishment: 
that Big Brother would do everything humanly possible to avoid creating 
martyrs. What “the German Nazis and the Rus sian Communists” never 
understood, O’Brien tells Winston, was precisely that a government 
must avoid turning those it punishes into martyrs (254). And so, be-
fore eliminating, before executing, before disappearing people, the 
state had to fi rst cure, to fi rst hollow out the individual— that was the 
only way to make sure that the dead would not “rise up against us” 
(254). Th e only way to make sure that “posterity will never hear of you” 
and that “you will be lift ed clean out from the stream of history” (254). 
It should come as no surprise that, today as well, we sometimes make 
sure that certain images or photographs are not broadcast, certain 
events not recorded, certain deaths not publicized. And certain bodies 
dumped at sea.
Yet despite these prescient insights, it almost feels as if 
whoever designed our new surveillance age—as if there  were such a 
person— learned from the error of 1984. For in contrast to today, ev-
erything O’Brien and Big Brother did in Orwell’s novel worked by 
quashing, destroying, liquidating desire and passion. Everything turned 
on the elimination of human plea sure. We see this well with the Ju nior 
www.Ebook777.com

40  Clearing the Ground
Anti- Sex League and the central eff ort, as O’Brien explains, to eradi-
cate the sexual instinct: “Procreation will be an annual formality like 
the renewal of a ration card. We will abolish the orgasm. Our neurol-
ogists are at work upon it now” (267). Big Brother also intended to 
eliminate art and literature: “Th ere will be no art, no literature, no 
science” (267). All those forms of plea sure would be vaporized. “Th e 
 whole literature of the past will have been destroyed. Chaucer, Shake-
speare, Milton, Byron— they’ll exist only in Newspeak versions, not 
merely changed into something diff erent, but actually changed into 
something contradictory of what they used to be” (53). Eradication of 
desire and plea sure is the fundamental strategy of Big Brother: to an-
nihilate jouissance, to make it a crime. Sex, “the natural feeling,” had 
to be “driven out of them” (68). Desire had to be transformed into 
thoughtcrime—or as Winston refl ected, “Desire was thoughtcrime” 
(68; emphasis added).
Now, part of this was about eradicating empathy— a task that may 
be essential for an authoritarian regime. As the phi los o pher Martha 
Nussbaum suggests, the eff ort was aimed in part at “extinguishing com-
passion and the complex forms of personal love and mourning that are 
its sources, and replacing them with simple depersonalized forms of 
hatred, aggression, triumph, and fear.”28 Th at was certainly a key as-
pect of 1984. Winston repeatedly emphasizes the love and friendship 
of an earlier age: “Tragedy, [Winston] perceived, belonged to the an-
cient time, to a time when there  were still privacy, love, and friendship, 
and when the members of a family stood by one another without 
needing to know the reason” (30). A central goal of Big Brother was 
to annihilate in individuals those feelings of compassion and love. 
“Never again will you be capable of ordinary human feeling,” O’Brien 
explains. “Never again will you be capable of love, or friendship, or 
joy of living, or laughter, or curiosity, or courage, or integrity. You will 
be hollow. We shall squeeze you empty” (256). Empty of love. Empty 
of friendship.
But also, importantly, empty of desire, empty of jouissance, empty of 
plea sure and attraction. Th at is central to the po liti cal strategy of Big 
Brother in 1984: to eliminate the sense of ecstasy—of all kinds. “Sexual 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  41
intercourse was to be looked on as a slightly disgusting minor opera-
tion, like having an enema” (65). Th e Party’s “real, undeclared purpose 
was to remove all plea sure from the sexual act. Not love so much as 
eroticism was the enemy, inside marriage as well as outside it” (65). 
And not just because sexual deprivation can be channeled into obedi-
ence, hatred, and fear—as some have suggested.29 But because all 
desire had to be extracted and replaced with hatred and allegiance. 
Big Brother exterminates all desire and then fi lls the emptiness with 
itself. As O’Brien explains to Winston: “We shall squeeze you empty, 
and then we shall fi ll you with ourselves” (256). And so, as they  were 
hollowing out souls, O’Brien and Big Brother  were folding everything 
back onto hate, with “Hate Week,” “the Hate Song,” and the “atrocity 
pamphlets” (148).
How radically diff erent our situation is today. We do not sing hate, 
we sing praise. We “like,” we “share,” we “favorite.” We “follow.” We 
“connect.” We get “LinkedIn.” Ever more options to join and like and 
appreciate. Everything today is or ga nized around friending, clicking, 
retweeting, and reposting. We share photos on Instagram so that others 
will like them, and constantly check to see how many people have— and 
we form judgments of ourselves based on how many likes we get. We 
make Snapchat “stories” and continually check to see who has viewed 
them— and to fi gure out how to make them more pop u lar. We tweet 
to our followers, hoping that they will retweet or “favorite” our post. 
We write blogs, hoping they will get trackbacks, be linked to, and be-
come embedded. We are appalled by mean comments— which are 
censored if they are too off ensive (which is not to diminish the fact 
that they oft en are nasty). But we privilege the positive. Many of us 
don’t even want people to be able to “dislike”! Recall that there was 
tremendous contestation and consternation around the very question 
of whether Facebook would allow a “dislike” button on its pages— and 
that Facebook ultimately rejected the idea. What we seem to want is 
more and more “likes,” not “dislikes.”
We want to be loved, we want to be pop u lar, we want to be de-
sired— and we want to desire. Th ose very instincts drive the digital 
condition. Th ey are what lead so many of us to give away our personal, 

42  Clearing the Ground
even intimate information so freely and enthusiastically. Th ey are also 
what have made us virtually transparent to surveillance today. Th ey 
are how come our information can be collected and analyzed so easily. 
Th ey are precisely what make it possible for the government and po-
lice to stalk the Twitter and Facebook pages of us all— especially of 
the usual suspects.30
•  •  •
Facebook is keenly aware that its business model depends on users 
enjoying being on Facebook. It is also acutely aware that people’s emo-
tions are contagious: whether someone likes using Facebook may be 
related to being surrounded by other people who like using Facebook. 
It is for that reason, not surprisingly, that Facebook has a “like” button 
but not a “dislike” button. Facebook wants people to like being on 
Facebook— that’s good for its business. And like any savvy corpora-
tion, Facebook is constantly trying to fi gure out new and creative ways 
to make users enjoy Facebook even more.
In January 2012, one of Facebook’s scientifi c researchers conducted 
an experiment on Facebook users.31 Th e idea was to test whether their 
good mood and positive attitude— and their enjoyment of Facebook— 
could be aff ected by the mood of their Facebook friends. Th e motiva-
tion—or rather the worry— was simple: “We  were concerned that 
exposure to friends’ negativity might lead people to avoid visiting 
Facebook.”32
Th e Facebook researcher, Adam D. I. Kramer of the Core Data Sci-
ence Team at Facebook, Inc., in Menlo Park, and two of his colleagues 
at Cornell University, in Ithaca, New York, ran the experiment on 
689,003 Facebook users.33 (Th e users, incidentally, did not know they 
 were being experimented on, nor had they given informed consent. 
Facebook’s view was that they had implicitly consented when they 
originally agreed to Facebook’s terms of ser vice. Facebook apparently 
“argued that its 1.28 billion monthly users gave blanket consent to the 
company’s research as a condition of using the ser vice.”)34

George Orwell’s Big Brother  43
To test emotional contagion, Kramer and his colleagues manipu-
lated the news feeds that users received by increasing or decreasing 
the amount of positive or negative emotional content. Based on those 
manipulations, they then tried to determine whether a user’s own 
messages and posts on Facebook would also change in emotional con-
tent. Th e idea was to test, in the study’s words, “whether exposure to 
emotional content led people to post content that was consistent with 
the exposure— thereby testing whether exposure to verbal aff ective 
expressions leads to similar verbal expressions, a form of emotional 
contagion.”35
Kramer and his colleagues mea sured emotional content by means 
of linguistic data- mining soft ware that could determine how many 
positive or negative emotional words  were in the messages they  were 
receiving and sending.36 Th is served to mea sure both the input and 
the output. As the authors explained: “Posts  were determined to be 
positive or negative if they contained at least one positive or nega-
tive word, as defi ned by Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count soft ware 
(LIWC2007) word counting system, which correlates with self- reported 
and physiological mea sures of well- being, and has been used in prior 
research on emotional expression. LIWC was adapted to run on the 
Hadoop Map/Reduce system and in the News Feed fi ltering system.”37
So what the researchers did, eff ectively, was to manipulate the sen-
sory input of Facebook users in order to see if that had any eff ect on 
their sensory output—in other words, to limit certain kinds of news 
feed posts, based on their emotional content, and increase others, in 
order to see the eff ect on users’ emotions. Th e researchers ran “two 
parallel experiments,” one for positive emotion and one for negative 
emotion: “one in which exposure to friends’ positive emotional con-
tent in their News Feed was reduced, and one in which exposure to 
negative emotional content in their News Feed was reduced.”38 Or, to 
be more exact, “when a person loaded their News Feed, posts that con-
tained emotional content of the relevant emotional valence, each emo-
tional post had between a 10% and 90% chance (based on their User 
ID) of being omitted from their News Feed for that specifi c viewing.”39

44  Clearing the Ground
To determine whether there was any contagion eff ect, the Facebook 
researcher and his colleagues then examined the posts the subjects 
made aft er being exposed to more or less emotional content, to see 
whether those posts  were more or less positive. In technical terms, 
the dependent variable— the thing that might have been aff ected by 
the treatment— was the posts of the Facebook users: “Dependent vari-
ables  were examined pertaining to emotionality expressed in people’s 
own status updates: the percentage of all words produced by a given 
person that was either positive or negative during the experimental 
period.” 40 All in all, the researchers analyzed more than 3 million 
Facebook posts, which contained “over 122 million words, 4 million of 
which  were positive (3.6%) and 1.8 million negative (1.6%).” 41
What the Facebook researcher and his colleagues found was not 
entirely surprising but very signifi cant. As they reported in the Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, under the heading “Sig-
nifi cance”: “We show, via a massive (N = 689,003) experiment on 
Facebook, that emotional states can be transferred to others via emo-
tional contagion, leading people to experience the same emotions 
without their awareness.” 42 Or, in slightly more detail:
Th e results show emotional contagion. As Fig. 1 illustrates, for 
people who had positive content reduced in their News Feed, a 
larger percentage of words in people’s status updates  were nega-
tive and a smaller percentage  were positive. When negativity was 
reduced, the opposite pattern occurred. Th ese results suggest 
that the emotions expressed by friends, via online social networks, 
infl uence our own moods, constituting, to our knowledge, the 
fi rst experimental evidence for massive- scale emotional conta-
gion via social networks, and providing support for previously 
contested claims that emotions spread via contagion through a 
network.43
We are happier when we get good news. And we are happier when we 
are surrounded by people who are getting good news. Happiness is 
contagious. And this is signifi cant at the scale of Facebook. In the 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  45
words of the Facebook researcher and his colleagues: “Aft er all, an ef-
fect size of d = 0.001 at Facebook’s scale is not negligible: In early 2013, 
this would have corresponded to hundreds of thousands of emotion 
expressions in status updates per day.” 44
With that in mind, it is worth noting that Facebook constantly 
modifi es the algorithms it uses to sort and discriminate between items 
in news feeds. Facebook is frequently adjusting the models, for in-
stance, to send users more “high- quality content” or more “relevant” 
news, or, in its own words, “to weed out stories that people frequently 
tell us are spammy and that they don’t want to see.” 45 Th e reality is, of 
course, that Facebook always screens and fi lters the news that users 
receive— for the simple reason that there is way too much news to 
share. Usually, when a user logs on to his or her Facebook account, 
there are around 1,500 feeds that typically could be displayed, but room 
for only about 300.46 Facebook decides what goes through and what 
does not. As the Facebook researcher acknowledged and explained:
Because people’s friends frequently produce much more content 
than one person can view, the News Feed fi lters posts, stories, 
and activities undertaken by friends. News Feed is the primary 
manner by which people see content that friends share. Which 
content is shown or omitted in the News Feed is determined via 
a ranking algorithm that Facebook continually develops and 
tests in the interest of showing viewers the content they will fi nd 
most relevant and engaging.47
Now, the algorithms that Facebook uses are intended to promote 
user satisfaction, to improve the experience, to create “a more alluring 
and useful product.” 48 Chris Cox, the chief product offi  cer of Face-
book, explains, “We’re just providing a layer of technology that helps 
people get what they want. . . .  Th at’s the master we serve at the end of 
the day.” 49 Kramer explained, aft er the research was published: “Th e 
goal of all of our research at Facebook is to learn how to provide a 
better ser vice.” 50 I take it that means a ser vice we are going to “like” 
more. Th e digital equivalent of the perfect hallucinogen, “soma,” from 

46  Clearing the Ground
Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World— a magical substance, without side 
eff ects or hangovers, that is perfectly satisfying. An experience one 
step closer to that perfect state of happiness in which we consume 
more, we communicate more, we expose ourselves more.
During Winston’s interrogation, O’Brien asks him what 
principle could possibly defeat the Party, and Winston responds, na-
ively, “I don’t know. Th e Spirit of Man” (270). In another passage, Win-
ston refers to “simple undiff erentiated desire.” Th at, he explains to 
Julia, is the only “force that would tear the Party to pieces”— “not merely 
the love of one person, but the animal instinct, the simple undiff eren-
tiated desire” (126). Th ose desires, those passions, that lust: those are 
the only things that could bring down Big Brother.
Now, sadly— the novel is, aft er all, a dystopia— Big Brother wins in 
the end, in Orwell’s account. Nothing brings it down. Th e “spirit of 
man” does not defeat the Party. To the contrary. On my reading, in 
fact, Winston is liquidated right aft er the close of the book. Th e meta-
phor in the last sentence of the penultimate paragraph is no mere 
literary fl ourish: “Th e long- hoped- for bullet was entering his brain” 
(297). Big Brother would reduce the traitor to complete obedience fi rst, 
but then kill him. O’Brien had oft en said so. He was honest in this re-
spect. “How soon will they shoot me?” Winston had asked. “ ‘It might 
be a long time,’ said O’Brien. ‘You are a diffi  cult case. But don’t give up 
hope. Everything is cured sooner or later. In the end we shall shoot 
you’ ” (274). Winston would be shot and then forgotten. “You will be 
lift ed clean out from the stream of history. We shall turn you into gas 
and pour you into the stratosphere. Nothing will remain of you: not 
a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. You will be an-
nihilated in the past as well as in the future. You will never have ex-
isted” (254).
Po liti cal disobedients are indeed disappeared in 1984. Winston was 
lobotomized (257) and he would be killed— but only aft er he had 
reached the point at which he would obey completely and love Big 
Brother, which, as we know, only happens in the last sentence of the 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  47
book, in Winston’s last thoughts: “He had won the victory over him-
self. He loved Big Brother” (298). It is only then that Winston can be 
eliminated, can be killed, can be wiped from history. It is only then 
that all traces of Winston Smith can be extinguished. Big Brother does 
prevail in 1984.
But somehow, we still believe today—or hope— that the “spirit of 
man” and “simple undiff erentiated desire” are the things that might 
have defeated Big Brother. We tend to think that Winston was right—
or at least, there is a lesson we think we can learn from 1984, namely, 
that surveillance cannot succeed, that populations cannot be mastered 
by eliminating desire. Th at desire, passion, lust, and love will save us 
from oppression.
Unlikely. Th e truth is, today it is those very passions, shaped and 
cultivated in the digital age, that render us virtually transparent. Th is 
is perhaps the dark side of desire and plea sure. It is far easier to master 
a population with their passions, through their desires, than against 
them—an insight that traces back at least to eighteenth- century lib-
eral thought and forward to the more modern writings of Gilles De-
leuze, Félix Guattari, and Wilhelm Reich.51 Our desires and passions 
can enslave us. Petty desires at that— those are all that Winston and 
Julia really wanted to satisfy in that basic little apartment above the 
antique dealer. Th ey just wanted the good taste and smell of real coff ee, 
a little perfume and some rouge, to hold each other, to have sex. How, 
one might ask, has Starbucks managed to dominate fi ve continents 
today? With decent coff ee and, now, free Wi- Fi—so rare even in the 
most urbane spaces.
Th at is primarily how surveillance works today in liberal democra-
cies: through the simplest desires, curated and recommended to us. 
Th e desire to play our favorite videogame, Facebook a viral Vine, Insta-
gram a selfi e, tweet a conference, look up the weather, check-in on-
line, Skype our lover, instant- message an emoticon. Th e impulse to 
quantify ourselves, to monitor all our bodily vitals and variations and 
changes. And in the pro cess, we expose ourselves. As Siva Vaidhya-
nathan reminds us, “We are not Google’s customers: we are its product. 
We— our fancies, fetishes, predilections, and preferences— are what 

48  Clearing the Ground
Google sells to advertisers. When we use Google to fi nd out things on 
the Web, Google uses our Web searches to fi nd out things about us.” 52 
For the most part, we give ourselves up so willingly and freely today 
out of desire, lust, friendship, and love.
Th is is one of the central lessons— a brilliant insight—of Luc 
Boltanski and Eve Chiapello’s Th e New Spirit of Capitalism: the revolu-
tionary spirit of 1968 was tamed, mastered, disciplined, turned back to 
corporate profi t by tapping the creative energy and artistic potential of 
the young militants, not by restricting them.53 Engineers today at 
Google and Apple can wear jeans and tie- dyed T- shirts and fl ip- fl ops, 
can have entirely creative and artistic lives, have a gym to work out 
in, drink cappuccinos and frappes and lattes on demand, telecom-
mute, play video games at their computers, re- create Star Wars in their 
own cubicle— the fact is, all that creativity, all that energy, all that pas-
sion is turned back into and reinvested in the capitalist enterprise to 
make a profi t, and to mold desire into corporate returns.
Julia, when she wants to be happy, puts on makeup, heels, a dress: 
“She had painted her face. . . .  Her lips  were deeply reddened, her 
cheeks rouged, her nose powdered” (142). She had found perfume. “In 
this room, I am going to be a woman, not a Party comrade,” Julia ex-
claims (142). Big Brother’s mistake in 1984 was to go aft er that— aft er 
the simplest desires of the self and the desire for others. Th at is pre-
cisely what we have learned not to do today. Instead, we feed people’s 
desires, we fuel and shape them with recommendations and targeted 
solicitations, and we lose all of our re sis tance. We give ourselves up, 
some joyfully, others anxiously, to the watching eyes of Amazon . com, 
Netfl ix, and the NSA.
In their wildly imaginative book Anti- Oedipus, Gilles Deleuze 
and Félix Guattari explore these deep regions of desire.54 Th ey set out 
to imagine desire in its full potentiality. Th ey dream of desire as a 
machine— a desiring and desire- producing machine that seeks to lock 
onto other desiring machines. Desire, they argue, does not seek out an 
object for its own sake, does not try to fi ll a void, but seeks a  whole as-

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
George Orwell’s Big Brother  49
semblage of interrelated sensations, experiences, pleasures, and sym-
bols. We are desiring machines, they argue, that glom on to other 
machines of desire. “Desire,” they tell us, “is a machine, a synthesis of 
machines, a machinic arrangement— desiring- machines.” 55
Th e unconscious, Deleuze emphasizes, is not some kind of theater 
in which Hamlet or Oedipus dominates, but rather a factory.56 It is 
productive. It is pure production. It is a desiring machine that wants 
not simply the mother or the father, but the entire world. It is outward- 
looking and seeks an assemblage of things, not a simple object.57 
Assemblages of icons and images and experiences. “Flags, nations, 
armies, banks get a lot of people aroused,” they write.58 Th ese can be 
all- encompassing and all- defi ning, and they become coextensive with 
the social. As Deleuze and Guattari emphasize, “Th ere is only desire 
and the social, and nothing  else.” 59 It is coextensive with the social, and 
infused with the sexual. Sexuality, they maintain, is pervasive. “Th e 
truth is that sexuality is everywhere: the way a bureaucrat fondles his 
rec ords, a judge administers justice, a businessman causes money to 
circulate; the way the bourgeoisie fucks the proletariat; and so on.” 60 
Even Hitler, they suggest, “got the fascists sexually aroused.” 61
Indeed, these assemblages— libidinal, phantasmal, productive— can 
serve despicable ends. Th ey can be fascistic, genocidal. “Even the most 
repressive and the most deadly forms of social reproduction are pro-
duced by desire within the or ga ni za tion,” Deleuze and Guattari remind 
us.62 For this reason, it is desire that we must focus on and explain.63 
Th ese instances of social obscenity demand, they write, “an explana-
tion that will take their desires into account, an explanation formulated 
in terms of desire: no, the masses  were not innocent dupes; at a certain 
point, under a certain set of conditions, they wanted fascism, and it is 
this perversion of the desire of the masses that needs to be accounted 
for.” 64 Wilhelm Reich was on the right path, but he failed to push the 
analysis beyond the traditional dualisms of rational and irrational and 
toward the concepts of desiring machines and the production of de-
sire.65 Th e important point is that the key to understanding our commit-
ments—or what Deleuze called our “investments”—is precisely through 
desire.66
www.Ebook777.com

50  Clearing the Ground
Deleuze and Guattari’s ideas may seem extreme to many readers, but 
they somehow capture best the relation of desire to expository power 
in the digital age: the sense that we are desire- producing  machines 
that seek an entire assemblage of sociality, sexuality, and plea sure, and 
that we are, today, stuck to these other machines: iPhones, Droids, 
iPads, the Internet, Facebook, Instagram. Th ey also capture well the 
idea of our disembodied and abstracted physical selves, and how these 
are reconstituted through digital surveillance and turned into digital 
assemblages—as Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson chart in their 
important work on the “surveillant assemblage.” 67 Th ese libidinal and 
phantasmal assemblages attach to digital devices. “Desire is a machine, 
and the object of desire is another machine connected to it,” Deleuze 
and Guattari wrote.68 How appropriate today, with everyone glued to 
their smartphones as they walk down the street, sitting with their lap-
tops in the quad, connected to the Internet. Th is is the production of 
desire in a machinelike way, as a pro cess, in a cycle of desire produc-
tion—in a schizoid frenzy of reproduction.
Inspired by the surrealists and the theater of the absurd, by R. D. 
Laing and Wilhelm Reich, but surpassing them deliberately, Deleuze 
and Guattari prefi gure digital lust. Th at frenzied desire for digital up-
dating, constantly rechecking social media to check the number of 
likes, or shares, or comments. Addictively checking Gmail to see if there 
is any good news— like a Pavlovian dog, or a mouse nibbling on an 
electrical wire. Digital stimulation taps into our lateral hypothalamus, 
triggering the kind of addictive “seeking” that absorbs us entirely, an-
nihilates time, and sends us into a constant, frenzied search for more 
digital satisfaction.69 “Th e desiring- machines pound away and throb 
in the depths of the unconscious,” Deleuze and Guattari write.70 Th ese 
devices keep “pinging” us, “fl agging” us, stimulating our cortex, poking 
at our refl exes. Th e digital space itself is precisely the machine that we 
are connected to: it is full of life and energy, of color and movement, of 
stimulation and production. Deleuze and Guattari spoke of machines 
in a meta phorical way. By happenstance, perhaps, they fi xated on this 
idea of desire as a bodiless or disembodied automaton generating 
wants and drives that are not directed at any par tic u lar objects but are 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
George Orwell’s Big Brother  51
churning forward— like a machine: “Desire does not lack anything; it 
does not lack its object. It is, rather, the subject that is missing in desire, 
or desire that lacks a fi xed subject; there is no fi xed subject unless 
there is repression. Desire and its object are one and the same thing: 
the machine, as a machine of a machine.”71
In his preface to Anti- Oedipus, Michel Foucault suggested that 
these radically new ideas form an “anti- oedipal . . .  life style, a way of 
thinking and living.”72 Foucault identifi ed, in this work, a liberatory 
ethic. He in fact described the book as “a book of ethics, the fi rst book 
of ethics to be written in France in quite a long time.”73 A book of 
ethics that could help us in our tactical, strategic engagements against 
fascisms of all kinds, “the fascism in us all, in our heads and in our 
everyday behavior, the fascism that causes us to love power, to desire 
the very thing that dominates and exploits us.”74 To Foucault, Anti- 
Oedipus could teach us: “How does one keep from being fascist, even 
(especially) when one believes oneself to be a revolutionary militant? 
How do we rid our speech and our acts, our hearts and our pleasures, 
of fascism? How do we ferret out the fascism that is ingrained in our 
behavior?”75 Foucault retitled Anti- Oedipus an “Introduction to the Non- 
Fascist Life” and drew from it maxims and guides for everyday life— the 
last of which was “Do not become enamored of power.”76
But how much have we learned from this book of ethics, from this 
tract against fascism? Has it served to liberate us—or rather, does it 
merely describe our newfound dependencies on these digital desiring 
machines? A telling description, perhaps. More than others, Deleuze 
and Guattari plumbed the depth of capitalism as desire—of capitalism 
as this “pro cess of production [that] produces an awesome schizo-
phrenic accumulation of energy or charge.”77 Consumerism, they sug-
gested, is what “liberates the fl ows of desire.”78
More a series of questions and wild hypotheses than a manual to 
liberate us and free us from the drive to fascism, Anti- Oedipus pushes 
us to rethink our current situation. “Th e question posed by desire is 
not ‘What does it mean?’ but rather ‘How does it work?’ How do these 
machines, these desiring- machines, work— yours and mine? With 
what sort of breakdowns as a part of their functioning? How do they 
www.Ebook777.com

52  Clearing the Ground
pass from one body to another? . . .  What occurs when their mode of 
operation confronts the social machines? . . .  What are the connec-
tions, what are the disjunctions, the conjunctions, what use is made of 
the syntheses?”79
Perhaps Deleuze and Guattari are right. We have become desiring 
machines, and we lock onto other desiring machines. Th ose other ma-
chines, we know them all too well today. We are glued to them. In-
separable. And we give ourselves up to them—in the pro cess, giving 
ourselves away. “Everything revolves around desiring- machines and 
the production of desire.”80 We take so much plea sure playing with 
our videos, texting, and Facebooking that we simply do not resist the 
surveillance. We let our guard down. We care less—we don’t read the 
terms of ser vice, we don’t clean out our cookies, we don’t sign out of 
Google. We just want, we just need to be online, to download that app, 
to have access to our email, to take a selfi e.
Th e technologies that end up facilitating surveillance are the very 
technologies that we crave. We desire those digital spaces, those virtual 
experiences, all those electronic gadgets— and we have become, slowly 
but surely, enslaved to them. To them, and to our desires, desires for 
passionate love, for politics, for friends. Th e uniformity of Winston’s 
blue overalls, the smell of boiled cabbage, the blunt razors, the rough 
soap, the  houses that are rotting away, the disgusting canteen with its 
“low- ceilinged, crowded room, with walls grimy from the contact of 
innumerable bodies; battered metal tables, and chairs . . .  bent spoons, 
dented trays, coarse white mugs . . .  and a sourish, composite smell of 
bad gin and bad coff ee and metallic stew and dirty clothes” (59)— 
these are the things we have avoided today, and by avoiding them we 
have made the world so much more palatable. Palatable like the colors 
of the iPhone, the liveliness of IM, the seductiveness of the new Apple 
Watch, and the messaging that surrounds us daily.
No, we do not live in a drab Orwellian world. We live in a beautiful, 
colorful, stimulating, digital world that is online, plugged in, wired, 
and Wi- Fi enabled. A rich, bright, vibrant world full of passion and 
jouissance— and by means of which we reveal ourselves and make our-
selves virtually transparent to surveillance. In the end, Orwell’s novel 

George Orwell’s Big Brother  53
is indeed prescient in many ways, but jarringly off  on this one key 
point. So much so, in fact, that one could almost say that whoever it is 
who has conspired to create our digital world today—if one  were so 
naive as to believe there was such a conspiracy— has surely learned 
the hard lesson of Orwell’s brilliant dystopia. We live in a world today 
that has rectifi ed Big Brother’s error. And, sadly, we no longer even 
have the illusory hope that Winston once had— hope in the proles.

Another dominant way to analyze our new po liti cal condition 
today is through the meta phor of the “surveillance state.” Even before 
the Snowden revelations, some astute observers such as the legal 
scholar Jack Balkin identifi ed an emerging “National Surveillance 
State”—in Balkin’s words in 2008, “Th e question is not whether we 
will have a surveillance state in the years to come, but what sort of 
surveillance state we will have”— and many others rallied around the 
term in the wake of the NSA leaks.1 Bill Keller, former New York Times 
editor, picked up on the trend in an infl uential editorial titled “Living 
with the Surveillance State.”2 Th e term has today become omnipresent 
across the po liti cal spectrum. Some commentators, such as Julian San-
chez at the Daily Beast, argue vehemently that we need to “dismantle 
the surveillance state.”3 Others, including the American Civil Liber-
ties Union (ACLU), maintain that we need to “rein in the surveillance 
state.” 4 Still others, like Th omas Friedman at the New York Times, 
echoing Keller, take the position that we simply need to adjust “to life 
in a surveillance state.” 5 Regardless of the po liti cal position, though, 
there seems to be a consensus now that we are indeed facing the sur-
veillance state, as Conor Friedersdorf remarks in the Atlantic.6 Even 
Glenn Greenwald, in the subtitle of his 2014 book on Edward Snowden, 
T W O
the surveillance state

Th e Surveillance State  55
deploys the term: No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and 
the U.S. Surveillance State.
Th e meta phor has reached into the legislative and constitutional 
debate as well, especially in the controversy surrounding the constitu-
tionality of the NSA’s bulk telephony metadata program. In the related 
judicial opinions and commission reports, the new “surveillance state” 
is being variously described as a great protector and selfl ess warrior by 
one federal judge in New York, as Big Brother by another federal judge 
in Washington, D.C., and as a New Deal– like administrative savior by 
President Barack Obama’s advisers.7
At one end, then, the American surveillance state is portrayed as 
a selfl ess warrior who, in response to 9/11, threw “the Government’s 
counter- punch” to al- Qaeda’s “bold jujitsu.”8 Th is is the meta phor of 
the Leviathan state— a knight in armor, faithful and selfl ess, honest 
and eff ective. It is the protector state, a view espoused by federal judge 
William H. Pauley III. Pauley, a 1998 Clinton appointee sitting on the 
United States District Court for the Southern District of New York— 
only a few blocks from the World Trade Center— sees the entire con-
stitutional controversy surrounding the bulk telephony metadata 
program through the lens of the surveillance state at war against a 
nimble, seventh- century jujitsu fi ghter. Th e very fi rst image in his 
ruling—in fact, the very fi rst fi ve words of his opinion— invokes “the 
September 11th terrorist attack.”9 Th e fi rst emotion is fear (“just how 
dangerous and interconnected the world is”), and the fi rst image is 
al- Qaeda’s martial arts attack (“While Americans depended on tech-
nology for the con ve niences of modernity, al- Qaeda plotted in a 
seventh- century milieu to use that technology against us”).10
In Pauley’s view, surveillance technology is the key weapon of the 
protector state— and an eff ective weapon at that. “Th e eff ectiveness of 
bulk telephony metadata collection cannot be seriously disputed,” 
Pauley contends, before describing in some detail three concrete 
instances where the program contributed to thwarting terrorist at-
tacks.11 “Armed with all the metadata,” Pauley writes, “the NSA can 
draw connections it might otherwise never be able to fi nd.”12 It is the 
state’s “counter- punch”: “connecting fragmented and fl eeting commu-
nications to re- construct and eliminate al- Qaeda’s terror network.”13 

56  Clearing the Ground
For Pauley, the protector state reaches its apex as warrior. Its “power 
reaches its zenith when wielded to protect national security,” when con-
fronting “a new enemy,” when fi ghting “the war on terror.”14 It is  here, in 
battle, that the surveillance state carries out its most “urgent objective of 
the highest order.”15 Th e people, by contrast, appear fi ckle: they com-
plain about the surveillance state, and yet, naively—or stupidly— they 
willingly surrender all their information to greedy private entrepreneurs 
who simply want to make money. “Every day, people voluntarily sur-
render personal and seemingly- private information to transnational 
corporations, which exploit that data for profi t. Few think twice about it, 
even though it is far more intrusive than bulk telephony metadata col-
lection.”16 Th e contrast could not be greater: to protect the fi ckle popu-
lation, we desperately need an active surveillance state.
At the other end of the po liti cal spectrum, our new surveillance 
state is portrayed as lying, deceiving, and cheating— a surveillance 
state that misrepresents, infl ates, embellishes, and threatens our indi-
vidual freedoms. Th is is the view of federal judge Richard Leon, nomi-
nated to the United States District Court for the District of Columbia 
one day before 9/11, on September 10, 2001, by President George W. 
Bush. His is the more skeptical, conservative libertarian view: the sur-
veillance state encroaches on our liberties, constantly developing new 
ways to get its hands into our most intimate relations. Th is is Big Brother, 
the spiderweb state. In fact, Leon refers explicitly to “the almost- 
Orwellian technology” of the government, which he describes as “the 
stuff  of science fi ction.”17 Elsewhere, Leon quotes another judge who 
refers to the “wide- ranging ‘DNA dragnets’ that raise justifi able cita-
tions to George Orwell.”18
Th is Orwellian surveillance state deceives. It “engaged in ‘system-
atic noncompliance’ with FISC [Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court]– ordered minimization procedures” and “repeatedly made 
misrepre sen ta tions and inaccurate statements about the program to 
the FISC judges.”19 Th is surveillance state has “misrepresented the 
scope of its targeting of certain internet communications.”20 Th is state 
has even, in a “third instance,” made a “substantial misrepre sen ta-
tion.”21 Th is is the “Government [that] wants it both ways.”22 Th is sur-

Th e Surveillance State  57
veillance state cannot be believed. It is not credible. It tells the people 
things, even under oath, that cannot be trusted. It is the state whose 
“candor” or lack thereof “defi es common sense and does not exactly 
inspire confi dence!”23 “I cannot believe the Government,” Richard 
Leon writes in the margin of his opinion.24
Th e contrast could not be sharper. To Pauley, the surveillance state 
does not misrepresent, it does not lie, it does not deceive. It is our selfl ess 
guardian. At most, at the extreme, it may exhibit some honest human 
error, but in good faith. Pauley refers to “issues,” “incidents,” “inconsis-
tencies,” and “errors,” but never to misdeeds.25 “While there have been 
unintentional violations of guidelines, those appear to stem from human 
error and the incredibly complex computer programs that support this 
vital tool. And once detected, those violations  were self- reported and 
stopped,” Pauley emphasizes.26 Th e protector surveillance state follows 
its own rules and protects the people’s anonymity. “Th e Government,” 
Pauley underscores, “does not know who any of the telephone numbers 
belong to,” and it does not seek to know.27 Th ere are layers of protection 
and rules that protect the people from a malevolent state. On Pauley’s 
view, the surveillance state is, in eff ect, rule bound.
And then, diagonal to both Pauley and Leon, there is a third image 
of the surveillance state as a New Deal– like regulatory state, the ad-
ministrative state. Th is is the view projected by President Obama’s ad-
visers, a committee composed of an eclectic range of former offi  cials 
and academics, including a former counterterrorism czar under both 
President George  W. Bush and President Clinton, Obama’s former 
deputy director of the CIA, a First Amendment scholar, the former head 
of the Offi  ce of Information and Regulatory Aff airs, and a former 
Clinton administrator who is an expert on privacy law. In their report, 
they project the image of the surveillance state as FDR’s dream of a big 
government with a large bureaucracy that solves problems by creating 
new offi  ces and boards, new agencies, new rules, and new regulations. 
Th is is the regulatory and self- regulating surveillance state— the ad-
ministrative, cost- benefi t, technocratic surveillance state.
Th is third image of the surveillance state is focused on “risk man-
agement” for risks of every type: “risks to national security,” but also 

58  Clearing the Ground
“risks to trade and commerce, including international commerce,” “risks 
to our relationships with other nations,” “risks to privacy,” and “risks 
to freedom and civil liberties.”28 We live surrounded by risk. And we 
have to manage those risks by conducting “careful analysis of conse-
quences, including both benefi ts and costs.”29 It is of great import that 
the state not rely “on intuitions and anecdotes, but on evidence and 
data.”30 Th e key is risk assessment “subject to continuing scrutiny, in-
cluding retrospective analysis.”31 “We recommend,” Obama’s advisers 
write, “the use of cost- benefi t analysis and risk- management approaches, 
both prospective and retrospective, to orient judgments about per-
sonnel security and network security mea sures.”32
Th rough risk management with cost- benefi t analysis, this surveil-
lance state can achieve great heights. It has tremendous promise. It 
shows remarkable progress: “Th e United States has made great prog-
ress over time in its protection of ‘the Blessings of Liberty’— even in 
times of crisis. Th e major restrictions of civil liberties that have black-
ened our past would be unthinkable today.”33 Th ese words refl ect the 
resounding optimism of this New Deal– like state. Increase the regula-
tory oversight. Create a “privacy and civil liberties policy offi  cial.”34 Add 
a “civil servant tasked with privacy issues”— a “policy offi  cial, who 
would sit within both the NSS [National Security Staff ] and the OMB 
[Offi  ce of Management and Bud get], to coordinate US Government 
policy on privacy, including issues within the Intelligence Commu-
nity.”35 Reinforce the “Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board.”36 
Th row in another offi  cial to present privacy interests at the Foreign In-
telligence Surveillance Court: “We recommend that Congress should 
create a Public Interest Advocate.”37 Improve and better “manage an in-
teragency pro cess.”38 More government regulators. Better pro cesses. 
More review. Enhanced cost- benefi t. Th is is the administrative state. A 
surveillance state that “publicly disclose(s),” promotes “transparency 
and accountability,” and fosters “public trust.”39 A state governed by ci-
vilians, not military men.40 A more open state, not cloaked in military 
secrecy. One that engages in “careful deliberation at high levels of gov-
ernment” and “due consideration of and respect for the strong presump-
tion of transparency that is central to demo cratic governance.” 41

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Surveillance State  59
As for President Obama, he waded into the debate carefully, tipping 
his hat in all three directions. Th e president borrowed Judge Pauley’s 
rhetoric of eff ectiveness: “Th ese eff orts have prevented multiple attacks 
and saved innocent lives— not just  here in the United States, but around 
the globe.” 42 Like Pauley, Obama imagines a protective surveillance 
state—in fact, one that dates back to “the dawn of our Republic,” when 
“a small, secret surveillance committee,” which included Paul Revere, 
“would patrol the streets, reporting back any signs that the British  were 
preparing raids against America’s early Patriots.” 43 Th at’s Obama’s fi rst 
image— not 9/11 but the American Revolutionary War, followed by 
Union balloons during the Civil War, code breakers in World War II, 
and the creation of the NSA during the Cold War to better watch the 
Soviet bloc. Like Pauley’s surveillance state, Obama’s is one that does 
not lie. To the contrary, “the men and women of the intelligence com-
munity, including the NSA, consistently follow protocols designed to 
protect the privacy of ordinary people. Th ey’re not abusing authorities 
in order to listen to your private phone calls or read your emails. When 
mistakes are made— which is inevitable in any large and complicated 
human enterprise— they correct those mistakes.” 44 Obama’s surveil-
lance state is one that would be able to protect us against a threat like 
9/11. For this, Obama borrows from Pauley’s discussion of the intercep-
tion of Khalid al- Mindhar’s phone call from San Diego— which, ac-
cording to Pauley, could have prevented 9/11 if it had been geolocated.45
Nodding in Judge Leon’s direction, the president also acknowledges 
some reservations, in fact some “healthy skepticism,” regarding the 
surveillance state.46 Th e president makes repeated references to ex-
cesses from times past, including the notorious spying on Martin Lu-
ther King Jr. Th ere is a “risk of government overreach”— but of course, 
that was mostly a problem associated with the prior George W. Bush 
administration and its use of torture.47
Th en, borrowing from the New Deal– like vision of the regulatory 
surveillance state, President Obama tells the American people that he 
has already “increased oversight and auditing” and implemented “new 
structures aimed at compliance. Improved rules  were proposed by the 
government and approved by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
www.Ebook777.com

60  Clearing the Ground
Court,” he claims.48 “I created an outside Review Group on Intelli-
gence and Communications Technologies to make recommendations 
for reform. I consulted with the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board, created by Congress.” 49 Going forward, Obama will order the 
director of national intelligence to “annually review” and “report to 
me and to Congress,” and he will ask Congress to establish “a panel 
of advocates from outside government to provide an in de pen dent 
voice in signifi cant cases before the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court.” 50 Obama declares, “I am making some important changes to 
how our government is or ga nized”:
Th e State Department will designate a se nior offi  cer to coordi-
nate our diplomacy on issues related to technology and signals 
intelligence. We will appoint a se nior offi  cial at the White House 
to implement the new privacy safeguards that I have announced 
today. I will devote the resources to centralize and improve the 
pro cess we use to handle foreign requests for legal assistance, 
keeping our high standards for privacy while helping foreign 
partners fi ght crime and terrorism.
I have also asked my counselor, John Podesta, to lead a com-
prehensive review of big data and privacy. And this group will 
consist of government offi  cials who, along with the President’s 
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, will reach out 
to privacy experts, technologists and business leaders, and look 
how the challenges inherent in big data are being confronted by 
both the public and private sectors; whether we can forge inter-
national norms on how to manage this data; and how we can 
continue to promote the free fl ow of information in ways that are 
consistent with both privacy and security.51
Th is is the well- regulated surveillance state in all its New Deal 
glory: new agencies, new offi  cials, more oversight, more expertise. It is 
by no means the surveillance state of stealth or deception. It is nothing 
like Leon’s view. Recall that for Leon, the government has its hands on 
the data and is getting information about individuals. Th e searching is 

Th e Surveillance State  61
not just algorithmic. It is not automatic. Th e data are queried, Leon 
emphasizes, “manually or automatically”— not simply anonymously.52 
Th ere is a real risk of overreach and prying in Leon’s view. And it is 
not only well regulated, this New Deal– like surveillance state, it is 
also eff ective— again, in direct contrast to Leon’s image of the state. 
Recall that, on the “effi  cacy prong,” Leon reminds us, “the Govern-
ment does not cite a single instance in which analysis of the NSA’s 
bulk metadata collection actually stopped an imminent attack, or 
otherwise aided the Government in achieving any objective that was 
time- sensitive in nature.” 53 Th e contrast between President Obama 
and Judge Leon is stark.
But, of course, no one today is prepared to dismantle the surveillance 
state or take responsibility for terminating the metadata collection pro-
gram.54 Even Judge Leon remains extremely sensitive to the need for a 
surveillance state— which is why, in the end, he stays the injunction in 
the case before him. Th is is security- conscious libertarianism, not radi-
calism in any sense. Leon stays the injunction; Pauley upholds the pro-
gram; the Second Circuit reverses Pauley and fi nds the program illegal, 
but refuses to issue a preliminary injunction; Congress reauthorizes the 
program in the USA FREEDOM Act and requires that the telecoms 
hold the data; and President Obama restructures the Section 215 pro-
gram accordingly— while he appoints more administrators, delegates 
more review and analysis, implements new and better procedures, es-
tablishes more layers of administration. On one thing, everyone agrees: 
the country needs a “robust foreign intelligence collection capability” to 
keep us “safe and secure” and to promote “prosperity, security, and 
openness,” but also, even more importantly, to “increase confi dence in 
the US information technology sector, thus contributing to US eco-
nomic growth.” 55 America needs its “surveillance state.”
The “surveillance state”: guardian, trickster, New Deal– like 
administrator—or faithful servant? Which version is more accurate? 
And what exactly shall we do? Shall we retain it, dismantle it, learn to 
live with it, or just face it? Th ese questions are puzzling and diffi  cult, 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
62  Clearing the Ground
all the more so because the meta phor itself, although obviously cor-
rect in some ways, is also inadequate and inapposite in others. Before 
being led astray by the meta phor, then, it would be wise to fi rst inter-
rogate closely the very notion of a “surveillance state.” Because, it turns 
out, the supposed “surveillance state” that we face today is neither, re-
ally: neither just a state, nor one that employs, at its core or exclusively, 
surveillance. A little history may shed some light.
During the ancien régime, an eccentric French inventor by the 
name of Jacques- François Guillauté drew an early blueprint for a per-
fect surveillance state: divide the city of Paris into twenty- four equal- 
sized neighborhoods, then subdivide it into districts of twenty  houses, 
each under the supervision of a syndic; minutely alphanumerize and 
label each building, entry hall, fl oor, stairwell, and door in order to 
most effi  ciently collect and or ga nize the constant fl ow of information 
coming from police agents, spies, and informants— les mouches et les 
mouchards; and place each district under the supervision of a police 
watchman at a console (see Figure 2.1).56
Th en give each district watchman instantaneous access to the infi -
nite reams of surveillance information by means of a remarkable 
paper- fi ling machine with gigantic wheels— twelve feet in diameter, 
thirty- six feet in circumference— that would rotate the data at a tap of 
each watchman’s foot (see Figure 2.3).
Guillauté estimated that each paper- fi ling wheel— which he called 
a serre- papier, a “paper- squeeze”— could effi  ciently or ga nize 102,400 
individual pieces of paper.57 He pitched his invention to Louis XV in a 
splendid report, published in 1749, with twenty- eight gorgeous draw-
ings “à la plume” by Gabriel de Saint- Aubin, titled Mémoire sur la réfor-
mation de la police de France.
Th is was a faultless system to perfect omniscient state surveillance. 
A dream of infi nite knowledge, of total awareness, of instantaneous 
access, of perfect data control. A policeman’s fantasy. And at the time, 
not surprisingly, it was and remained pure fantasy. Louis XV could not 
be bothered with such fantasies. He had a kingdom to run.
Big Data would change all that. Digital technology would make an 
eighteenth- century dream come true, with data- mining programs like 
www.Ebook777.com

Th e Surveillance State  63
figure 2.4 Th e watchmen at their consoles (1749 vs. 2013). Composite of Figure 2.2 and Figure 2.3.
figure 2.3 Jacques- François Guillauté’s blueprint for police surveillance (1749). Source: Mémoire 
sur la réformation de la police de France, soumis au roi en 1749 par M. Guillauté, illustré de 28 dessins de 
Gabriel de Saint- Aubin, ed. Jean Seznec (Paris: Hermann, 1974), 22.
figure 2.1 Jacques- François Guillauté’s blueprint 
for data retrieval (1749). Source: Mémoire sur la 
réformation de la police de France, soumis au roi en 1749 
par M. Guillauté, illustré de 28 dessins de Gabriel de 
Saint- Aubin, ed. Jean Seznec (Paris: Hermann, 1974), 22.
figure 2.2 Top- secret NSA PowerPoint slide for 
XKeyscore training (2013). Source: “XKeyscore: NSA 
Tool Collects ‘Nearly Everything a User Does on the 
Internet,’ ” Guardian, July 31, 2013.

64  Clearing the Ground
XKeyscore, which can instantaneously give an analyst access to “nearly 
everything a typical user does on the internet.” 58 Th is was illustrated 
as well, this time in a classifi ed NSA training slide leaked by Edward 
Snowden in June 2013 (see Figure 2.2).
You may notice an odd, almost eerie similarity. More than 250 years 
have passed, technology has progressed by leaps and bounds, and yet the 
little watchmen at their consoles still look awfully alike (see Figure 2.4).
Th e contemporary resemblance to the “surveillance state” is sur-
prising indeed. But there are certain diff erences, practically imper-
ceptible at fi rst glance, that are central to understanding our current 
situation. Because the little watchman on the right, it turns out, may 
be working for a private consulting company, not the police; querying 
data provided willingly by enthusiastic users of social media, not the 
scribbled jottings of a gumshoe; using soft ware manufactured by a 
multinational corporation, not a tool produced by the royal carpenter; 
sitting in a location operated by a private telecommunications com-
pany, not the préfecture de police.
Th e image on the left , surely, represents l’État, but to employ that 
term under our present circumstances to the watchman on the right 
seems highly anachronistic— a discourse from an earlier era of modern 
po liti cal theory, with sharply diff erent notions of sovereignty— that 
may have profoundly misleading eff ects today. Not just because we 
have entered an age of neoliberalism that is characterized by privatiza-
tion, “deregulation,” and outsourcing.59 Nor because, as Pierre Bour-
dieu would emphasize in a series of Collège de France lectures, the 
modern “state” is nothing more than a reservoir of symbolic power, a 
privileged point of view that metes out physical and symbolic vio-
lence.60 Beyond all that, what has changed is the form of surveillance 
or management or governmentality—or, since the terms themselves 
are melding together, let’s say that the relations of power today have 
dramatically shift ed and circulate in importantly diff erent ways. Th e 
form of digital power made possible by our exposure, by data mining, 
and by modern algorithms undermines the coherence of the notion of 
the “state,” let alone the notion of a “surveillance state.”

Th e Surveillance State  65
Th e fact is, we are no longer simply talking about “the state” when 
the NSA installs, through its UPSTREAM program, network- tap 
hardware developed by a Boeing subsidiary, Narus, in a room at the 
AT&T Folsom Street facility in San Francisco, to splice and make a per-
fect duplicate of a cable stream of digital communications fl owing from 
the private servers of Facebook, Google, YouTube, Twitter, Myspace, 
AOL, Hotmail, and so on (most of which are providing data as well under 
the PRISM program), and has con sul tants at private fi rms like Booz 
Allen monitor the communications using off - the- shelf Silicon Valley 
or other soft ware, such as the Semantic Traffi  c Analyzer STA 6400, 
and then augments the database by means of cooperative agreements, 
under the LUSTRE program, with France, Germany, the United 
Kingdom, and other foreign countries.61
No, that is not just “the state.” When Microsoft  collaborates with 
national intelligence during the fabrication of its new Outlook email 
soft ware in order to facilitate NSA’s decryption abilities; when Micro-
soft  works hand in hand with the FBI to allow access to its new cloud 
storage ser vice, SkyDrive, used by over 250 million people across the 
globe; when our network ser vice providers, search engines, and social 
media monitor our every digital action to recommend products, fuel our 
consumption, and share our personal data; when employers can access 
and freely inspect personal emails and the online activities of their em-
ployees; when the watchmen at the console can so easily, “out of curi-
osity,” spy on their lovers; when hackers so seamlessly infi ltrate the fi nan-
cial systems of large retailers like Target and Neiman Marcus; when so 
much of Snowden’s NSA archive reveals, in Greenwald’s words, “what 
can only be called economic espionage”; when American economic inter-
ests are so closely tied to maintaining the country’s dominance in com-
munications and the Internet; when the NSA itself is placing undercover 
agents within private foreign corporations (which themselves may or 
may not be cooperating with the NSA), then we know we are facing a 
situation that goes well beyond the modern notion of “the state.” 62
Th is amalgam of the intelligence community, retailers, Silicon Valley, 
military interests, social media, the Inner Beltway, multinational 

66  Clearing the Ground
corporations, midtown Manhattan, and Wall Street forms an oligar-
chic concentration that defi es any such reductionism. President Dwight 
Eisenhower cautioned us about the “military- industrial complex” 
several de cades ago.63 James Bamford warned us of the “surveillance- 
industrial empire” last de cade.64 But the participants in this new oli-
garkhía are now far too diverse to conjugate into a single neologism. All 
we can say is that they are olígos and appear to rule together, as evi-
denced by the upward trend in cooperation— refl ected in that classifi ed 
NSA slide disclosed by Snowden— between the NSA and Microsoft  
(with PRISM collection beginning on September  11, 2007), Yahoo 
(March 12, 2008), Google (January 14, 2009), Facebook (June 3, 2009), 
PalTalk (December 7, 2009), YouTube (September 24, 2010), Skype 
(February 6, 2011), AOL (March 3, 2011), and Apple (October 2012).65
•  •  •
Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, and colleagues at the Guardian broke 
the story in July 2013, a month aft er the Edward Snowden revelations.66 
Combing through the top- secret NSA documents, Greenwald discov-
ered evidence of close collaboration between Silicon Valley and the 
intelligence ser vices. Th e specifi c documents originated from NSA’s 
elite Special Source Operations (SSO) division, which focuses on do-
mestic communications systems.
Th e SSO documents reveal that the NSA was particularly worried 
about its ability to intercept communications on Microsoft ’s Outlook 
portal as soon as Microsoft  started testing it in July 2012. “Within fi ve 
months,” Greenwald reveals from his review of the documents, “Micro-
soft  and the FBI had come up with a solution that allowed the NSA to 
circumvent encryption on Outlook . com chats.” 67 Th e NSA document 
in question, dated December 26, 2012, reads:
On 31 July, Microsoft  (MS) began encrypting web- based chat 
with the introduction of the new outlook . com ser vice. Th is new 
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) encryption eff ectively cut off  collec-

Th e Surveillance State  67
tion of the new ser vice for . . .  the Intelligence Community (IC). 
MS, working with the FBI, developed a surveillance capability to 
deal with the new SSL. Th ese solutions  were successfully tested 
and went live 12 Dec 2012. . . .  Th e MS legacy collection system 
will remain in place to collect voice/video and fi le transfers. . . .  
An increase in collection volume as a result of this solution has 
already been noted by CES.68
Greenwald, Poitras, and their colleagues additionally report that 
“another newsletter entry stated that NSA already had pre- encryption 
access to Outlook email. ‘For Prism collection against Hotmail, Live, 
and Outlook . com emails will be unaff ected because Prism collects 
this data prior to encryption.’ ” 69
Another NSA document from April 2013, titled “Microsoft  Skydrive 
Collection Now Part of PRISM Standard Stored Communications 
Collection,” reveals that Microsoft  worked hand in hand with the FBI 
to give the government agency access to the soft ware giant’s new cloud 
storage ser vice, Skydrive. Th e NSA document states, “Beginning on 
7 March 2013, PRISM now collects Microsoft  Skydrive data as part of 
PRISM’s standard Stored Communications collection package. . . .  Th is 
new capability will result in a much more complete and timely collec-
tion response. . . .  Th is success is the result of the FBI working for 
many months with Microsoft  to get this tasking and collection solu-
tion established.”70 Microsoft ’s SkyDrive, apparently, is used by more 
than 250 million people worldwide.71
None of this should come entirely as a surprise. Th ere is a long his-
tory of cooperation between tech companies— especially in commu-
nications and information delivery— and intelligence ser vices in this 
country and abroad. Episodes of cooperation stretch back for de cades. 
In the 1920s, for instance, the director of U.S. military intelligence, Her-
bert Yardley, set up what became known as “the Black Chamber,” where, 
thanks to a handshake agreement with Western Union, Yardley got 
access to all tele grams passing over the company’s wires.72 Before that, 
during World War I, Western Union was required by law to share all 

68  Clearing the Ground
cables with the military, but with the end of war time censorship, the 
surveillance of citizens could only be done illegally and in direct 
violation of the Radio Communications Act of 1912, which guaranteed 
the privacy of telegraph messages. Faced with that prohibition, Yardley 
entered into handshake agreements with the presidents of Western 
Union and All American Cable Company to get complete cooperation 
and a copy of all their cables.73 Aft er 1927, when things got dicier, the 
intelligence unit turned to bribery to obtain communications— which 
ultimately ended in 1929 with the election of President Herbert 
Hoover.74 But the history of cooperation and partnerships would 
stretch forward from the Black Chamber in 1919 to Operation Sham-
rock during the post- World War II period, into the mid-1970s, and 
then to the warrantless eavesdropping post-9/11.75 And these kinds of 
cooperation have not only occurred in the United States. In the United 
Kingdom, a “Secret Department of the Post Offi  ce” searched desig-
nated “mail of the king’s subjects for centuries” before being exposed 
in 1844.76
Cooperation between telecommunication companies and intelli-
gence agencies has been facilitated by a series of revolving doors and 
lucrative relationships between executives of both sectors. Th ere is, in 
fact, a long history of board swapping between top intelligence offi  -
cials, the corporate heads of the telecommunications companies, and 
the CEOs of related industry leaders. James Bamford’s investigative 
reporting, especially in his book Th e Shadow Factory, provides a long 
list of collaboration:
•  In September 2004, Narus, the Boeing subsidiary that has devel-
oped so much of the data- mining soft ware and hardware, ap-
pointed William P. Crowell to its board. Crowell was the former 
deputy director of the NSA.77
•  Former NSA director Mike McConnell left  the NSA in February 
1996 and became a vice president at Booz Allen with a $2 million 
salary.78 (Booz Allen serves as a con sul tant to the NSA; in fact, 
that is where Edward Snowden worked.)

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Surveillance State  69
•  SPARTA, a private security fi rm in the surveillance consulting 
industry, “hired Maureen Baginski, the NSA’s powerful signals 
intelligence director, in October 2006 as president of its Na-
tional Security Systems Sector.” Another fi rm, Applied Signal 
Technology, “put John P. Devine, the [NSA’s] former deputy di-
rector for technology and systems, on its board of directors.”79
•  Former NSA director Adm. William Studeman was hired to 
manage intelligence programs at TRW Inc., which was then pur-
chased by Grumman.80 Upon his retirement, Admiral Studeman 
described his responsibilities as follows: “Retired in 2005, from 
Northrop Grumman Corporation (NGC) as Vice President and 
Deputy General Manager of Mission Systems (NGMS) (now 
consolidated into NGIS), a $5.2B annual revenue Sector (for-
merly part of TRW) focused on System Integration/System En-
gineering of large complex systems. In this position, he focused 
on strategies, programs, business development, marketing related 
to Intelligence and Information Warfare, as well as corporate 
cross- Sector integration, and on managing technology partner-
ships and concepts related to Net Centricity/Cyber matters, ISR, 
IO/IW and advanced command environments. He served in this 
position for approximately 9 years, and has continued as an NGC 
con sul tant.”81 Admiral Studeman was also elected to a number of 
boards, including the board of Paracel Inc., “a provider of high- 
performance ge ne tic and text analysis systems.”82
•  Another major fi rm, Cylink, which develops encryption products, 
hired as a vice president former NSA director Mike McConnell’s 
former deputy director, William P. Crowell. As Bamford explains, 
“Crowell had been through the revolving door before, going from 
a se nior executive position at the NSA to a vice presidency at At-
lantic Aerospace Electronics Corporation, an agency contractor, 
and back to the NSA as chief of staff . Another deputy director of 
the agency, Charles R. Lord, left  the NSA and immediately be-
came a vice president at E Systems, one of the NSA’s biggest 
contractors.”83
www.Ebook777.com

70  Clearing the Ground
Bamford goes on to note:
With about forty- four thousand employees each, [defense con-
tractor] SAIC and NSA are both heavyweights, and they have a 
decidedly incestuous relationship. Aft er fi rst installing the former 
NSA director Bobby Inman on its board, SAIC then hired top 
agency offi  cial William B. Black Jr. as a vice president following 
his retirement in 1997. Th en [NSA director] Mike Hayden hired 
him back to be the agency’s deputy director in 2000. Two years 
later SAIC won the $280 million Trailblazer contract to help de-
velop the agency’s next- generation eavesdropping architecture, 
which Black managed. Another offi  cial spinning back and forth 
between the company and the agency was Samuel  S. Visner. 
From 1997 to 2001 he was SAIC’s vice president for corporate de-
velopment. He then moved to Fort Meade as the NSA’s chief of 
signals intelligence programs and two years later returned as a 
se nior vice president and director of SAIC’s strategic planning 
and business development within the company’s intelligence 
group.84
Th e revolving door has become even more troubling since 2001, 
when the NSA began an all- out eff ort to outsource many of its opera-
tions to private contractors.85 Th is has resulted in lots of lucrative 
consulting contracts that have made board relations even more im-
portant and sensitive. Th e growth of outsourcing since 2001 has been 
absolutely exponential: whereas, for instance, in October 2001, the in-
telligence agency had only 55 contracts with approximately 144 con-
tractors, four years later, by October 2005, the NSA had 7,197 contracts 
with 4,388 contractors.86
And the cooperation between the private sector and the intelli-
gence ser vices has only continued to blossom post-9/11 to the point 
where today, although the NSA itself has about 40,000 employees, it 
has contracts with private companies for another 60,000 or so people.87 
As Greenwald reports, approximately “70 percent of our national in-
telligence bud get is being spent on the private sector.”88

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Surveillance State  71
Th e relations with the private sector got especially cozy aft er 9/11. 
At around the same time that NSA head Michael Hayden began se-
cretly bypassing the FISC— the specially designed intelligence court—
to engage in monitoring of all international communications, regard-
less of whether a domestic caller was involved, Hayden got AT&T to 
allow the NSA to make copies of all fi ber- optic cable communications 
at key switches like Folsom Street in San Francisco using “optical 
splitter[s] [that] would create a mirror image of the contents of the en-
tire cable.”89 James Bamford recounts:
By the late fall of 2001, Hayden succeeded in gaining the secret 
cooperation of nearly all of the nation’s telecommunications gi-
ants for his warrantless eavesdropping program. Within a year, 
engineers  were busy installing highly secret, heavily locked rooms 
in key AT&T switches, among them Bridgeton, New York City, 
and the company’s major West Coast central offi  ce in San Fran-
cisco. From then on the data— including both address informa-
tion and content— would fl ow through the PacketScopes di-
rectly to the NSA. And Bridgeton would become the technical 
command center for the operation. “It was very hush- hush,” said 
one of the AT&T workers there at the time. “We  were told there 
was going to be some government personnel working in that 
room. We  were told, ‘Do not try to speak to them. Do not hamper 
their work. Do not impede anything that they’re doing.’ ”90
As Bamford explains in an article published in the New York Review 
of Books on August 15, 2013, there was ongoing cooperation between 
the telecommunications companies and the NSA at least through 
2009 (and possibly continuing since then). Based on a “draft  of a top 
secret NSA inspector general’s report leaked by Snowden,” a report 
that apparently dates to 2009, Bamford reports:
As part of its cable- tapping program, the NSA has secretly in-
stalled what amount to computerized fi lters on the telecommu-
nications infrastructure throughout the country. According to 
www.Ebook777.com

72  Clearing the Ground
the leaked inspector general’s report, the agency has secret co-
operative agreements with the top three telephone companies in 
the country. Although the report disguises their names, they are 
likely AT&T, Verizon, and Sprint:
NSA determined that under the Authorization it could gain 
access to approximately 81% of the international calls into and 
out of the United States through three corporate partners: Com-
pany A had access to 39%, Company B 28%, and Company C 14%.91
Bamford goes on to report, “According to a recent slide released by 
Snowden, the NSA on April 5, 2013, had 117,675 active surveillance tar-
gets in the program and was able to access real- time data on live voice, 
text, e- mail, or Internet chat ser vices, in addition to analyzing stored 
data.”92
One NSA document leaked by Snowden, related to the FAIRVIEW 
program targeting corporate partnerships, refers to an unidentifi ed 
telecom company as “aggressively” providing access: “FAIRVIEW— 
Corp partner since 1985 with access to int. cables, routers, switches. 
Th e partner operates in the U.S., but has access to information that 
transits the nation and through its corporate relationships provide 
unique accesses to other telecoms and ISPs. Aggressively involved in 
shaping traffi  c to run signals of interest past our monitors.”93 Another 
typical NSA dispatch regarding its “corporate portfolio” refers to meta-
data and content received from “commercial links managed by the 
NSA Corporate Partner.”94 Under the FAIRVIEW program, the NSA 
was collecting around 200 million rec ords per day in December 2012, 
for a monthly total of over 6 billion rec ords.95
Whatever it is that is surveilling us, then, is not simply “the state.” 
It is more an amalgam of various national intelligence ser vices, Google, 
Microsoft , other Silicon Valley fi rms, Facebook and other social media 
corporations, private surveillance industry companies and con sul-
tants, IT departments everywhere, and, as we will see, local police de-
partments, friends, hackers, and curious interlopers. It ranges in scale 

Th e Surveillance State  73
from the NSA and Apple to your neighbor with a “packet sniff er” or 
free Mac soft ware like Eavesdrop, and it includes friends stalking on 
Facebook as well as the companies Amazon and Netfl ix.
We had come to think of ours as a time of “liquid modernity,” as 
Zygmunt Bauman famously wrote—as a new form of modernity, in 
which institutions and social formations no longer have suffi  cient time 
to become hardened structures, to “solidify.”96 We had come to think 
of ours as a more fl uid world. And this oligarchic amalgam certainly 
bears a family resemblance to more fl uid power structures. But at the 
same time, it is hard to reconcile with liquidity, as the oligarchic power 
structures grow ever more commanding and formidable.97
Th e amalgam is the product, in part, of shared interests in security 
among government and tech companies— especially shared interest 
in security from foreign corporate espionage, cyber hacking, and threats 
from countries that are viewed as malevolent. It is also largely the 
product of the rise of neoliberalism over the past four de cades, and the 
associated trend toward “deregulation,” outsourcing, and privatiza-
tion. Th is is surely what accounts for the proliferation of contracts, con-
sultancies, and private- public partnerships— and the revolving doors 
between boardrooms, CEO offi  ces, and the upper echelons of intelli-
gence agencies.
To give but one example, the breakup of the Bell telephone system 
in the 1980s and the advent of mobile phones in the 1990s produced a 
fragmentation of the phone network and posed problems for govern-
ment surveillance. A 1997 law allowing telephone customers to retain 
their telephone number when they switched carriers only made things 
worse, because it made it harder for the states and local law enforce-
ment to know which carrier had the phone data they  were looking for.98 
So the federal government put in place a system— kind of like an air 
traffi  c control system— for routing all phone calls and text messages, 
and then bid the system out to private enterprise.99 A private Virginia 
company, Neustar, got the multibillion- dollar contract; in 2013, the 
company took in about $446 million. But the privatized routing system 
is, of course, overseen by the FCC, which ensures that the interests of 
law enforcement and national security are protected. So what we end 

74  Clearing the Ground
up with is a cooperative medley of private telecommunications com-
panies and the government, all working together to ensure national 
security interests. As the New York Times reports, “Th e routing net-
work that was put in place, with Neustar as its administrator, was de-
signed partly to allow the government nearly instant access to the data 
on where calls  were being routed.”100
When the FCC called for new bids in 2014, as the New York Times 
reported, “offi  cials from the F.B.I., the Drug Enforcement Administra-
tion, the Secret Ser vice and the Immigration and Customs Enforce-
ment agency . . .  weighed in on the debate, as have senators and House 
members who supervise American intelligence operations.”101 And 
while these agencies expressed, to use their own words, “no position” on 
who should win the contract, they did, according to the Times, “want to 
make sure that their professional needs  were adequately addressed and 
that there would be no disruption in access to call- routing data ‘in real 
time or near real time.’ ”102 Specifi cally, “the agencies expressed par tic-
u lar concern that a contractor with access to the phone system from out-
side the United States could mean ‘unwarranted, and potentially 
harmful’ access to American surveillance methods and targets.”103
Th e resulting routing system that is now in place is typical: a lucra-
tive, complex, privately operated but governmentally overseen regula-
tory network in which everyone’s “professional needs” are taken care 
of— especially “the government’s ability to trace reams of phone data 
used in terrorism and law enforcement investigations.”104 In the pro cess, 
Neustar hired Michael Chertoff , former U.S. secretary of homeland se-
curity, as a con sul tant, and Chertoff  published a forty- fi ve- page report 
about the national security issues surrounding the contract.105 Th e other 
bidding company, Telcordia, a U.S. subsidiary of the Swedish company 
Ericsson, hired a retired rear admiral, James Barnett Jr., as outside 
counsel.106 As usual, everybody is making out like a bandit.
None of this is to deny in any way the breadth, sweep, and 
depth of the NSA’s own surveillance capabilities, which are jaw- 
dropping. Nor is it to deny that there is, indeed, a surveilling “state” in 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Surveillance State  75
this amalgam, and that it is truly awesome. We know its contours 
thanks to the recent disclosures by Edward Snowden and other recent 
leaks and planted leaks— “pleaks,” as David Pozen would say— that 
have emerged in the press.107 Th e NSA and its “Five Eyes” peers— the 
intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United 
Kingdom— have access to and the ability to record and monitor all 
our emails, Facebook posts, Skype messaging, Yahoo video chat plat-
forms, Twitter tweets, Tumblr photos, Google searches—in sum, all our 
traffi  c on social media and on the Internet.
Th e NSA’s program XKeyscore, for instance, can give a government 
analyst real- time access to practically everything that an Internet user 
does, including the content that she types in an email, the websites 
that she visits, and the searches she performs, as well as all of her meta-
data.108 In essence, the NSA has access to all the Internet user infor-
mation it could want, and it retains that information for as long as it 
wants, sometimes for only twenty- four hours, but other times much 
longer. Th e NSA keeps rec ords of most calls made in the United States; 
rec ords of emails, Facebook posts, and instant messages “for an un-
known number of people, via PRISM”; and “massive amounts of raw 
Internet traffi  c” in the form of metadata— which alone is extremely 
powerful.109
Th e extent of the surveillance is practically boundless. Glenn Green-
wald reports on the scope of the technology:
Beyond emails, the XKeyscore system allows analysts to monitor 
a virtually unlimited array of other internet activities, including 
those within social media.
An NSA tool called DNI Presenter, used to read the content 
of stored emails, also enables an analyst using XKeyscore to 
read the content of Facebook chats or private messages.
 . . .  An analyst can monitor such Facebook chats by entering the 
Facebook user name and a date range into a simple search screen.
Analysts can search for internet browsing activities using a 
wide range of information, including search terms entered by 
the user or the websites viewed.
www.Ebook777.com

76  Clearing the Ground
As one slide indicates, the ability to search HTTP activity by 
keyword permits the analyst access to what the NSA calls “nearly 
everything a typical user does on the internet.”
Th e XKeyscore program also allows an analyst to learn the 
IP addresses of every person who visits any website the analyst 
specifi es.110
Th is is a remarkable amount of access, and a staggering amount of 
data available to the state. According to Greenwald:
One NSA report from 2007 estimated that there  were 850 billion 
“call events” collected and stored in the NSA databases, and 
close to 150 billion internet rec ords. Each day, the document 
says, 1–2 billion rec ords  were added. William Binney, a former 
NSA mathematician, said last year that the agency had “assem-
bled on the order of 20 trillion transactions about US citizens 
with other US citizens,” an estimate, he said, that “only was in-
volving phone calls and emails.” A 2010 Washington Post article 
reported that “every day, collection systems at the [NSA] inter-
cept and store 1.7 billion emails, phone calls and other type of 
communications.”111
And what is not turned over by Google, Facebook, and other com-
panies can simply be seized by the state through duplicating tech-
nology that makes copies of communications streams. Th is is the 
program called UPSTREAM, discussed earlier, which operates at the 
Folsom Street AT&T facility in San Francisco, a facility through 
which pass most of the communications in the U.S. Northwest.112 
UPSTREAM captures about 80 percent of the information that the 
NSA collects; the other 20 percent is retrieved with PRISM.113 Ac-
cording to William Binney, the former NSA se nior offi  cial who re-
signed in protest in 2001, “the NSA has established between ten and 
twenty of these secret rooms at telecom company switches around the 
country.”114 Moreover, the technology to access and repair deep- sea 
fi ber- optic cables already exists, and there are some reports of un-

Th e Surveillance State  77
dersea splicing, which adds an entire other dimension to the collec-
tion capabilities.115 Several years ago it was reported that the General 
Dynamics shipyard in Groton, Connecticut, was hard at work retrofi t-
ting the nuclear- powered USS Jimmy Carter to equip it with “state- of- 
the- art technology for undersea fi ber- optic taps.”116
Th e United States is, of course, a central node for communications, 
giving the NSA remarkable global access to Internet traffi  c: one- third 
of all international telephone calls in the world go through the United 
States, as does about 99 percent of Internet traffi  c.117 Th at makes it 
mightily useful to be able to duplicate communications streams right 
 here on American soil.
David Cole reports on a chilling PowerPoint slide, leaked by Edward 
Snowden, that gives a sense of NSA’s capabilities and ambition. Th e 
NSA document, which was produced for and shown at a gathering of 
the “Five Eyes,” contends that “the NSA’s ‘new collection posture’ is to 
‘collect it all,’ ‘pro cess it all,’ ‘exploit it all,’ ‘partner it all,’ ‘sniff  it all,’ 
and, ultimately, ‘know it all.’ ”118
What makes this all possible, of course, is the actual size of the 
NSA. Th e size and scope of the signal intelligence agency— only one 
of many intelligence ser vices in the United States— are truly stag-
gering. Back in 2000, before 9/11, the NSA facility in Fort Meade, MD, 
was a city that had “32 miles of roads . . .  covering 325 acres,” with 
“more than four dozen buildings containing more than seven million 
square feet of fl oor space.”119 At the time, it had upward of 30,000 em-
ployees and contractors. “Th e secret city’s police force employed more 
than 700 uniformed offi  cers and a SWAT team.”120 Aft er 9/11, Michael 
Hayden, then head of the NSA, began an “enormous building cam-
paign” at the NSA’s four locations in Georgia, Texas, Colorado, and 
Hawaii.121 In Georgia alone, the listening post had 1,200 people, and 
aft er 9/11 the number immediately doubled to 2,400.122 Today, the 
agency is made up of multiple little cities.
No, none of this is to deny the breathtaking surveillance ca-
pabilities that the “state” has today. It is to suggest, instead, that the state 

78  Clearing the Ground
is not alone in surveilling us, that it forms part of a much wider 
amalgam. We are faced not so much with a “surveillance state” as with 
a surveillance amalgam or, in the words of John Gilliom and Torin 
Monahan, a “surveillance society.”123
More radically, we may need to entirely rethink the very notion of 
“the state” in this digital age— a notion which was, of course, itself 
subject to dramatic contestation and transformation over the course 
of the twentieth century. Th ose who theorize about the state tradition-
ally begin with Max Weber and his celebrated defi nition of the state 
as that which has the monopoly on the legitimate use of physical 
force.124 To a certain extent, Judge William Pauley’s conception of the 
guardian surveillance state is Weberian—as is, perhaps, the concep-
tion of the New Deal– like administrative state and Judge Leon’s image 
of the deceptor state. Th e history and theory of the state have featured 
ebbs and fl ows of deconstruction and reconstruction— movements to 
destabilize, followed by waves of trying to “bring the state back in,” 
especially in relation to other institutions and social actors, to better 
understand this emerging amalgam. Th e problem with the Weberian 
ideal type has always been the tendency to reify the state as the single 
figure 2.5 United States National Reconnaissance Offi  ce NROL-39 satellite logo
Source: Matt Sledge, “America Is Launching a Giant, World- Sucking Octopus into Space,” 
Huffi  ngton Post, December 5, 2013.

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Surveillance State  79
entity that achieves legitimacy in force, when we have known for so 
long that so many other corporate entities also exercise not only 
symbolic but legitimate physical force. Th e outsourcing of the govern-
ment function, including the use of force, to private enterprise has, for 
a long time, been too pervasive to ignore. Th e advent of the digital age 
is perhaps the fi nal straw.
Th e proper meta phor, then, is not the government agent at his con-
sole, but a large oligopolistic octopus that is enveloping the world— 
perhaps the none- too- subtle mascot of the United States National 
Reconnaissance Offi  ce’s mission USA-247, which was painted on a 
top- secret surveillance satellite launched into space in December 2013.
Th is octopus is the amalgam of Google and NSA, of Microsoft  and 
the FBI, of Skype and AT&T, of Netfl ix and the New York Police De-
partment, of the IT department upstairs and the Facebook stalker next 
door. And it is nourished, fed, kept alive by our digital exposure and by 
the technologies themselves, technologies that mysteriously fuse in-
formation and data into the surveillance mechanism itself—as if the 
security industry  were designing the technology for its own purposes. 
We reveal our secrets in texts, emails, photos, videos, and social media 
posts. We have become our own in for mants. What we are facing today 
is not so much a “surveillance state” as an amalgam, an oligarchy, a 
knot of tenticular statelike actors that see through us and our desire- 
fi lled digital lives.
www.Ebook777.com

A third dominant way of conceptualizing our current condition 
is through the meta phor of Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon as inter-
preted through the theoretical lens of Michel Foucault’s work Disci-
pline and Punish. Here too, the use of the meta phor is varied and ranges 
the po liti cal spectrum. Some writers, such as Glenn Greenwald, draw 
a parallel to the panopticon to warn us of the dangers of NSA surveil-
lance.1 “In Discipline and Punish,” Greenwald writes, “Foucault ex-
plained that ubiquitous surveillance not only empowers authorities 
and compels compliance but also induces individuals to internalize 
their watchers. Th ose who believe they are watched will instinctively 
choose to do that which is wanted of them without even realizing that 
they are being controlled.”2 When this happens, Greenwald cautions 
us, there is no longer any need for overt government repression, nor 
any evidence of it. Other commentators, such as William Simon, 
embrace the “panopticism” of Big Data, and view it as a potentially 
favorable development. “For demo cratic accountability,” Simon writes, 
“panopticon- style surveillance has an underappreciated advantage. It 
may more easily accommodate transparency. Electronic surveillance 
is governed by fully specifi ed algorithms.”3 In good hands, Simon sug-
T H R E E
jeremy bentham’s panopticon

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  81
gests, panoptic power may be a step in the right direction and serve to 
police discriminatory practices.
Here too, though, before embracing the metaphor— pro or con—it 
is even more important to question it.
During the early 1970s, Foucault himself was struggling to 
properly theorize state repression in the wake of May 1968 and the 
French government’s severe, authoritarian response to the student 
and worker uprisings.4 Following the street revolts, the French gov-
ernment of President Georges Pompidou outlawed a number of non- 
parliamentary left ist po liti cal parties, and arrested and imprisoned 
hundreds of left ist militants. Th e incarceration of po liti cal prisoners, 
mostly Maoists, led to greater general awareness of prison conditions, 
and an outbreak of prison riots across France in 1971 and 1972— riots 
that left  the country in a state of turmoil. Not enough turmoil, though, 
to bring about po liti cal reform or a wider social movement. And so 
Foucault turned all his attention to the questions of state repression, 
state punitive strategies, and relations of power in what he called our 
“punitive society.” 5 He also turned to the larger question of how, de-
spite increasing awareness of state repression and prison conditions, 
we so easily and so comfortably continue to tolerate what should be 
intolerable. “No introduction,” Foucault jotted down quickly in his 
notes for his fi rst lecture of the series, Penal Th eories and Institutions. 
“One need only open one’s eyes. Th ose who are loath to do so will 
surely recognize themselves in what I have to say.” 6 Foucault’s engage-
ment with state repression would be direct and unwavering.
In Paris, on January 3 1973, Foucault dove into his third lecture se-
ries at the Collège de France, titled Th e Punitive Society: an analysis of 
eighteenth-  and nineteenth- century forms of social struggle and re-
pression, confl icts that he would model on civil war. His analysis reso-
nated with current events and directly challenged, sub silencio, the 
dominant Marxist theories of state apparatuses, class struggle, and 
superstructural power.7 Foucault’s lectures—as refl ected in the title— 
placed the emphasis not just on punitiveness but also, importantly, on 
www.Ebook777.com

82  Clearing the Ground
society, and in par tic u lar on relations of power throughout society.8 
Th e lectures  were a deeply historical engagement with specifi c acts of 
repression and strategies of governance— seven of the previous lectures 
would be almost purely historical narrations of the events surrounding 
the repression of pop u lar movements in 1639. Th at same year, in May 
1973, Foucault presented a series of fi ve conferences in Rio de Janeiro 
under the title “Truth and Juridical Form” and elaborated on what he 
called a new form of “disciplinary power” pulsing throughout society— 
this time placing special emphasis on the way in which various legal 
forms or devices, such as the trial or the inquest, produce truth in soci-
eties. One of those legal devices that would become increasingly impor-
tant to Foucault would be penitential exclusion: the birth of the prison.
Both in Paris and in Rio, Foucault directed his audience to a certain 
Nicolaus Heinrich Julius, a doctor of medicine, prison reformer, pro-
fessor at the University of Berlin, and colleague of Hegel.9 “Th is man,” 
Foucault lectured, “this man named Julius, whom I highly recommend 
that you read, and who delivered for several years in Berlin a course on 
prisons, is an extraordinary personality who had, at times, an almost 
Hegelian tinge [un souffl  e presque hégélien].”10
Th is professor named Julius had discerned, during the 1820s, a re-
markable transformation in our ways of seeing and knowing. He iden-
tifi ed an architectural mutation refl ecting a profound shift  in power 
relations across society. Antiquity, Julius observed, had discovered 
and exploited the architectural form of the spectacle: the arena, the 
amphitheater where masses of people watch the few. Modern society, 
by contrast, had accomplished a fundamental shift  from spectacle to 
surveillance, where one person or the few could watch the many. As 
Julius elaborated in his “Lectures on Prisons” in 1827, in a passage that 
would become a cornerstone for Foucault in 1973:
It is a fact worthy of the highest interest, not only in the history 
of architecture, but in that of the human mind in general: that in 
the earliest times, not only in classical antiquity, but even in 
the Orient, the genius mind conceived and then pleased itself 

to decorate— with all the trea sures of human magnifi cence— 
buildings that  were designed to make accessible to a large multi-
tude of men the spectacle and inspection of a small number of 
objects, such as in temples, theaters, amphitheaters, where they 
would watch the blood of humans and animals fl ow. All the 
while, the human imagination never seems to have applied itself 
to provide a small number of men, or even a single man, the si-
multaneous view of a great multitude of men or objects.11
Julius then adds, jumping to his own time:
It would be a task reserved to modern times (and I intend to de-
velop this idea later), to a period marked by the growing infl u-
ence of the state and of its many interventions— deeper, day by 
day, into every detail and every relation of social life—to ensure 
and perfect the grand goal of constructing and distributing edi-
fi ces intended to simultaneously surveil [surveiller] at one and 
the same time a great multitude of men.12
It is  here that Foucault picks up the thread, declaring in his lecture 
on January 10, 1973: “Th is is precisely what happens in the modern era: 
the reversal of the spectacle into surveillance.”13 Lecturing in Paris, 
Foucault would elaborate:
We are in the pro cess of inventing, says Julius, not only an archi-
tecture, an urbanism, but an entire disposition of the mind in 
general, such that, from now on, it will be men who will be of-
fered in spectacle to a small number of people, at the limit to only 
one man destined to surveil them all. Th e spectacle turned into 
surveillance, the circle that citizens formed around the spec-
tacle— all that is reversed. We have  here a completely diff erent 
structure where men who are placed next to each other on a fl at 
surface will be surveilled from above by someone who will be-
come a kind of universal eye.14
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  83

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
84  Clearing the Ground
Foucault would return to and develop this idea further in 1975, 
in  his chapter “Panopticism” in Discipline and Punish, where, again 
speaking of Julius, Foucault would say: “A few years aft er Bentham, 
Julius wrote the birth certifi cate of this [disciplinary] society.”15
Julius had discerned a reversal of the architecture of knowledge and 
power—in Foucault’s words, a “reversal of the spectacle into surveil-
lance.” Whereas in ancient societies the directionality of knowledge 
and power fl owed from the gaze of the many to the isolated few in the 
center of the arena or the well of the amphitheater, in modern times 
power circulated from the individual in the central tower who could 
watch and see to the masses placed around the periphery in visible 
ways. Th is represented not only an architectural development but, in 
the words of Foucault, “an event in the ‘history of the human mind.’ ” 
“In appearance,” Foucault emphasized, “it is merely the solution of a 
technical problem; but through it, a  whole type of society emerges.”16
Th is reversal of spectacle into surveillance was one that Julius him-
self would put into eff ect in his capacity as a penal theorist and prison 
reformer. Julius had absorbed these new architectural ideas and tech-
nologies during his several missions to En gland, Wales, and Scotland 
in 1827 and to the United States in 1834–1836, where he became an 
admirer of the Philadelphia system and the technique of individual 
isolation—in his words, the “principle of uninterrupted solitude 
throughout the entire period of imprisonment.”17 Like Gustave de 
Beaumont and Alexis de Tocqueville— whose famous report on Amer-
ican prisons, On the Penitentiary System in the United States and Its Pos-
sible Application in France, he would translate into German— Julius 
would become an ardent proponent of the larger American peniten-
tiary system.18 Julius also disseminated these new architectural ideas 
in his theoretical work and practical interventions, becoming a leading 
fi gure in the science of prisons— Gefängniskunde in German.19 Julius 
aided the king of Prus sia in constructing prisons based on the “modi-
fi ed Pennsylvania system” of labor and solitary confi nement, for which 
London’s Pentonville prison, with its radiating design, served as a 
model.20 His plans for prisons in four cities— Berlin, Königsberg, Rat-
ibor, and Münster— would be completed in 1843.21
www.Ebook777.com

Julius, with his Hegelian tinge, personifi ed a historic reversal in 
technologies of power in society, and his 1827 “Lectures on Prisons” 
would constitute one of the main inspirations— Bentham, of course, 
being another— for Foucault’s idea of disciplinary power. Bentham 
had developed the idea of a perfectly disciplinary space and coined the 
term panopticon, borrowing the idea from his brother, Samuel Ben-
tham, during a visit to Rus sia in 1786–1787. At the time, Samuel was 
charged with the supervision of the ports, factories, and workshops of 
the Potemkin prince, and in that capacity he was trying to implement 
better ways to supervise and control a poorly disciplined British labor 
force.22 In sketching out his refl ections on the panoptic principle in a 
series of letters sent back from White Rus sia in 1787— a principle that 
applied as easily to ports, factories, and workshops as to penitentiaries, 
asylums, hospitals, schools, and barracks— Bentham prefi gured and 
captured the new form of power that circulated throughout society.23 
Foucault also identifi ed the panoptic principle in architectural plans 
for the circular hospital at the Hôtel- Dieu drawn in 1770, with a design 
based on the shape of a star.24 Th e model at the Hôtel- Dieu allowed 
for total surveillance— a “huge radiating hospital” that would make 
possible “a constant and absolute surveillance.”25 Foucault traced 
the origins of “this isolating visibility” to the dormitories of the Mili-
tary Academy of Paris in 1751, noting that “all the major projects for the 
redevelopment of prisons . . .  would take up the same theme [of the 
complete visibility of bodies], but this time under the sign, as it was 
almost always reminded, of Bentham. Th ere  were hardly any texts 
or projects concerning prisons where one did not fi nd that ‘trick’ of 
Bentham’s— namely, the panopticon.”26
Foucault would appropriate the meta phor of the panopticon to cap-
ture the ethos of disciplinary power in nineteenth- century French so-
ciety. It is important to emphasize that the panopticon served as a 
meta phor only and therefore captured some dimensions of disci-
plinary power better than others. In minute detail, Foucault would 
articulate the central traits and techniques of the larger category of 
disciplinary power: a spatial or ga ni za tion that ensures the exact obser-
vation of human subjects, so that “the techniques that make it possible 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  85

86  Clearing the Ground
to see induce eff ects of power”; an architecture that permits the isolation 
and confi nement of the individuals who are watched, the omnipresence 
of the few who watch, and the knowledge of constant surveillance; a 
perfect control over time that allows the maximum extraction of in-
formation and work from those who are under surveillance; a nor-
malizing form of judgment that “compares, diff erentiates, hierarchizes, 
homogenizes, excludes”; and a generalized form of truth production, the 
examination, that constantly evaluates and judges those who are 
being watched, and which ultimately hides the gaze of the watcher, 
so that those watched begin to internalize the discipline them-
selves.27 On this last point, Foucault emphasized, “Th e examination 
transformed the economy of visibility into the exercise of power. Tradition-
ally, power was what was seen, what was shown and what was mani-
fested. . . .  Disciplinary power, on the other hand, is exercised through 
its invisibility. . . .  In discipline, it is the subjects who have to be seen. 
Th eir visibility assures the hold of the power that is exercised over 
them.”28
Foucault had a razor- sharp conception of “disciplinary surveil-
lance”—in distinction, for instance, from an alternative notion of 
“control.” Surveillance had a French pedigree and descended from 
French techniques of internment and confi nement.29 Control, by con-
trast, drew its heritage from En glish procedures of moral control. In 
the British case, the individual was monitored by a group of which he 
formed a part— whether a guild, a religion, or a social group. Th ink 
 here of the Quakers or Puritans, or of any of the numerous leagues, 
federations, or associations that formed around work or even property. 
Th e overseeing in En gland began as a form of self- governance— there 
was no need for a pro cess of internalization because the individual was 
already part of the group that did the monitoring. By contrast, in 
nineteenth- century France, the individual was situated as an outsider 
in relation to the institution that monitored him. Th e French case of 
confi nement, Foucault lectured, “involved an exclusion, either tempo-
rary, in the name of punishment, or a form of exclusion that built on 
another, that sanctioned a marginality that had already been acquired 

(unemployed, vagabonds, beggars).”30 Gradually, even this would change 
as the French approach embraced a more productive model of inclusion 
for purposes of normalization—or what Foucault referred to as “se-
questration,” as in the sequestration of funds, but this time of people.
Th is notion of sequestration refl ected the productive side of the 
punitive practices— and especially the physical, corporeal eff ects of 
discipline. Surveillance, on Foucault’s view, served to render the pris-
oner, the young laborer, or the schoolchild more docile and to fi x him 
to the carceral, factory, or educational system. As Foucault explained 
in his lecture on March 14, 1973, “the couple ‘surveil- punish’ [surveiller- 
punir] establishes itself as the relation of power indispensable to fi xing 
individuals on the production apparatus, indispensable to the consti-
tution of the forces of production, and it characterizes the society that 
we could call disciplinary.”31 Disciplinary mechanisms and their eff ect 
on our bodies  were as central to the advancement of capitalist produc-
tion as the accumulation of capital itself: they made possible the ac-
cumulation of bodies without which the Industrial Revolution would 
not have taken place.32 And they gave birth as well to the penitentiary 
and the modern prison.
Many of the central features of disciplinary power  were refracted 
in the idea of Bentham’s panopticon prison, with its central watch-
tower and circular ring of transparent cells where the prisoners are 
constantly visible— especially to themselves. Th e culmination of dis-
ciplinary power is when the few who watch no longer need to look 
because the masses who are surveilled have internalized the gaze and 
discipline themselves— when the panopticon induces in the inmate, 
in Foucault’s words, “a state of conscious and permanent visibility that 
assures the automatic functioning of power.”33 And so Foucault appro-
priated the meta phor of the panopticon, designating this new form of 
power and knowledge— one that circulates from the individual at the 
center to the many on the periphery, that allows for absolute surveil-
lance, that inverts spectacle into surveillance— “panoptic,” in homage 
to Bentham. In an unpublished draft  of Discipline and Punish, Fou-
cault jotted down his reasoning:
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  87

88  Clearing the Ground
If we characterize as “disciplinary” the apparatuses of spatial 
distribution, of extraction and accumulation of time, of individ-
ualization and subjection of bodies through a game of watching 
and recording, then let’s honor Bentham and call “panoptic” a 
society in which the exercise of power is ensured on the model of 
generalized discipline. And let’s say that, at the turn of the eigh-
teenth and nineteenth centuries, we saw clearly emerge “pan-
optic” societies of which Bentham could be considered, depending 
on your view, the prophet, the witness, the analyst or the 
programmer.34
“Let’s honor Bentham”: Foucault named our disciplinary society 
“panoptic” as a meta phor to capture key features of discipline. “Th e Pan-
opticon,” Foucault emphasized in Discipline and Punish, “must be under-
stood as a generalizable model of functioning; a way of defi ning power 
relations in terms of the everyday life of men.”35 It captured some fea-
tures of discipline extremely well: how the panopticon preserves the 
enclosure of the dungeon but off ers “full lighting” and makes possible 
the trap of visibility; how it produces the internalization of power so 
that “the perfection of power should tend to render its actual exercise 
unnecessary”; and the experimental, laboratory nature of the edi-
fi ce— “a privileged place for experiments on men.”36
“We are much less Greeks than we believe,” Foucault declared. “We 
are neither in the amphitheater, nor on the stage, but in the panoptic 
machine, invested by its eff ects of power, which we bring to ourselves 
since we are part of its mechanism.”37 Foucault’s play on words— “the 
reversal of the spectacle into surveillance”— was undoubtedly a veiled 
reference to Guy Debord, theorist of the “society of the spectacle.”38 
Debord, notably in his 1967 book but also in his earlier Situationist in-
terventions, had placed the form of the “spectacle” at the very center of 
his theorization of our times: “Th e spectacle appears at once as society 
itself, as a part of society and as a means of unifi cation.”39 For Debord, 
like Julius before him, the spectacle was not only an architectural form 
but a means to understand the circulation of power throughout so-
ciety: “Th e spectacle is not a collection of images; rather, it is a social 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
relationship between people that is mediated by images.” 40 Its key 
trait was precisely the dimension of social relationship, of relations of 
power, and its connection to capitalist production. As Debord fa-
mously wrote, “Th e spectacle is ideology par excellence.” 41 (Debord’s 
project was still steeped in Marxism, and his concept of the spectacle—
or rather, his critique of the “society of the spectacle”— was copious: it 
incorporated a critique of modes of production and a call for revolu-
tionary class struggle. In other words, it included more than what we 
might fi rst think of when we imagine “the spectacle.”)
By contrast to Debord, Foucault would underscore that what 
characterizes our modern society—or at least nineteenth- century 
France, insofar as the book Discipline and Punish ends in 1840 with the 
opening of the Mettray Penal Colony, a juvenile reformatory in the 
Loire region— was not the spectacle, but rather its eclipse and reversal 
into surveillance. Or, even more strikingly, the creation of a  whole 
panoptic society, of a “punitive society.”
The contrast between spectacle and surveillance may have 
been drawn too sharply. As W. J. T. Mitchell observes in Th e Spectacle 
Today, the terms can no longer be understood as mutually exclusive. 
Th ey have begun to function, in our contemporary setting, in constant 
tension with each other: it is practically impossible today to conceptu-
alize surveillance in isolation from its spectacular dimensions—if it 
ever was possible. Rather, spectacle and surveillance should be seen, 
as Mitchell explains, as “dialectical forces in the exertion of power and 
re sis tance to power.” 42 Or, as Mitchell suggested in Picture Th eory: Es-
says on Verbal and Visual Repre sen ta tion, spectacle and surveillance are 
two sides of the formation of subjects today: “Spectacle is the ideo-
logical form of pictorial power; surveillance is its bureaucratic, mana-
gerial, and disciplinary forms.” 43
I would go further, however, and suggest that both forms— spectacle 
and surveillance— are overshadowed today by a third: exhibition, or 
exposition, or perhaps more simply exposure. In our digital age, we are 
not so much watching a spectacle or being forced into a cell as we are 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  89
www.Ebook777.com

90  Clearing the Ground
exhibiting ourselves to others. We are not being surveilled today so 
much as we are exposing ourselves knowingly, for many of us with all 
our love, for others anxiously and hesitantly. Th ere are, to be sure, 
spectacular dimensions to this exposition today, even if we are no 
longer in the arena. Although we may not be looking together, at least 
physically, our computer screens, iPads, and smartphones oft en create 
a virtual commons, fi lled with chats and comments, “likes” and shares. 
Th ere is undoubtedly a spectacular dimension when the videos and 
memes go viral. And at times there is also, we know, pure surveillance— 
bugs, hidden cameras, parabolic listening devices. At times we are 
watched by some agent at his console, and many are still incarcerated 
in panoptic prisons, such as at Stateville Prison in Joliet, Illinois.44 But 
for the most part, we modern subjects give up our  information in 
love and passion. We are not forced; we expose ourselves. Rather than a 
surveillance apparatus stealthily and invasively forcing information 
out of us, more oft en than not we exhibit ourselves knowingly to that 
voy eur is tic digital oligarchy— and we put ourselves at its mercy. We 
are confronted less with surveillance than with an oligarchical voyeur 
taking advantage of our exhibitionism. As François Ewald suggests, 
today we should no longer “analyze power relations in the data world 
according to the patterns of the old state power with its technologies 
of surveillance, control and domination.” 45
Ours is not so much a “society of the spectacle,” as Debord thought, 
nor so much a disciplinary or “punitive society,” as Foucault suggested. 
Instead, it seems as if we are living in an expository society. Th is is not 
to minimize in any way the punitive element—so much more clearly 
connoted by the term surveillance. Nor is it to minimize the pervasive 
forms of repression found not just in liberal democracies, in the be-
havior of police and in carceral practices, but also in authoritarian 
countries and territories. Th e state, narrowly defi ned, will of course 
use intimate incriminating information to monitor, surveil, and 
punish. As we will see, the New York Police Department now has its 
own social media unit that tracks the Facebook postings of suspected 
youth gang members.46 Many other law enforcement agencies are col-

lecting phone data— including content— for purposes of data mining 
and surveillance.47 Th e FBI has rolled out new, “fully operational” fa-
cial recognition soft ware, what it calls Next Generation Identifi cation 
(NGI), with a database that “holds more than 100 million individual 
rec ords that link fi ngerprints, iris scans and facial- recognition data 
with personal information, legal status, home addresses, and other 
private details” and which will  house “52 million facial recognition im-
ages by 2015.” 48
But the way that power circulates in advanced capitalist liberal 
democracies— through expository and voy eur is tic forms, rather than 
through surveillance— has to be understood separately from what the 
state, traditionally defi ned, will do with the information. It was, aft er 
all, a couple: discipline and punish. Th e same is true for the couple that 
is constituted by digital exposure and the collection, mining, pro-
fi ling, and targeting of our data— more simply, the couple “expose and 
enmesh,” to which I will return in Chapter 9. Georges Didi- Huberman 
discusses our condition as “exposed peoples” in what he calls the 
“media age.” 49 As a people, he explains, we are both underexposed and 
overexposed— underexposed insofar as we so oft en have diffi  culty 
seeing injustice, overexposed in our spectacular self- presentations in 
reality shows and shared profi les.50 Th is, it seems, captures far better 
our digital age.
In the end, the meta phor of panoptic power is somewhat inexact 
today— for these and other reasons. As Siva Vaidhyanathan argues in 
Th e Googlization of Everything, many of us are not even aware of the 
myriad ways in which we are being tracked.51 “Unlike Bentham’s pris-
oners,” Vaidhyanathan emphasizes, “we don’t know all the ways in 
which we are being watched or profi led.” 52 Our situation resembles 
perhaps more a “cryptopticon,” in his words— refl ecting the Kafk aesque 
dimension of our times. Recall that for Foucault, knowing visibility 
was one of the most important features of panoptic power.53 For the 
panopticon to function, the inmate had to be aware he was being 
watched—he had to always “[know] himself to be observed.” 54 Th at 
too, it seems, is no longer the case. In addition, many of us “don’t seem 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  91

92  Clearing the Ground
to care” about being watched— which is far diff erent from the condi-
tion of those in the panopticon.55 For the panopticon to function, the 
watching gaze must be internalized, not ignored.
But overall, the most striking inversion is that today we expose 
ourselves so freely and passionately and anxiously—at least, so many 
of us in advanced capitalist liberal democracies. It is an expository 
form of power we face at the present time, one in which we use digital 
mediums to tell stories about ourselves and create and reshape our 
identities. One in which we participate fully— willingly or not— 
through all of our ordinary, mundane, daily actions: carry ing a cell 
phone, sending emails and texts, taking the subway. No, we are not 
being forced into this situation, we are not enclosed, it is not just disci-
plinary. But that, perhaps, should not be entirely surprising.
Foucault’s reference to Julius having un souffl  e presque hé-
gélien may have been a clue to things to come. “Only when the dusk 
starts to fall does the owl of Minerva spread its wings and fl y.” 56 Al-
though Foucault coined the conceptual use of the terms “surveillance” 
and “panoptic power” as early as 1973—in the lectures published as 
Th e Punitive Society, in which he described so meticulously that “fi rst 
example of a civilization of surveillance”—by the mid-1970s he him-
self had already moved beyond the model of the panopticon.57 
Within a couple of years— perhaps even by 1976, with his discussion 
of biopower in Th e History of Sexuality: Volume 1— Foucault had al-
ready begun to question whether surveillance could serve as a model 
of power relations in contemporary society.58 Turning his attention 
more intensely to the rise of a neoliberal paradigm, Foucault began to 
articulate a diff erent form—or rather a supplemental form—of power 
relations, namely, sécurité. He would elaborate this model in his lec-
ture series Security, Territory, Population in 1978 and Th e Birth of Bio-
politics in 1979.
Th e securitarian form of power is tied to the arts of maximizing 
and minimizing, to those special competences of neoclassical econo-
mists. Security reaches for equilibrium points for populations as a 

 whole; it is not focused on the event in a spectacular way, nor on the 
individual in a disciplinary manner. In this sense, security diff ers 
markedly from surveillance. Discipline is centripetal: it focuses on every 
instance of minor disorder and seeks to eradicate even the smallest oc-
currence. Security, by contrast, is centrifugal: it is tolerant of minor 
deviations and seeks to optimize, to minimize or maximize, rather 
than to eliminate.59 And both, of course, diff er dramatically from the 
juridical model of sovereignty, the form of law, which distinguishes in 
a binary way between the permissible and the prohibited, and then pe-
nalizes the latter.60
Foucault never provided a clear architectural schematic to visualize 
the notion of security that he associated with the neoliberal era—in 
contrast to the spectacular supplices or spectacles of torture and the 
disciplinary panopticon. Th ere was, to be sure, the tripartite series 
that Foucault presented in his Security, Territory, Population lecture on 
January 11, 1978: the juridical exclusion of lepers in the Middle Ages, 
the gridlike regulation and disciplinary quarantine of entire cities 
during the plague in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and the 
medical campaign of security against smallpox in the eigh teenth cen-
tury.61 Or, even closer to architecture, the other tripartite series that 
Foucault discussed in the same lecture: Alexandre Le Maître’s dis-
course on the metropole in the seventeenth century, the construction 
of artifi cial cities under Louis XIII and XIV, and the redevelopment of 
Nantes at the end of the eigh teenth century.62 All the same, we lack a 
precise schema— akin to the arena for the spectacle or the panopticon 
for surveillance—to properly visualize securitarian power in a neo-
liberal age, a necessary fi rst step toward better understanding its rela-
tionship to the expository society.
I would propose, as the architectural schema that best captures the 
notion of sécurité, the amusement park or the theme park—or even 
better, the themed shopping mall or, more simply, the themed space. 
It is a private commercial space, for profi t, that has been underwritten 
and made possible by state and municipal governments; a mixed 
private- public space—or perhaps, more accurately, a space of private 
profi t and public expenditures— that practices a form of management 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  93

94  Clearing the Ground
and control of large fl ows of populations in order to maximize the 
number of visitors, to optimize consumption, to attract more adver-
tising, and to facilitate spending. Th ese are quintessential spaces that 
seek to optimize the movement of large numbers of people in order to 
fuel their purchases, while at the same time minimizing labor and 
other expenditures. Th is is not just a spectacle, because everything is 
scattered. Th e goal is to distribute, not concentrate, the population, to 
avoid amassing consumers at any one spectacle—so that they spend 
much more at all the various mini- theaters of consumption. Th e goal 
is to optimize and redirect queues, to make them feel shorter than 
they are, to turn them into consuming opportunities, to learn how to 
manage the patience of consumers who want to see, but who are never, 
or almost never, actually in the arena. To be sure, surveillance also oc-
curs, but that is only one small dimension of the endeavor. Yes, there 
are a large number of CCTV cameras. Th e watchful eye is everywhere. 
Th at is, in fact, what renders a place like Disneyland so popular— the 
feeling that everything is monitored, that everything is secure, that 
the children, or rather the parents, have nothing to fear. Th ere is con-
tinuous surveillance, yes, but not in a panoptic form. We do not inter-
nalize the gaze, we are reassured by it.
Some will recall that amusement parks  were the subject of exten-
sive theorizing in the 1980s and 1990s. Th is included the provocative 
writings of Jean Baudrillard on Disneyland— the simulacrum that be-
comes more real than reality itself:
Disneyland exists in order to hide that it is the “real” country, all 
of “real” America that is Disneyland (a bit like prisons are there 
to hide that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal omnipres-
ence, that is carceral). Disneyland is presented as imaginary in 
order to make us believe that the rest is real, whereas all of Los 
Angeles and the America that surrounds it are no longer real, but 
belong to the hyperreal order and to the order of simulation. It is 
no longer a question of a false repre sen ta tion of reality (ideology) 
but of concealing the fact that the real is no longer real, and thus 
of saving the reality principle.63

Recall the equally insightful way Umberto Eco analyzed theme parks 
as “hyperreality,” or Louis Marin saw them as a type of “degenerate 
utopia”—as “ideology changed into the form of a myth.” 64 And, con-
versely, recall the rich theorization of the “new city,” of strip malls, 
shopping malls, and gentrifi ed architecture, of Orange County as the 
exopolis, of all the “variations on a theme park.” 65
Th e project  here, though, is to visualize securitarian power—in 
order to better understand its relation to the expository society— and 
toward that end, rather than rehearse these analyses of simulacra and 
hyperreality, it may be more useful and punctual to explore the line of 
thought developed in George Ritzer’s texts on the “McDonaldization” 
of society— and, by extension, the analysis by Alan Bryman of the 
“McDisneyization” of the social.66 Th e four main elements of Mc-
Donaldization are present, as Bryman suggests, in the world of 
Disneyland— and, I would add, in the neoliberal condition that is tied 
to securitarian logics: fi rst, the eff ective management of large num-
bers of people; second, the control of their movements to increase 
their spending and to police their behaviors; third, the predictability 
of the experience; and fi nally, the computability, the calculability, the 
quantifi cation, the measurability of each queue, each amusement  ride, 
every game.
Amusement parks are, in the words of Steven Miles, “the quintes-
sential physical manifestation of the consumer society,” “the ultimate 
commercial environment,” and “an expression of capitalism in per-
haps its purest form.” 67 Th ey constitute “mini- cities of consumption 
in their own right,” Miles adds.68 Disney has been marketing experi-
ences and memories for profi t for years— with resounding success: 
“In 1998, overall revenues from the Disney theme parks  were $6.1 bil-
lion, and . . .  above 50 per cent of that was from entrance fees.” 69 In 
this sense, they capture well the guiding spirit of the neoliberal 
management of consumption.
Th is is the case today not only with amusement and theme parks, 
but with all the other themed spaces and venues, such as the Hard 
Rock Café or Planet Hollywood—or, on an even larger scale, the en-
tire town of Celebration, Florida, built by Disney right next to its 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  95

96  Clearing the Ground
Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando, so marvelously theorized in 
Keally McBride’s book Collective Dreams.70 Th eming, says Miles, may 
be “the most successful commercial architectural strategy of the twen-
tieth century.”71 It gives full rein to our modern neoliberal consum-
erist desires, imagination, and pleasures— modern precisely in the 
sense of “modern consumerism” or what Colin Campbell describes as 
“the distinctively modern faculty, the ability to create an illusion 
which is known to be false but felt to be true.”72 Walt Disney’s objec-
tive was to create a new kind of space “free from the dirt and danger of 
the carnival world of freaks, barkers, and thrill rides.”73 For many, it 
worked— and still does: “Disney’s transformation was a blessing, sub-
stituting clean, orderly, and family- oriented fun for the grimy disorder 
and working- class and minority crowds of America’s declining urban 
amusement parks and seaside resorts.”74 In this sense, the Disney 
theme parks are the quintessential space of modern consumption— 
more so, even, than a space of leisure.75
Th emed consumption: if you live in the “small town” of Celebra-
tion, Florida, you will be treated during Christmastime to an hourly 
snowfall in the downtown area— courtesy of Disney.76 As McBride 
writes, “Disney Imagineers are off ering us fantasy as real life. We can 
buy it and move in permanently.”77 Th e themed ideals of the commu-
nity now “exist as commodities.”78 And not just kitsch commodities at 
that—it is an elite form of premier, themed consumption. “Th e array 
of architects who helped to plan Celebration is a virtual who’s who of 
contemporary architecture,” McBride notes.79 Philip Johnson de-
signed the town hall, Robert Venturi the town bank, Michael Graves 
the post offi  ce, and Cesar Pelli the movie theater; Robert Stern devel-
oped the master plan.80 It is a star- studded cast, all intended to re- 
create an imaginary Main Street for us to consume and for Disney to 
profi t from— with a model school and teaching academy (again courtesy 
of Disney) that doles out not grades, but instead “narrative assess-
ments.”81 As McBride recounts, the principal of the school boasts, 
“Th is is a place where nobody fails.”82
Th e themed space—or, perhaps, variations on the theme park—as 
architectural repre sen ta tion of neoliberal sécurité: that would be an 

idea to pursue.83 Perhaps we could go even further, to the themed 
space of consumption par excellence: today’s oversized shopping 
malls, in urban towers and in the suburbs— the Water Tower in Chicago, 
the Shops at Columbus Circle in Manhattan, or the Mall of America 
outside the Twin Cities.84 In these gigantic spaces, the theme itself has 
become consumption— consumption as the amusement, shopping as 
the entertainment. Th ese are distilled spaces of consumption. Some of 
these malls, in fact, have physically absorbed the amusement park. Th e 
Mall of America, for instance, the most- visited mall in the world, has 
its own amusement park inside its walls. Less monstrous than the pan-
opticon as an image of the punitive society, but just as frightening, and 
focused exclusively on consumption.
How then does securitarian power in our neoliberal age 
relate to the expository society? Is it just a question of refreshing the 
architectural schemata of the themed space and digitizing it? Is it just 
a question of adding the digital technology? Of turning on Wi- Fi? 
Daily Show host Jon Stewart confessed recently, when asked about 
BuzzFeed and Vice: “I scroll around, but when I look at the internet, I 
feel the same as when I’m walking through Coney Island.”85 Is digital 
exposure something like Coney Island or the Mall of America with 
connectivity? Is it the wired space of secure consumption?
It may be tempting to answer in the affi  rmative, and previously I 
had developed a notion of “digital security” along these lines.86 But 
that no longer seems entirely correct. Our expository society is more 
than just neoliberal security gone digital, because the central mecha-
nisms of optimization and equilibrium tied to sécurité do not charac-
terize digital exposure. Although the expository society is undoubt-
edly fueled by neoliberalism, power circulates diff erently there than 
through a securitarian apparatus. Something  else is taking place. To 
understand this, it is crucial to sever the link that ties neoliberalism 
to the form of power that Foucault identifi ed as sécurité. It is important 
to pull those two strands— neoliberal logics on the one hand, and secu-
ritarian power on the other— apart.
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  97

98  Clearing the Ground
To put it simply, our digital age is surely neoliberal, but not exactly 
securitarian.
Neoliberalism has unquestionably shaped our current condition. 
Th e NSA’s ability to see through us is the product of outsourcing the 
collection of information to social media companies, to retailers, to 
advertisers— and to ourselves. We, each one of us, are doing the work of 
exposing ourselves and sharing our personal information. Th e secu-
rity industry has eff ectively delegated the work to us, and at a pittance: 
the PRISM program only costs $20 million per year, which is absolutely 
nothing for such a massive surveillance program. Th e job of collecting 
data is being done by private enterprise and individual users. Plus, the 
growth of the surveillance- industrial empire is itself an artifact of 
privatization and outside consultancy. As Edward Snowden reminded 
us so powerfully when he introduced himself from Hong Kong, “I 
work for Booz Allen Hamilton as an infrastructure analyst for NSA in 
Hawaii.”87 James Bamford and Glenn Greenwald document the NSA- 
corporate relationship in intricate detail and underscore that today, 
more than two- thirds of intelligence dollars are going to the private 
sector.88 Th e public- private collaboration in the surveillance industry 
refl ects all the classic features of neoliberalism.
Now, neoliberalism must be understood not just in practical terms— 
namely, in terms of the typical policies of privatization and out-
sourcing— but also along theoretical lines. At the broader theoretical 
level, neoliberalism represents an attempt to displace politics with a 
notion of economic orderliness and naturalness—to neutralize the 
po liti cal clash over irreconcilable normative visions of family, society, 
and nation by privileging the orderliness of the economic realm. Th is 
notion of orderliness corresponds to the idea of the ordered market as 
the model of social interaction— a model of purportedly “voluntary 
and compensated exchange” that “benefi ts all parties.” Early liberal 
economists in the eigh teenth century set the stage for neoliberalism 
by introducing the notion of natural order into the sphere of trade, com-
merce, and agriculture—by inserting the divine notion of orderliness 
into the economic realm. Building on this original impetus, twentieth- 
century neoliberals, beginning in the late 1930s and in reaction to the 

rise of fascism and communism, performed two key theoretical moves 
that ultimately gave birth to the kind of state interventions (such as 
“deregulation,” privatization, and workfare) that have come to be known 
as post-1970 neoliberalism. Th e fi rst critical move was to update and 
render more technical the notion of natural orderliness (for example, 
with more technical economic theories that gave rise to concepts such 
as Pareto optimal outcomes and Kaldor- Hicks effi  ciency); the second 
was to extend the earlier liberal notion of orderliness from economics 
to every other domain— the social, the familial, the po liti cal. In other 
words, to extend the model of natural order beyond economic ex-
change to crime, divorce, punishment, illicit drugs, adoption, and now 
social interaction and social media. Th ese two moves demarcate the 
essence of neoliberalism from its earlier liberal kin in the eigh teenth 
century.89
Th ese two moves are refracted throughout our digital lives today, 
and in this sense the digital age is certainly neoliberal at a theoretical 
level as well. Facebook is a good illustration. As Phillip Mirowski sug-
gests, Facebook is “neoliberal technology par excellence”: a “wildly suc-
cessful business that teaches its participants how to turn themselves 
into a fl exible entrepreneurial identity.”90 Facebook assumes and pro-
motes the idea of the entrepreneurial self, so closely tied to Chicago 
School theories of human capital.91 It is also accompanied by many of 
the techniques of neoliberal governmentality. It projects a type of 
market rationality on social interaction. It simultaneously hides the 
profi t motive associated with all the advertising, and highlights the 
open- market features of sociability. As Mirowski describes, “Even 
though Facebook sells much of the information posted to it, it stri-
dently maintains that all responsibility for fallout from the Facebook 
wall devolves entirely to the user. It forces the participant to construct 
a ‘profi le’ from a limited repertoire of relatively ste reo typed materials, 
challenging the person to somehow attract ‘friends’ by tweaking their 
off erings to stand out from the vast run of the mill.”92 Facebook models 
our social interactions on a market with menus of options.
Th ere is also, naturally, an important confessional dimension to 
Facebook— one that I will return to in Part II. Many of us use Facebook 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  99

100  Clearing the Ground
to avow our foibles and secrets, to share things about ourselves that 
make us more vulnerable or human. For some of us, there is an auto-
maticity to social media—to Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram, espe-
cially among the younger generations— that harks back to older forms 
of confessional logics. Th ere are elements of truth- telling, of saying 
truth about oneself, that resemble far earlier forms of avowal, of ex-
amination of the self, of penitence even.93 But even these moments of 
confession are diffi  cult to dissociate from the instrumental and entre-
preneurial pre sen ta tions of the self that fl ood Facebook. A “friend” 
tells us all about her children and family life, only to slip in that she is 
anxious about being away while she heads to the Sundance Festival for 
a screening of her fi lm. Th e avowals turn into self- promotion— again, 
nothing entirely new, since this too occurred before, but it is a stark 
reminder of the entrepreneurial possibilities of social media. In short, 
our expository society is suff used with an entrepreneurial logic and 
fueled by the consumer spending, advertising, and maximization of 
profi t that are key features of neoliberalism. Th e digital technology, it 
seems, goes hand in hand with a new “invested self”—it both facili-
tates and at the same time is the product of our neoliberal age.
But although our digital lives may well be traversed by neoliberal 
logics and practices, we are far from the form of securitarian power 
today that Foucault envisaged in the late 1970s. Th e transparence that 
Facebook, Google, and the NSA seek is complete: total awareness. Th e 
idea is not merely to optimize awareness given cost functions, but to 
achieve total awareness. To know every single device that is hooked to 
the Internet. We are beyond a model of equilibrium or cost- benefi t. 
And the reason, very simply—as we will see in Part II—is that the 
data are a raw resource that is being given away for free despite the fact 
that it is worth its weight in gold. As a result, there is practically no cost 
barrier: on the contrary, it is free revenue, nothing but positive 
gain— which is what makes it so cheap for the PRISM program to run. 
Th e information, in eff ect, is worth billions of dollars, and it is being 
doled out gratis by individuals every minute of every hour of every day 
across the globe.

You may recall the Total Information Awareness (TIA) program 
that Adm. John Poindexter tried to pioneer in the wake of 9/11. Th e 
TIA program had originally been introduced as part of the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), a lab at the Pentagon, 
but it was shelved in 1999, in part because of the taint that followed 
Poindexter. (Poindexter had been the highest- ranking offi  cial in the 
Reagan administration found guilty during the Iran- contra aff air.) 
Nevertheless, aft er 9/11 Poindexter got the TIA refunded to the tune 
of $200 million, with the intent to outsource much of the research to 
Booz Allen and public and private universities, such as Berkeley and 
Cornell.94 Th e program was exposed in the fall of 2002 and the funding 
was scrapped— but the idea, the notion of “total information aware-
ness,” captures perfectly the ambition of digital exposure and the dif-
ference with securitarian logics.
Th e fi nancial equation in our digital age is completely distinct from 
that of a security apparatus: there is no need to maximize the benefi t to 
national security while minimizing costs. Th e digital surveillance ap-
paratus can take a totalizing approach— for small sums of intelligence 
dollars. Plus, the information is suffi  ciently granular that there is no 
need to remain at the level of a population. It—or shall I say we— can 
go aft er individuals and target them uniquely. We can obtain total in-
formation and zero in on one person at a time, one person only. We 
can stalk each and every one.
•  •  •
Google launched Gmail in 2004. What made it so attractive to con-
sumers was that Google promised Gmail users a large amount of free 
space for emails: 1 gigabyte of free storage for each user account.95 In 
2004, that was a huge amount of free storage. Even before the platform 
went online, many of us  were clamoring— and some, in fact,  were 
paying—to get priority access to Gmail. In exchange for the free ser-
vice and all the storage space, Gmail users agreed, eff ectively, to give 
Google access to all of their emails and attachments as well as access 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  101

102  Clearing the Ground
to the incoming emails of any nonsubscriber communicating with a 
Gmail user.
Google automatically scanned all the email traffi  c and contents in 
order to provide targeted advertising— with which we are now fa-
miliar because of the telltale ad recommendations that pop up at the 
top, bottom, and sides of our screens. We’ve become accustomed 
to that; it’s even sometimes amusing, as similar hotels in the same 
 location or goods that we purchase remind us of the searches we have 
been conducting over the past few days.
But it turns out that Google’s commercial surveillance goes far be-
yond that. As an investigative reporter, Yasha Levine, discovered:
Google was not simply scanning people’s emails for advertising 
keywords, but had developed underlying technology to compile 
sophisticated dossiers of everyone who came through its email 
system. All communication was subject to deep linguistic anal-
ysis; conversations  were parsed for keywords, meaning and even 
tone; individuals  were matched to real identities using contact 
information stored in a user’s Gmail address book; attached 
documents  were scraped for intel— that info was then cross- 
referenced with previous email interactions and combined with 
stuff  gleamed from other Google ser vices, as well as third- party 
sources.96
Based on a close analysis of two patents that Google fi led prior to 
launching its Gmail ser vice, we now know that the company uses a 
wide range of technologies to construct complex digital profi les of 
its users—to build our digital selves. Th ese technologies include ana-
lyzing the concepts and topics discussed in users’ emails, as well as in 
their email attachments; analyzing the content of the websites that 
users have visited; tracking demographic information about users, in-
cluding their income, sex, race, and marital status, and linking this to 
their geographic information; inferring their psychological and “psy-
chographic” information, such as their personality type, values, life-
style interests, and attitudes; dissecting the previous Internet searches 

that users have made; collecting information about any documents 
that the user has viewed and edited; analyzing their Internet browsing 
activity; and studying their previous purchases.97
Th e goal is to produce profi les of each user so as to better target ad-
vertising and facilitate consumption—or, in the lingo, to make the on-
line experience “more enjoyable,” to “help people get what they want.” 
Th is capability has been enhanced with the other products that Google 
has introduced: Google Calendar, Google Docs, Google Drive, 
Google Groups, Google Hangouts, Blogger, Orkut, Google Voice, and 
Google Checkout.98 And now Google Inbox— which is going to re-
place Gmail.99 As Levine suggests, “Google isn’t a traditional Internet 
ser vice company. It isn’t even an advertising company. Google is a 
 whole new type of beast: a global advertising- intelligence company 
that tries to funnel as much user activity in the real and online world 
through its ser vices in order to track, analyze and profi le us: it tracks 
as much of our daily lives as possible— who we are, what we do, what 
we like, where we go, who we talk to, what we think about, what  we’re 
interested in— all those things are seized, packaged, commodifi ed 
and sold on the market.”100 And it does all this to better recommend 
products to us— products that Google knows we will like, even though 
we do not yet know it.
The knowledge that digital surveillance is seeking is far 
richer and individualized than the stuff  of biopower. It is not merely 
about “the right to foster life, or disallow it to the point of death,” as in 
biopower; nor, for that matter, is it “the right to take life or to let live,” 
as in sovereign power (although there is some of that, of course, as 
evidenced by the drone strikes, including lethal strikes on American 
citizens).101 It is not primarily about life and death, nor bare life. It is 
about every little desire, every preference, every want, and all the 
complexity of the self, social relations, po liti cal beliefs and ambitions, 
psychological well- being. It extends into every crevice and every di-
mension of everyday living of every single one of us in our individu-
ality. It accompanies us to every website and YouTube video we surf in 
Jeremy Bentham’s Panopticon  103

104  Clearing the Ground
the darkness of the late hours. It rec ords our slightest emotional reac-
tion, the most minor arrhythmia of our heartbeat. We are today be-
yond the model of security, in a type of digital transparence and total 
costless awareness, that thrives on individualities, diff erentiation, and 
effi  ciency— and that shapes us into our digital selves.

P A R T  T W O
Th e Birth of the Expository Society


If one had to identify a single architectural structure to best 
capture our expository society in the digital age, it would not be a 
panopticon, nor the Mall of America or another themed space of con-
sumption, but instead a mirrored glass pavilion. Part crystal palace, 
part high- tech construction, partly aesthetic and partly effi  cient, these 
glass and steel constructs allow us to see ourselves and others through 
mirrored surfaces and virtual refl ections. Th ey are spaces in which 
we play and explore, take selfi es and photograph others. At times they 
resemble a fun  house; at other moments they make us anxious. Th ey 
intrigue and amuse us. Th ey haunt us. And they hide pockets of 
obscurity.
Th e mirrored glass structures of the artist Dan Graham are an 
excellent illustration. Made of refl ective glass and steel beams, open- 
topped, these sculptures invite us in and capture our imagination. 
Graham’s “Hedge Two- Way Mirror Walkabout,” the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art’s 2014 Roof Garden Commission, is precisely a space 
of seeing, mirroring, virtual transparence, and opacity.1 It is a glass- 
mirrored space that refl ects the surrounding buildings and the people 
walking around the garden terrace. Th e associate curator at the Met, 
F O U R
our mirrored glass pavilion

108  The Birth of the Expository Society
figures 4.1A and B Dan Graham’s “Hedge Two- Way Mirror Walkabout” (2014)
Source: Photographs copyright © Tod Seelie, reproduced by permission.

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  109
Ian Alteveer, calls the “Mirror Walkabout” “not quite sculpture, not 
quite architecture,” but rather a “plea sure palace for play or leisure.”2 It 
thrives on the same pleasures as our digital exposure, as people gaze 
and make faces, bend and stare to see how the mirrored glass refl ects 
their image and those of others. One is not quite sure, looking through 
the glass, whether one is inside or outside, whether we are watching or 
being watched. As Dan Graham explains: “Th e experience, as you walk 
around it, is designed as a fun  house, and you get changing concave- 
convex mirroring situations.”3 It functions by means of participation 
and produces, through the transparencies, refl ections, and mirroring, 
a new virtual space. Notice in Figure 4.1.A how we can see both sides of 
the glass: the refl ections of those walking by, the many people taking 
photos and selfi es, but also the man with a hat on the other side of the 
glass. Notice how the buildings are there too, perhaps a bit skinnier 
than they usually stand; many of the fi gures are elongated, some su-
perimposed, looking in diff erent directions, always paying attention 
to their refl ection in the glass.
Karen Rosenberg of the New York Times describes the “Mirror Walk-
about” almost as if she  were speaking about our digital exposure:
Th e pavilion consists of an S- shaped curve of specially treated 
glass, bookended by two parallel ivy hedgerows. Th e glass, which 
divides the structure into two equal compartments, is slightly 
refl ective; viewers moving around it will see faint but visibly dis-
torted mirror images (and will inevitably try to capture them on 
their cellphone screens). Th ey will also experience a kind of false 
mirroring, observing people on the opposite side of the glass. As 
in Mr. Graham’s earlier pavilions and installations, looking goes 
hand in hand with being looked at.4
Dan Graham’s glass pavilion somehow epitomizes the virtual trans-
parency and exhibition of our digital lives.5 It is a space in which we 
play and make ourselves at home, where we can try to orchestrate our 
identities, digital selves, and traces, where we create a space for our 
plea sure, entertainment, and productivity, while we render ourselves 

110  The Birth of the Expository Society
exposed to the gaze of others and, of course, our own. We embrace 
digital exposure with a wild cacophony of emotions, ranging from fe-
tishism and exhibitionism for some to discomfort, hesitation, and 
phobia for others— and including along the way curiosity, experimen-
tation, play, lust, some distance, re sis tance, uncertainty, and even dis-
gust or loathing. Regardless of our emotions and desires, though, we 
can be seen. We are exposed.
Tony Bennett described the original Crystal Palace in London as 
emblematic of what he referred to as the “exhibitionary complex,” the 
set of institutions such as museums, dioramas and panoramas, great 
exhibitions, and world fairs that served to make bodies and objects 
public—in contrast to the set of institutions of confi nement.6 Th ese 
institutions and their associated disciplines, Bennett wrote, are ori-
ented toward the “show and tell.”7 Th e exhibitionary complex, he main-
tained, “reversed the orientation of the disciplinary apparatuses” by 
making it possible for the people “to know rather than be known, to 
become the subjects rather than the objects of knowledge.”8 It is al-
most as if today each and every one of us has become our own cabinet 
of curiosity and, in the pro cess, built our own crystal palaces to play in 
and to be watched—to show and tell.
For many of us, there is a certain exhibitionist plea sure as we look at 
ourselves in the mirrored refl ections in the glass in an increasingly 
narcissistic way brought upon us by the digital plea sure, the addic-
tion and stimulation— and the distraction of these desire machines: 
our iPhone and Kindle, quad- core devices and tablets. We constantly 
check how many times our Instagram has been “liked,” our Snapchat 
viewed. How many times our blog posts have been shared or reposted 
on Facebook. How many times our tweet has been retweeted. Th e 
craving for stimulated distraction— a kind of self- centered distraction 
that reminds us that we are living, present, seen, clicked on, liked— 
makes us increasingly focus on our own digital traces, our new digital 
self. We take selfi es—in fact, we publish entire books of selfi es.9 We 
look through the glass at others; we look at our refl ection in the mirror. 
We want to see our refl ection as we exhibit and expose ourselves to 
others.

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  111
For many of us, we lose track of time in the digital space, as the ex-
perience becomes addictively pleas ur able. We are so engrossed, we do 
not even feel the craving; we just slide from one digital platform to 
another—or stay glued to the screen playing a video game into the 
early morning hours. It feels almost as if the digital experience taps 
into a plea sure node in our brains, or that we are experiencing the high 
of Huxley’s magical hallucinogen soma. It is almost as if we are lab 
subjects of neuropsychological research and a lab technician is stimu-
lating our hypothalamus— triggering the kind of “seeking” or “wanting” 
behavior that sends us into an altered state and evaporates time and 
space.10
We feed our machines all the time, hoping for good news, for an in-
vitation, for a like or share, constantly hoping for something pleasant. 
We peek, check email, scroll through Facebook, surf the web— and 
such behavior feeds on itself. Th e connectivity draws us in even deeper. 
Upload a snapshot, and you will want to see who liked it. Post a com-
ment, and you will want to know if people are reading it, tweeting 
it, sharing it. Th ere is an addictive aspect to all this. Th e screen is ad-
dictive. It is mesmerizing—at least, for many digital subjects today.
For many others, this new digital existence is disconcerting and un-
settling, but practically unavoidable. Even when we resist, there are 
few other ways to publicize an event, to coordinate a meeting, to com-
municate overseas. Today there is practically no way to talk to a loved 
one in another city without going through VoIP— that is, voice over 
Internet protocol technologies. Th ere is no way to see a distant friend 
without Skype or Yahoo Messenger. And even when we resist and se-
cure our devices, our emails and communications to others are ex-
posed at the other end of the conversation. We can be seen and watched 
and monitored, as if we  were in a glass  house. Much of the time, we do 
not even realize it.
•  •  •
Th e British intelligence initiative was code- named Optic Nerve.11 It is 
not known whether the Government Communications Headquarters 

112  The Birth of the Expository Society
(GCHQ), the British signals intelligence agency, is still conducting 
the program today, although there is evidence it was doing so in 2012. 
What is certain is that during a period of six months in 2008, the British 
signals intelligence division surreptitiously intercepted screenshots of 
the webcam video communications of about 1.8 million Internet users 
using video chat platforms like those provided by Yahoo Messenger.12
Unlike some other programs that only capture metadata, Optic 
Nerve was able to view the video communications— the actual video 
images streaming in the chat. Apparently it “automatically downloaded 
the content of video communications— taking a screenshot from the 
video feed every fi ve minutes.”13 According to a secret report revealed 
by Edward Snowden, British intelligence aspired to capture more 
images at a faster clip and hoped to get the full webcam videos at some 
point, at least for surveillance targets, with the intent to “identify targets 
using automatic facial recognition soft ware as they stared into their 
computer’s webcams.”14 (GCHQ was assisted in these eff orts by the 
NSA: “Webcam information was fed into NSA’s XKeyscore search 
tool, and NSA research was used to build the tool which identifi ed Ya-
hoo’s webcam traffi  c.”15)
Apparently the operation netted a trove of X- rated images. An intel-
ligence document regarding the program noted, “It would appear that 
a surprising number of people use webcam conversations to show inti-
mate parts of their body to the other person.” According to one informal 
analysis, somewhere around 7 to 11 percent of the recorded images 
contained “undesirable nudity.”16 As the Associated Press reported, 
“Th e collection of nude photographs also raises questions about po-
tential for blackmail. America’s National Security Agency has already 
acknowledged that some analysts have been caught trawling data-
bases for inappropriate material on partners or love interests. Other 
leaked documents have revealed how U.S. and British intelligence dis-
cussed leaking embarrassing material online to blacken the reputa-
tions of their targets.”17
As reported by Reuters, Optic Nerve “was intended to test auto-
mated facial recognition, monitor GCHQ’s targets and uncover new 
ones.”18 Th e images  were used “to aid selection of useful images for 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  113
‘mugshots’ or even for face recognition by assessing the angle of the 
face,” notes the Guardian, quoting the leaked document.19 Facial rec-
ognition technology is used to identify users and connect them to their 
Internet activity. Explaining how the program functions, the paper re-
ports that the bulk data obtained by “GCHQ’s huge network of in-
ternet cable taps” was then “pro cessed and fed into systems provided 
by the NSA” through its “XKeyscore search tool.”20
Webcam surveillance of this type is permitted in the United 
Kingdom under the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA), a 
piece of British legislation that was passed in 2000 “with this kind of 
surveillance in mind,” the Guardian reports.21 Optic Nerve makes use 
of an “external warrant” provided under what is called Section 8 of 
RIPA.22 As the Guardian details:
In most Ripa cases, a minister has to be told the name of an indi-
vidual or fi rm being targeted before a warrant is granted. But 
section 8 permits GCHQ to perform more sweeping and indis-
criminate trawls of external data if a minister issues a “certifi cate” 
along with the warrant. It allows ministers to sanction the col-
lection, storage and analysis of vast amounts of material, using 
technologies that barely existed when Ripa was introduced.23
Furthermore, while “additional legal authorisations are required 
before analysts can search for the data of individuals likely to be in the 
British Isles at the time of the search,” no such laws prevent GCHQ 
from doing so to individuals from the other “Five Eyes” partners: the 
United States, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.24 As Amy Da-
vidson notes, “Th ere may be times when the N.S.A. considers it easier 
to have foreigners spy on Americans and then get the information that 
is collected, however private it may be.”25 Th e “Five Eyes” partnership, 
it seems, largely involves “trading loopholes rather than actionable in-
telligence: you  can’t do this but I can, so let’s each do the other’s for-
bidden thing and then talk about it.”26
Th ese latest revelations sparked serious privacy concerns, in part 
because of the nudity issues.27 Th ree U.S. senators— Ron Wyden, Mark 

114  The Birth of the Expository Society
Udall, and Martin Heinrich, all members of the Senate Intelligence 
Committee— are investigating the role of the NSA in the GCHQ ac-
tivities. In addition, on February 28, 2014, “the Internet Association— a 
trade body representing internet giants including Google, Amazon, 
eBay, Netfl ix, AOL and Twitter—  . . .  [issued] a statement expressing 
alarm at the latest GCHQ revelations, and calling for reform.”28 Yahoo, 
for its part, denied awareness of the program. Company spokeswoman 
Suzanne Philion told Reuters, “We  were not aware of nor would we 
condone this reported activity. Th is [Guardian] report, if true, repre-
sents a  whole new level of violation of our users’ privacy that is com-
pletely unacceptable.”29 GCHQ sought to defend the program in ways 
similar to early defenses of NSA surveillance. Th e Guardian reported 
that “Sir Iain Lobban, the [former] director of GCHQ . . .  likened the 
gathering of intelligence to building a haystack and said he was ‘very 
well aware that within that haystack there is going to be plenty of in-
nocent communications from innocent people.’ ”30
Other documents leaked by Edward Snowden reveal that the NSA 
has been investigating the possibility of intercepting video game con-
sole video communication. “Th e NSA  were exploring the video capa-
bilities of game consoles for surveillance purposes,” the Guardian 
reported. “Microsoft , the maker of Xbox, faced a privacy backlash last 
year when details emerged that the camera bundled with its new con-
sole, the Xbox One, would be always-on by default.”31
What we are facing today is not so much a “haystack” as a glass 
pavilion. A space where we expose ourselves to virtually everyone, at 
every moment, and simultaneously watch others. A space where, at 
any moment, we can gaze at others, check their Tumblr or Google 
Scholar page, look up their Facebook friends, check with whom they 
are LinkedIn, observe, monitor, even stalk the other. A space where 
we take plea sure in watching them, “following” them, “sharing” their 
information— even while we are, unwittingly, sharing our every key-
board stroke. A space where we exhibit ourselves and become the 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  115
voyeur to others, side by side with the social media and retailers who 
follow us, and the intelligence agencies and security fi rms too.
Th is new form of digital exposure is not a radical rupture. Th ere is 
an element of the spectacle, naturally. Kim Kardashian’s selfi es are in-
tended to be spectacular— and intended to go viral. And such strate-
gies oft en succeed. Vice President Joe Biden’s selfi e with President 
Obama, which Biden posted on his Instagram account, almost imme-
diately got more than 60,000 “likes”: a virtual public that would fi ll a 
football stadium.32 When we expose ourselves, we step into the arena, 
virtually, or at least we oft en hope to—we want to be as visible in our 
glass pavilion as we are in the amphitheater.
Sovereign power has not been left  behind, either. Th e use of meta-
data to locate and assassinate targets in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia 
and to guide drone missiles amply demonstrates how classic forms of 
the juridical exercise of power can be brought into the digital age. Sim-
ilarly, the monitoring of Facebook and Twitter feeds of suspected gang 
members by the new social media units of large metropolitan police 
forces, and the resulting arrests, convictions, and punishments, illus-
trate well how classic forms of juridical enforcement can be updated 
with big data. In liberal democracies— not to mention in police and 
military regimes— earlier forms of sovereign power continue to in-
fuse the digital age. Recall General Hayden’s words once more: “We 
kill people based on metadata.”33
Th ere is also, obviously, a large dose of surveillance. We are watched 
and monitored through the glass by practically everyone, from the 
NSA to our nosy neighbor with a packet sniff er. Practically everyone is 
trying to monitor and record our tweets and texts and posts, the apps 
we download, our Internet surfi ng, how we spend, what we read, with 
whom we speak—in short, all our activities are captured and analyzed 
to better target us, to better punish us when appropriate. Bentham’s 
ambition is not entirely distinct from the present digital condition: 
both share the ambition of “total awareness.” But the symmetries and 
asymmetries are diff erent. Foucault reminds us that “Bentham in his fi rst 
version of the Panopticon had also imagined an acoustic surveillance, 

116  The Birth of the Expository Society
through pipes leading from the cells to the central tower.”34 Bentham 
apparently dropped the idea because the acoustic surveillance was not 
asymmetrical and allowed those watched to listen into the central 
tower as well.35 (Julius, with his Hegelian souffl  e, continued to pursue 
the project and “tried to develop an asymmetric listening system.”)36 
Today, there is no longer as much concern or fear of symmetry. Today 
we are far more comfortable exposing ourselves and watching others 
(even though asymmetries survive, as evidenced by Optic Nerve).
And there is also an element of securitarian power today, especially 
when we consider the massive mining of the metadata of entire popu-
lations; but  here too, things are somewhat diff erent. Th e cost equation, 
in par tic u lar. We have entered an age of costless publicity and dirt- cheap 
surveillance. It costs practically nothing now to disseminate vast 
quantities of our private information; the only cost, in eff ect, is the 
loss of secrecy. Not only is it practically costless, but the information 
itself is so highly valuable that it has become one of the leading pri-
mary resources in contemporary Western society. Yet we practically 
give it away for free. More oft en than not, we do it unthinkingly, we 
have no choice, we don’t even know or realize we are giving it away. 
We have become our own administrators and publicists, routinely dis-
seminating our private information. We spend our time sharing our 
vitals, inputting our personal data online, downloading or printing or 
emailing our fi nancial information, becoming our own travel agents 
and bank clerks. We enter our private information on websites like 
Orbitz and Travelocity, we share our calendars with Hotwire and 
Hotels . com, we give away our identifying data to online stores like 
Zappos and Amazon, we input our social security number on IRS . gov 
. us. Th e digital age has birthed a  whole new form of value, in which the 
clients and customers themselves participate in the work pro cess and 
contribute to the bottom line while simultaneously producing their 
own surveillance— a kind of surplus surplus- value unimaginable in 
earlier times.37
No, ours is not a radical departure. Th ere are elements of spectacle, 
surveillance, and sécurité. But to these we must add the element of ex-
hibition, of exposition, of exposure. To make visible, to be seen, to be 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  117
fi lmed—to post something on Facebook that will hopefully go viral, 
to tweet something that might get favorited— surely this was not an 
integral element for the inmate in the panoptic cell. Nor was the fact 
that we also watch, look, observe, examine, contemplate those who are 
willing to expose themselves. We are fi ne today with exposing our-
selves and watching others. In fact, we make it our business to share 
data about others. Dating apps aggregate our observations about inti-
mate relations to create and share ratings of potential dates. One 
dating app, Lulu, “lets female reviewers anonymously select hashtags 
that describe male associates, from #DudeCanCook to #SexualPan-
ther, which it then translates (via secret algorithm) into numerical 
ratings.”38 We love watching others and stalking their digital traces. 
“People love spying on one another,” Eben Moglen reminds us. “And 
Facebook allows them to spy on their friends in return for giving every-
thing up to the boy with the peephole in the middle.”39 Th en we all 
meet again in front of the screen, spectators of the surveillance and the 
exhibition, viewers monitoring our per for mances and expositions, 
watching and watched by means of our texts, our mobile apps, our 
photos, our posts.
Th e reciprocity is diff erent from that of the panopticon, the cost 
equations are diff erent from those of the securitarian apparatus. We 
live in a peculiar glass pavilion. What we need, in the end, is to better 
understand the power of virtual transparence, to better grasp the ex-
posure in digital power, to begin to see how our own glass  house is 
built. Neither spectacle nor surveillance nor sécurité is fi tted entirely 
properly to the present. Ours is an expository society.40
The age of spectacle provided evidence of the high cost of pub-
licity in ancient Greece and Rome. To render something public was 
expensive, and so the ancients would gather together, amass them-
selves to watch, to share, to partake in a public act of entertainment. 
Th ere was no replay button, nor  were there any video feeds and no 
mechanical arts of reproduction. Th e modern era of surveillance, on 
the other hand, gave proof of the cost of security. To render secure was 

118  The Birth of the Expository Society
expensive, and so the moderns discovered ways to surveil more effi  -
ciently, to see everyone from a single gaze, to turn the arena inside out, 
to imagine the panopticon. In the digital age today, publicity has 
become virtually costless and surveillance practically free of charge. A 
new form of digital power circulates through society. Here, then, are 
some of its central features.
1. Virtual transparence. Th ere is a new kind of transparence, neither 
literal nor entirely phenomenal, that characterizes our digital age: vir-
tual transparence. It is not predominantly literal in the sense that we 
are not facing a perfectly clear or see- through glass surface or a trans-
lucent object.41 We are not faced with transparency as “a physical fact.” 42 
Th e digital medium distorts the pre sen ta tion of ourselves and of others, 
allowing us to emphasize certain traits or desires, to see some things 
better than others. We can create new profi les and change them, ex-
periment, twist them, disfi gure them to a certain degree. Not entirely, 
of course, because all of our clicks and keystrokes are collected, meaning 
that all our habits and impulses, even the least thought through, form 
part of our digital selves. But there is suffi  cient room for distortion to 
believe that we are not seeing through the self.
In this sense, Philip Johnson’s glass  house is almost too modern 
a  symbol for our postmodern times—as is Mies van der Rohe’s 
Farnsworth House, the “Miesian glass box.” 43 Th ough an intriguing 
metaphor— useful in many ways, as we will see, more ways than we 
might fi rst imagine— Johnson’s glass  house is almost too literally trans-
parent. Completed in 1949, it reveals more the modern ambition of 
genuine transparence rather than our current digital condition, where 
we are able to see more refl ections and overlapping spaces, behind as 
well as in front of us, but where these fi gures are more oft en distorted, 
elongated, somewhat manipulated. “Modernity has been haunted,” 
Anthony Vidler writes, “by a myth of transparency: transparency of 
the self to nature, of the self to the other, of all selves to society, and all 
this represented, if not constructed, from Jeremy Bentham to Le Cor-
busier, by a universal transparency of building materials, spatial pene-
tration, and the ubiquitous fl ow of air, light, and physical movement.” 44 
But the modern ideal is “notoriously diffi  cult to attain” and “quickly 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  119
turns into obscurity (its apparent opposite) and refl ectivity (its re-
versal).” 45 Th is is surely the case today.
Our virtual transparence is somewhat more phenomenal, insofar as 
it refl ects an or ga ni za tion, design, or structure that is intended to com-
municate the notion of a transparent space.46 It produces a perceptual 
eff ect from the superposition of overlapping planes. But it also does 
more than that.47 In part, as we will see, it incorporates phenomenal 
opacity, a term that Vidler proposes.48 Or what Laura Kurgan calls 
“the opacity of transparency.” 49 For now, though, it playfully engages 
with distortions in order to seduce us to look, to take selfi es, to expose 
ourselves— these are the mirroring eff ects of the fun  house that draw 
us all in. We experiment with new engineered glass products that 
create certain odd refl ections, new materials that aff ect what we see 
and how. We add colors, we insert new technology within the sheets 
of glass, we double and curve the mirror.
Th e public sculpture by the artist Sarah Braman at the northern tip 
of Dante Park on Broadway and 64th Street in New York City does 
just that.50 Titled “Another Time Machine, 2014,” it is a multicolored 
glass cube that stands eight feet tall.51 Despite the fact that it is an en-
closed cube that one cannot enter, the quality of the glass makes it feel 
as if one is inside the structure when one looks at it. Th rough the com-
bination of colors, transparence, and refl ections, the structure distorts 
the surrounding environment, placing people and buildings inside it, 
being transparent at the same time, bringing into it all of the city, the 
taxicabs, the skyscrapers, Lincoln Center, the passing tourists and opera 
singers, the selfi es and those photographing, ourselves— everyone, in 
short, becomes part of the cube. It mirrors and refl ects and allows us 
to see through, creating in the pro cess a virtual reality.
Th e ambition of virtual transparence magnifi es the disciplinary 
ambition of visibility within enclosed structures. Recall that there was 
an important gradual evolution from rendering visible to transparency 
during the disciplinary turn. “Th e old simple schema of confi nement 
and enclosure,” Foucault wrote, “began to be replaced by the calcula-
tion of openings, of fi lled and empty spaces, passages and transparen-
cies.” 52 Rendering visible would develop into internal transparency, to 

120  The Birth of the Expository Society
the point that the panopticon itself would “become a transparent 
building in which the exercise of power may be supervised by so-
ciety as a  whole.” 53 Foucault refers to Bentham’s panopticon as his 
“celebrated, transparent, circular cage,” and places the element of 
transparency at the center of the panoptic principle: it is what made 
“architecture transparent to the administration of power.” 54 Th e ele-
ment of transparency played an important role in the internal struc-
ture of the disciplinary edifi ces. “Th e perfect disciplinary apparatus 
would make it possible for a single gaze to see everything constantly,” 
Foucault emphasized.55
But in our digital age, we have moved beyond the internality of 
transparence. Our ambition is to see through brick walls and physical 
barriers, to turn internal structures inside out, to break down entirely 
the internal- external diff erentiation, in order to see into devices and to 
decipher the invisible. Th e mirrored glass structure allows us to do that 
by using refl ections to open up spaces and break down walls. Th e dig-
ital technology allows us to do that by transcending the physical ob-
stacles and barriers. It is not by accident that Admiral Poindexter 
named his program Total Information Awareness. Neither is it an 
accident that the NSA’s “Trea sure Map” seeks to know every single 
device connected to the web.56 Th roughout the commercial and 
intelligence- security sectors, there is an unparalleled exhaustivity— 
internal and external—to the drive to know.
Google’s mission is “to or ga nize the world’s information and make 
it universally accessible and useful” no matter where it is hidden.57 
What that means is making a mass of chaotic, illegible information see-
able, readable, usable. And so Google “fi lters and focuses our queries 
and explorations through the world of digitized information. It ranks 
and links so quickly and succinctly, reducing the boiling tempest of 
human expression into such a clean and navigable list.” 58 It sees 
through all the opaque structures of data to sort and rank and feed us 
information.
Meanwhile, the stated ambition of the NSA, in its own words, is to 
“sniff  it all,” “know it all,” “collect it all,” “pro cess it all,” and “exploit it 
all.” 59 Th is is from a top- secret NSA pre sen ta tion at an annual confer-

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  121
ence with its “Five Eyes” partners in 2011. Th e goal with that alliance 
is to “partner it all.” 60 And the mission of those allies, at least for the 
GCHQ , is similarly to “collect it all”— which is precisely what is hap-
pening.61 In a single month in 2013, a single unit of the NSA, the Global 
Access Operations unit, “collected data on more than 3 billion tele-
phone calls and emails that had passed through the US telecommuni-
cations system.” 62 And digital technological developments make this 
possible— just like the mirrored glass allows us to see in practically 
every direction.
With digital capabilities, the actual content of communications can 
easily be recorded, stored, matched, cued up, dumped onto computers, 
and analyzed— which is precisely what the NSA excels at doing. An 
analyst at the agency, Sgt. Adrienne J. Kinne, describes the pro cess as 
she sits in front of her computer, with all its listening and digital tech-
nology, on which “the phone numbers of the parties as well as their 
names would appear on her digital screen”: “In our computer system, 
it would have the priority, the telephone number, the target’s name . . .  
And you could actually triangulate the location of the phone if you 
wanted to. We could ask our analysts to fi gure out the exact location of 
the phone.” 63 Th is information can then be fed into automated data- 
mining programs that can conduct sophisticated analyses of the con-
tent. As James Bamford explained, back in 2008 before any of the 
Snowden revelations, “to fi nd hidden links between [intercepted calls], 
[the NSA uses] a technique known as ‘call chaining analysis.’ . . .  To do 
the call chaining, the analysts use a program known as PatternTracer, 
made by i2 Inc., a company in McLean, Virginia. ‘When suspected 
terrorists go to great lengths to disguise their call activity, Pattern-
Tracer can be used to fi nd hidden connections in volumes of call re-
cord data,’ says the company.” 64 Bamford goes on:
In addition to PatternTracer, the analysts at NSA Georgia have 
an alphabet soup of data mining, traffi  c analysis, and social 
network analysis tools— secret and unclassifi ed— within their 
computers. Th ey include Agility, AMHS, Anchory, ArcView, 
Fastscope, Hightide, Hombase, Intelink, Octave, Document 

122  The Birth of the Expository Society
Management Center, Dishfi re, CREST, Pinwale, COASTLINE, 
SNACKS, Cadence, Gamut, Mainway, Marina, Osis, Puzzlecube, 
Surrey, Tuningfork, Xkeyscore, and Unifi ed Tasking Tool. Th e 
NSA also maintains large databases containing the address in-
formation, known as externals, on millions of intercepted mes-
sages, such as the Externals Data Global Exploitation (EDGE) 
database, the Communication External Notation list, and the 
Communications Externals Data Repository and Integration 
Center.65
Th e result is a combination of mission, desire, and capacity that is 
truly unmatched—an ambition for virtual transparence. As Glenn 
Greenwald suggests, the explicit aim of the NSA is “to collect, store, 
monitor, and analyze all electronic communication by all people around 
the globe. Th e agency is devoted to one overarching mission: to pre-
vent the slightest piece of electronic communication from evading its 
systematic grip.” 66 Virtual transparence is precisely this combination 
of fun  house entertainment, which brings us all in, with the desire and 
technology of total awareness.
2. Virtual seduction. One of the most powerful ways to achieve this 
total awareness is through our plea sure and lust: to seduce us into 
buying the most recent smartphone, downloading an irresistible ap-
plication, clicking on a tantalizing image, giving free rein to our curi-
osity, addictions, fetishes, and ambitions. To recommend things to us 
we did not even know we wanted— but do, it turns out. To make us 
take selfi es in the glass mirror and share them with everyone. To want 
to expose ourselves.
Apple introduced the Apple Watch in a ten- minute fi lm that is 
enough to lure in the most hardened ascetics. Th e videography is as-
toundingly seductive. Th e voice- over, by Jony Ive, se nior VP of design, 
is perfectly accented with a baritone Commonwealth touch.67 Th e 
background music glides and pulses while the images roll over the 
screen. Against the hard, shining, polished steel and the slick black 
lines, there rotates the “digital crown” that “fl uidly zooms into apps,” 
“enables nimble, precise adjustment,” and gently changes the face of 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  123
the watch, which is “laminated to a machined and polished single crystal 
of sapphire, that’s the second- hardest transparent material aft er dia-
mond.” 68 Th e images and the quality of the visuals are stupefyingly 
beautiful. Th e videography achieves perfection— and makes even the 
monastic among us salivate.
“You know, it’s driven Apple from the beginning: this compulsion 
to take incredibly powerful technology and make it accessible, rele-
vant and ultimately personal.” Th e watch is the perfect combination of 
total individuality and high- tech precision, of the unique individual 
and technical exceptionalism. It is “a completely singular product” 
with “an unparalleled level of technical innovation, combined with a 
design that connects with the wearer at an intimate level to both em-
brace individuality and inspire desire.”
Th e video is all about inspiring desire, about wrapping this seduc-
tive object around yourself— and, in the pro cess, disclosing your in-
nermost being. You touch it, you tap, you press, you push. It senses the 
diff erence. With its “taptic engine” and the “four sapphire lenses on 
back, LEDs and photo sensors,” the watch can detect your pulse, your 
activity, and your movement, when you are standing and when you are 
running—it gives you a “comprehensive picture of your daily activity.” 
It rec ords it all and rewards you for “fi tness milestones.” It captures 
every aspect of your personal life: all your apps, all your mail, your 
contacts, your messages, your locator information, your friends— any 
of which you can contact in just seconds— all your family photos, even 
your heartbeat.
“You can send a quick sketch, or you can even share something as 
personal as your own heartbeat,” Jony Ive tells us in his seductive, 
sophisticated voice. “Th ese are subtle ways to communicate, that 
technology oft en inhibits rather than enables”— while images of red 
heartbeats pulse on the laminated screen. Th e technology is all about 
self- expression and individuality. Th ere is a range of watch faces, 
which can be personalized both for appearance and for capability, and 
a wide selection of straps, including sport bands, loops in soft  quilted 
leather, solid metal clasps, stainless steel, and the ever seductive “Mil-
anese loops” that magnetically clasp together. “Creating beautiful 

124  The Birth of the Expository Society
objects that are as simple and pure as they are functional, well, that’s 
always been our goal at Apple,” Ive tells us in his baritone whisper. 
“We designed Apple Watch as a  whole range of products enabling 
millions of unique designs, unparalleled personalization both in ap-
pearance and capability. I think we are now at a compelling begin-
ning, actually designing technology to be worn, to be truly personal.”
Yes, and it is to be worn on your wrist, capturing all your data, trans-
mitting everything you do, from your heartbeat and your pictures to 
every email and PDF, every app you use . . .  clasped to your wrist and 
transmitted to the cloud. We strap on the monitoring device volun-
tarily, proudly. We show it off . Th ere is no longer any need for the 
state to force an ankle bracelet on us when we so lustfully clasp this 
pulsing, slick, hard object on our own wrist— the citizen’s second 
body  lusciously wrapping itself around the fi rst. Virtual transparence 
functions through seduction.
3. Phenomenal opacity. While so many expose themselves on social 
media, many of the most voy eur is tic among us try to dissimulate our 
gaze and shield our own information. Th e truth is, expository power 
functions best when those who are seen are not entirely conscious of 
it, or do not always remember. Th e marketing works best when the tar-
gets do not know they are being watched. Information is more acces-
sible when the subject forgets that she is being stalked.69
Th e retail giant Target, which excels at data mining and targeting 
customers, has this down to an art form and has developed “best prac-
tices” to make sure that the targeted consumers are not aware they are 
being targeted. As a marketing analyst at Target explains: “As long as a 
pregnant woman thinks she hasn’t been spied on, she’ll use the cou-
pons. She just assumes that everyone  else on her block got the same 
mailer for diapers and cribs. As long as we don’t spook her, it works.”70 
And so Target will mix in ads for lawn mowers or wineglasses next to 
diapers and infant clothing. And as long as it looks or feels like the 
items are chosen by chance, the targeting pays dividends. It depends 
on creating pockets of opacity.
Frank Pasquale explores this in Th e Black Box Society, where he ably 
demonstrates how “fi rms seek out intimate details of potential cus-

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  125
tomers’ and employees’ lives, but give regulators as little information 
as they possibly can about their own statistics and procedures. In-
ternet companies collect more and more data on their users but fi ght 
regulations that would let those same users exercise some control over 
the resulting digital dossiers.”71 Th is is the central recurring problem, 
in Pasquale’s words, of “transparent citizens vs. an opaque government/
corporate apparatus.”72
Over time, these pockets grow and shrink. Th ey vary fl uidly over 
time. 9/11 produced a signifi cant shift  in the security apparatus toward 
greater transparency of intelligence information throughout the defense 
establishment; the Manning and Snowden leaks will undoubtedly lead 
to less sharing of intelligence and more pockets of opacity. Th e same 
vagaries are seen in the corporate fi eld. Tim Wu documents the trans-
formations at Apple in his book Th e Master Switch. He shows how the 
company, originally dedicated to openness, gradually evolved into a 
closed environment, refl ecting the historical tendency of information 
sectors to become closed empires— while nevertheless rendering the 
rest of us transparent.73
Th e artist Andrew Norman Wilson documents pockets of obscu-
rity at Google, where digital laborers known as the “ScanOps” or “Yellow 
Badged” workers at the “3.1459 Building,” predominantly people of 
color, are hidden from view, kept in deep secret, and denied the bene-
fi ts of Google meals, Google bikes, Google shuttles; they cannot set foot 
anywhere  else on Google’s campus.74 Th ey are kept in complete ob-
scurity. Th ey are called, disparagingly, the “digital janitors.”
Th is is, surprisingly, where the modernity of Philip Johnson’s glass 
 house, the literal transparence of the structure, off ers unexpected in-
sight. You may recall that at its innermost core the glass  house contains 
a closed opaque cylindrical shape made of solid brick— dark brown, 
rock- solid blocks from fl oor to ceiling, even protruding out the top of 
the structure. It turns out that at the heart of literal transparency, there 
needs to be— there must be— a closed cell. (In Johnson’s glass  house, 
it serves as the fi replace/chimney and the bathroom). In addition to 
the distortions of the mirrored glass, it turns out, we also revert to the 
shuttered space— the locked trunk, the safe, the closet, the iron 

126  The Birth of the Expository Society
cage— and reproduce its epistemology.75 No one can see in, and from 
within, no one can see out—or at least, we think.
Th ese pockets of opacity represent, in eff ect, the opposite of the 
panopticon: there is no ambition  here for ordinary citizens to inter-
nalize the surveillance, since that would render them less legible and 
would reduce their consumption. Th is is certainly true for advertisers. 
As Siva Vaidhyanathan suggests in Th e Googlization of Everything, 
“ChoicePoint, Facebook, Google, and Amazon want us to relax and 
be ourselves.”76 Th is is also true for the NSA, which has entire units 
devoted to surreptitiously planting surveillance devices in sealed, 
packaged routers, servers, and other computer network devices— 
technologies of surveillance that only work through deception and 
opacity.77 Just like the Stasi used vapor to unseal and reseal envelopes 
so that the recipients never knew their mail had been opened, the NSA 
magically undoes factory seals and carefully reseals them so that the 
buyers do not know that backdoor surveillance has been inserted into 
the machinery. A top- secret NSA document, dated June 2010, leaked 
by Snowden, states the following:
Here’s how it works: shipments of computer network devices 
(servers, routers,  etc.) being delivered to our targets throughout 
the world are intercepted. Next, they are redirected to a secret loca-
tion where Tailored Access Operations/Access Operations 
(AO- S326) employees, with the support of the Remote Opera-
tions Center (S321), enable the installation of beacon implants di-
rectly into our targets’ electronic devices. Th ese devices are then 
re- packaged and placed back into transit to the original destina-
tion. All of this happens with the support of Intelligence Com-
munity partners and the technical wizards in TAO.78
It is too facile to suggest that the intelligence apparatus wants ev-
eryone to feel that they are watched in order to instill generalized fear 
and control the population better. To be sure, the NSA wants the 
world, especially other nations and potential enemies, to know just 
how powerful the United States is and how much computing tech-

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  127
nology it has.79 But it also depends and thrives on people forgetting 
how much they are surveilled. Th e watching works best not when it is 
internalized, but when it is absentmindedly forgotten.
4. Virtual authenticity. What virtual transparence claims is an even 
deeper penetration into the “authentic” self. Th e ambition is to exca-
vate a genuine self, a self that is not just the artifi ce of advertising and 
consumerism, that is not just molded by the digital devices—or so we 
tell ourselves. We want these devices to mine our soul, to excavate 
deep into the biological, to peel away the psychological.
Th e sports edition of the Apple Watch is a perfect illustration. Again, 
the seductive advertisement video— called, this time, the “Health and 
Fitness Film”— documents how the device serves to better extract 
deeper personal information, in “one device you can wear all the time”: 
“It can track a wider variety of activities because it’s able to collect 
more types of data. It uses an accelerometer to mea sure your total 
body movement, it has a custom sensor that can mea sure intensity by 
tracking your heart rate, and it uses the GPS and Wi- Fi in your iPhone 
to track how far you have moved.”80
Th is device will know everything about our body and our selves. 
Th is is precisely the promise of big data: such deep and accurate knowl-
edge of our innermost being. Th e analysis of our heart rhythms will 
detect and warn us of early symptoms of a heart attack hours before it 
actually occurs, hours before ordinary medicine would detect any-
thing. Th ere is an urgency to this technology, one that requires the 
deepest intimacy:
We wanted to give you the most complete picture of your all- day 
activity, and not just highlight the quantity of movement, but 
the quality and frequency as well. So the activity app on Apple 
Watch mea sures three separate aspects of movement, with the 
goal of helping you sit less, move more, and get some exercise.
Th e movement mea sures the calories you’ve burned. Th at 
gives you the best overview of how active you are. Th e movement 
is customized to you and you close it when you hit your personal 
calorie goal for the day. Th e exercise ring captures the brisk 

128  The Birth of the Expository Society
activity that you have done. . . .  Th e stand ring shows how oft en 
you’ve stood up to take a break from sitting.81
Th e Apple Watch integrates the “quantifi ed self” seamlessly. It feeds 
and nourishes the desire to quantify, to know, to share our true selves. 
“Over time,” the fi lm continues, “Apple Watch actually gets to know 
you the way a good personal trainer would.”82 It makes the subject feel 
unique and uniquely satisfi ed. It makes the subject fl ourish in his or 
her individuality. It is catered to satisfy the individual. Th e uniqueness 
of the wearable to the individual is key: although everyone will want 
to buy this object, each one will be individualized, tailored to your 
color preferences and your favorite texture— whether it’s the soft  leather 
band, the cold metallic mesh, or the solid plastic sports band. All that 
in the ser vice of strapping a device on, voluntarily, to capture all your 
intimate information.
5. Digital narratives. Our digital self is a narrative self, one that we 
construct through our pre sen ta tion of self and telling of stories. With 
apps like Storify, which allows us to connect together our bits of self 
(those 140- character tweets) into continuous, apparently coherent 
accounts, we share our timelines and our histories, our innermost 
thoughts, our secrets. For adolescents and those who have grown up 
with these mediums, communication begins to take, predominantly, 
the form of storytelling. Th is is, according to the sociologist Shan-
yang Zhao, a key feature of our digital selves. It is, in fact, in the very 
“pro cess of narrating to others who we are and what we do, [that] the 
digital self begins to take shape.”83
Drawing on the work of John Th ompson, Zhao sketches out how 
we, as digital selves, construct our self- identities online by telling 
others— others who, importantly, are not “corporally copresent” 
but only “telecopresent”— our own narratives of self.84 Zhao quotes 
Th ompson: “To recount to ourselves or others who we are is to retell 
the narratives— which are continuously modifi ed in the pro cess of 
retelling—of how we got to where we are and of where we are going from 
 here. We are all the unoffi  cial biographers of ourselves, for it is only by 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  129
constructing a story, however loosely strung together, that we are able 
to form a sense of who we are and of what our future may be.”85
Th is dimension refl ects the expository nature of our exposed so-
ciety— the narrative aspect of our surveillance structures. Th e visi-
bility and data mining practices piece together stories about our lovers 
and passions, about our po liti cal contributions and disobedience, 
about our fantasies and desires. Th ey glue together all the little pieces 
of all diff erent colors to make a mosaic of ourselves.86 And we piece 
together little mosaics of others as well. We not only expose ourselves, 
we surveil others and build narratives around them too. Th ere is no 
clean division between those who expose and those who surveil; sur-
veillance of others has become commonplace today, with nude pic-
tures of celebrities circulating as “trading fodder” on the more pop u lar 
anonymous online message boards, users stalking other users, and 
videos constantly being posted about other people’s mistakes, acci-
dents, rants, foibles, and prejudices.87 We tell stories about ourselves and 
others. We expose ourselves. We watch others.
6. Digital avowals. Finally, we constantly emit little puzzle pieces 
through our increasingly confessional digital presence: our selfi es, our 
“quantifi ed” data, our reality videos. Th ese acts of self- revelation be-
tray our desire for attention and publicity. Th e urge may not be new, 
but the medium changes it, creating a potential audience that could 
never have been imagined before.
Th e confessional dimensions of these digital times are marked, 
fi rst, by a more public, exposed confession. Th ese are no longer purely 
internal— like the stoic examination of conscience at nighttime— nor 
limited to a lover or minister. Th ey are logged for others to see and 
hear. Second, they have an element of permanence. Th ey will be cached 
somewhere, preserved forever. Even if we erase them or delete them, 
someone will be able to fi nd them in an unknown part of our drive or 
the cloud. Th ey are not fl eeting or defi ned by their phenomenal pres-
ence. Th ey are burned into the digital in the same way that a mark of 
penitence tattooed on us might last forever. Th ird, they are lighter and 
more malleable than the face- to- face confession: there is no risk of 

130  The Birth of the Expository Society
blushing, no body language, no visual cues to absorb. Th e relationship 
to authenticity and fi ction is looser, more supple. In the digital age, we 
are not forced to avow, we are not required to perform penance at reg-
ular intervals— there are no rules, no cold showers.88 We embrace 
avowal more entrepreneurially, something made possible and magni-
fi ed by the publicity and reach of the new medium.
During the protest marches in New York City in December 2014 
following two grand juries’ failure to indict police offi  cers in Ferguson, 
Missouri, and Staten Island, New York, protesters in the streets took 
selfi es and shared them on social media. According to the New York 
Times, thousands of such images  were posted “on every social- media 
platform available, captioned with a condensed, hashtagged version 
of the sort of po liti cal chatter that usually populates timelines and 
newsfeeds (#ICantBreathe, #NoJusticeNoPeace,  etc.).”89 Th e selfi es 
documented our presence, proved our concern, told truth about 
ourselves. Th ey represented our digital expression of outrage— and at 
the same time curated pre sen ta tions of the self. In the words of the 
Times, somewhat tendentiously but in part accurately, “Th e protests in 
New York City  were, in large part, a staging ground for people to take 
and upload personal images, and that, more than the chanting or 
the marching, seemed to be the point.”90 Perhaps, more fairly, a point.
We avow our diff erent selves diff erently in diff erent contexts— 
whether on web- based platforms where we can be identifi ed, like Face-
book, or in anonymous chat rooms. Neither is more nor less authentic 
than the other, but they diff er. Mediums aff ect how we present our-
selves and how we confess.91 Our Facebook selves, for instance, ap-
pear, to researchers at least, to approximate more closely the more so-
cially desirable identities that we aspire to have offl  ine but  haven’t been 
able to achieve. Some believe that we present less fi ltered or constructed 
selves in anonymous environments such as online chat rooms— and 
that, by contrast, the physical selves we present in localized face- to- 
face interactions are more highly sensitive to visual cues and physical 
interpersonal dynamics, to the myriad interactions that Goff man and 
other symbolic interactionists so carefully identifi ed.

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  131
Our curated identities and pre sen ta tions of self vary based on the 
technology. In contrast to anonymous chat rooms, for instance, 
“public proclamations of non- mainstream or gay sexual orientations 
seemed to be rare on Facebook”—or at least more infrequent.92 
More common are mainstream, heterosexual displays of aff ection like 
this one, by a female student in a Facebook study: “I am currently 
married to a man named xxx [real name was provided originally but 
removed  here to protect privacy]. He is the reason I wake up ever[y] 
morning with a smile on my face & the reason why I look forward to 
living another day. He is my lover & best friend.”93 Apparently, only 
recently are people beginning to post on social media about getting 
divorced. It is still relatively rare to see “the documentation of strife, 
anxiety, discord or discontent.”94
In sum, we might call these six diff erent dimensions of our digital 
age “expository power.” Our new technological capabilities make it 
possible for us to believe that we can achieve total awareness and si-
multaneously forget. Th rough lust, anxiety, and distraction, we are 
made to want these new digital gadgets, and though we marvel at the 
risks to our autonomy, the very next moment we strap them on our-
selves. Virtual transparence gives us the kind of confi dence that makes 
possible the NSA’s “Trea sure Maps” and Google’s Street View— the gall 
to believe that these wild dreams are within our reach— and simulta-
neously the diversion that distracts us into forgetting that it is each 
one of us that is being mapped and viewed.
The rapidity with which we have built our mirrored glass pa-
vilion is remarkable. Th e explosion of data and computing capacity is 
a phenomenon that dates back just a few de cades. Facebook was 
only founded in 2004. YouTube only started in 2005. Twitter was only 
launched in 2006. Email only got going in the mid-1990s, and mobile 
phones only became pop u lar around 2000. Th e rich digital life that we 
live today only really began in the third millennium. We are dealing 
with a radically new and young turn- of- the- century phenomenon: we 

132  The Birth of the Expository Society
have built our glass pavilion with lightning speed. Almost in a frenzy. To 
get a sense of it, one need only look at the way in which the digital has 
so quickly overcome the analog— how “big data” (such a multifaceted 
term) has skyrocketed past analog technology.95 It is all radically new.
“Big data” refers to data sets that are so copious and complex that 
they have to be pro cessed by computing power to be useful. Th e data 
themselves include a wide variety of objects, including mobile com-
munications, social media, emails, videos, chats, vital statistics, gov-
ernment census data, genomics, satellites, and sensors.96 Th ey include 
all the data produced by emailing, texting, tweeting, and videotaping—
in other words, by using computers, mobiles, and any digital device. 
We are oft en not even aware of these objects. Hospital and home sen-
sors used to monitor key biochemical markers, for instance, are increas-
ingly important and transmit, collect, and analyze massive real- time 
fl ows of information in the health care industry.97 Th e space where the 
data are stored can be Google’s servers, hospital computers, AT&T’s 
rec ords, or IRS archives of tax returns. Doug Laney, in 2001, famously 
pointed out the three variables that make such a data set “big”: volume, 
velocity, and variety. Th ese vast sets of data can then be analyzed, 
mined, and probed across multiple dimensions and for multiple ends.
Th ey are growing at exponential speed. IDC, a premier IT research 
and consulting fi rm, provided a basic mea sure of the size of “big data” 
in 2013.98 Th e total amount of information stored in what IDC refers to 
as the “digital universe” is roughly 4.4 zettabytes (a zettabyte is equiv-
alent to 1.18059162 × 1021 bytes). By 2020, this number is expected to 
increase to 44 zettabytes.99 Th e Harvard Business Review reports, “As 
of 2012, about 2.5 exabytes of data are created each day, and that 
number is doubling every 40 months or so.”100
Th e most scientifi c, rigorous mea sure ment of the world’s techno-
logical capacity to store, communicate, and compute data was col-
lected and presented in a research article in Science magazine in April 
2011.101 Th at article is the source of most of the descriptions today re-
garding the gargantuan quantity of data and those folkloric meta-
phors of stacking CD- ROMs of data to the moon. Th e authors, Martin 
Hilbert and Priscila López, mea sure and compare the technological 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  133
capacity to store, communicate, and compute, using analog versus 
digital technologies, over the period 1986 to 2007.102 Th eir fi ndings are 
remarkable.
Th e growth in the capacity to store data has been exponential since 
the turn of the twenty- fi rst century. While overall capacity was origi-
nally growing steadily because of analog developments, storage capacity 
exploded beginning in 2000, as illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Looking at the growth in storage capacity alone, one could almost 
say that although the foundations  were laid in the 1990s, our mirrored 
glass pavilion started to be built only in 2000. Th e exponential trend 
line is equally arresting when it comes to computation. Now, compu-
tation has always been digital, so there is no direct point of compar-
ison in this regard, but there is evidence of an exponential increase 
since 2000 as well, as shown in Figure 4.3.
Th ird, although a lot of the capacity in broadcast and telecommuni-
cation remains analog, there has been a dramatic shift  in velocity since 
2000 in the digital area. As a result, the overall percentage of these 
technological capacities that have been taken over by digital media 
0.00E + 00
5.00E + 13
1.00E + 14
1.50E + 14
2.00E + 14
2.50E + 14
3.00E + 14
3.50E + 14
1986
1993
2000
2007
Optimally Compressed Megabytes
Year
Analog
Digital
Total
figure 4.2 World’s technological capacity to store information, in optimally compressed 
megabytes (MB) per year, for 1986, 1993, 2000, and 2007. Graph by Bernard E. Harcourt. Data source: 
Martin Hilbert and Priscila López, “Supporting Materials for ‘Th e World’s Technological Capacity to 
Store, Communicate, and Compute Information,’ ” Science 332, no. 6025 (2011): 6–7, table S A-1.

134  The Birth of the Expository Society
0.00E + 00
1.00E + 11
2.00E + 11
3.00E + 11
4.00E + 11
5.00E + 11
6.00E + 11
1986
1993
2000
2007
Digital Computing Capacity
figure 4.3 World’s technological capacity to compute information on general- purpose computers 
(gross usage), in MIPS (million instructions per second), for 1986, 1993, 2000, and 2007. Graph by 
Bernard E. Harcourt. Data source: Martin Hilbert and Priscila López, “Supporting Materials for ‘Th e 
World’s Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information,’ ” Science 332, no. 
6025 (2011): 6–7, table S A-1.
increased at a remarkable rate beginning in 2000, as demonstrated in 
Figure 4.4.
Th ese graphs powerfully illustrate the historical trajectory of our 
digital universe. Although the cornerstone was set in the 1990s, the 
construction of the edifi ce essentially began in 2000. And the overall 
growth rates are simply staggering. If we pull together data on com-
pound annual growth in all three areas, there is evidence of a 23 per-
cent annual growth in digital storage between 1986 and 2007 and a 
58 percent annual growth in computation capacity during the same 
period.103 According to the consulting fi rm McKinsey, the worldwide 
data totals are expected to increase at a rate of 40 percent per year, 
with both data storage and data computation capacity continuing to 
rise.104 Storage limitation, in fact, is practically the only thing that is 
slowing down our virtual transparence— including in the signals in-
telligence area. NSA programs like XKeyscore are collecting such vast 
quantities of data that a large amount of it can only be retained for 
short periods of time. So, for instance, in 2012, that program was cap-

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  135
turing at some sites more than 20 terabytes of data, but these could 
only be stored for about twenty- four hours because of the vastness of 
the collected troves. Other documents reveal that certain data  were 
stored for three to fi ve days.105
To take another perspective, the IDC mea sures the prevalence of 
“digital things” within the total universe of things that manage the 
physical world— trying to map onto the physical world old analog 
things, like cars and turbines, alongside the new “digital things.” It 
defi nes the “Internet of Th ings” as consisting of “adding computeriza-
tion, soft ware, and intelligence to things as varied as cars, toys, air-
planes, dishwashers, turbines, and dog collars.” In 2013, “connected 
‘things’  were 7% of the total” number of connectable things in the 
world; however, “by 2020, that number will grow to 15%.” Th e Internet 
of Th ings is thus exploding in the fi rst de cades of the twenty- fi rst cen-
tury, as “analog functions managing the physical world migrate to 
digital functions.”106 Th e Internet of Th ings is a primary driver of big 
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
70.00%
80.00%
90.00%
100.00%
1986
1993
2000
2007
Optimally Compresed Megabytes
Year
Percent digital storage
Percent digital communication
(broadcast)
Percent digital communication
(telecom)
figure 4.4 Evolution of the world’s capacity to store and communicate information, percentage in 
digital format (1986–2007). Graph by Bernard E. Harcourt. Data source: Martin Hilbert and Priscila 
López, “Th e World’s Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information.” 
Science 332, no. 6025 (2011): 63.

136  The Birth of the Expository Society
data accumulation. Th is is especially the case for mobile devices— 
these include “devices such as RFID tags, GPS devices, smart cards, 
cars, toys, and even dog collars”— which in 2014 was expected to 
“generate 18% of the digital universe” and grow to 27 percent in 2020.107 
In 2011, McKinsey reported some amazing statistics about what it 
called this “growing torrent” of data and digital things:
• 5 billion mobile phones in use in 2010
• 30 billion pieces of content shared on Facebook every month
•  235 terabytes of data collected by the US Library of Congress as of 
April 2011
•  15 out of 17 sectors in the United States have more data stored per 
company than the US Library of Congress108
It is estimated that Walmart alone “collects more than 2.5 petabytes 
of data every hour from its customer transactions.”109 On YouTube, 
there is nearly an hour of video being uploaded each second.110 According 
to the Harvard Business Review, “More data cross the Internet every 
second than  were stored in the entire Internet just 20 years ago.”111
Our mirrored glass pavilion only dates back to the turn of the 
twenty- fi rst century. Th e World Wide Web was launched on Christmas 
Day 1990.112 Facebook is just over a de cade old. As Mark Zuckerberg 
emphasized in his 2014 Th anksgiving greeting: “In just 10 years, you’ve 
built a community with more than 1.35 billion people. You’ve shared 
your happy moments and your sad ones, you’ve kept your friends and 
families closer together, and you’ve made the world feel a little smaller 
and a little warmer. . . .  I hope you have a great Th anksgiving, and 
thank you for helping to make the world more open and connected.”113 
Indeed, it is a world that is more connected and at the same time more 
open— virtually transparent. And this world has been built practically 
overnight.
The architectural design— the elements, the structure, 
the texture of the glass pavilion—is unique, and raises many questions 

Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  137
about the actual makeup of this virtually transparent space, what it 
consists of, and how it can be subdivided. Th e answers, it turns out, are 
somewhat murky and depend to a certain extent on the angle or per-
spective that we take. Big data is described and categorized in a number 
of diff erent ways—by form, by source, by type, by purpose. Here are a 
few ways to describe it and to try to understand it better.
One way is in terms of the sources of data. Th e IDC reported in 2014 
that roughly two- thirds of the information in the digital universe, or 
about 2.9 zetabytes (ZB), is “generated by consumers”; the rest, or about 
1.5 ZB, is generated by enterprises. Business ends up touching about 
85 percent, or 2.3 ZB, of the data.114 Th ere are certain sectors of the 
economy that dominate the digital sphere. So, for instance, in 2009, 
according to McKinsey, the three top sectors relative to the quantity 
of information stored by sector  were (1) discrete manufacturing (966 
petabytes), (2) government (848 petabytes), and (3) communications 
and media (715 petabytes).115 Government fi gures second on this list, 
which refl ects the fact that a signifi cant portion of data is still collected 
and stored by local, state, and federal governments. In the United States, 
“the amount of information the federal government captures has in-
creased exponentially” since 2000.116 To give a sense of this, in 2009 
alone “the U.S. Government produced 848 petabytes of data and U.S. 
healthcare data alone reached 150 exabytes. Five exabytes (1018 giga-
bytes) of data would contain all words ever spoken by human beings 
on earth. At this rate, Big Data for U.S. healthcare will soon reach 
zetabyte (1021 gigabytes) scale and soon yottabytes (1024 gigabytes).”117 
Th e other sectors of the economy that store most of the country’s data 
include banking and investment ser vices, health care providers, retail, 
education, insurance, and transportation.118
Another dimension is the composition of the data itself. In this re-
gard, there are a number of ways to analyze and categorize the data:
1. Smart, identity, and people. Higinio Maycotte, in an article in 
Wired, suggests that there are three particularly important and preva-
lent types of big data that should be distinguished: “smart data,” “iden-
tity data,” and “people data.”119 “Smart data” is the term for digital data 
that has been “siloed, segmented and then visualized” for a par tic u lar 

138  The Birth of the Expository Society
need.120 It has been transformed from its original state as a large col-
lection of binary numbers into something legible that no longer requires 
an expert to analyze it. “Identity data” is possibly the most important 
type of data going forward. It is “the force behind predictive modeling 
and machine learning,” and it seeks to “tell the story of who you are in 
the digital age, including what you like, what you buy, your lifestyle 
choices and at what time or intervals all of this occurs.”121 It includes 
social media activity, purchases, behavior analytics, and more. As 
Maycotte notes, when Target’s customer data was hacked in 2013, “it 
was the loss of identity data . . .  that became the biggest issue”; in this 
case, the identity data stolen included “credit card numbers associated 
with names and physical addresses, as well as email addresses.”122 Lastly, 
“people data” are created by “aggregating social data over time.”123 
Th is is collected by looking at the data exhaust of a large number of 
users: “who your audience likes and follows on social media, what 
links they click, how long they stay on the site that they clicked over to 
and how many converted versus bounced.”124
2. Social, machine, and transactional. Th is fi rst tripartite division 
overlaps, in part, with another way of dissecting data into “social data,” 
“machine data,” and “transactional data.”125 “Social data” refers largely 
to the “people data” described previously by Maycotte. It is generated 
mostly by consumer behavior on the Internet. It includes the massive 
amount of social media data, “with 230 million tweets posted on Twitter 
per day, 2.7 billion Likes and comments added to Facebook every day, 
and 60 hours of video uploaded to YouTube every minute.”126 Machine 
data “consists of information generated from industrial equipment, 
real- time data from sensors that track parts and monitor machinery 
(oft en also called the Internet of Th ings), and even web logs that track 
user behavior online.”127 An example of this is the Large Hadron Col-
lider (LHC) at CERN beneath the Franco- Swiss border, the largest 
research center on particle physics on the globe, which generates ap-
proximately 40 terabytes of data per second when experiments are on-
going. Lastly, transactional data is generated by aggregated, recorded 
transactions from a company’s daily business, including the items sold, 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Our Mirrored Glass Pavilion  139
“product IDs, prices, payment information, manufacturer and distrib-
utor data.”128 Th ink  here of Amazon . com, eBay, and Domino’s 
Pizza— the last of which serves about a million customers per day— 
which produce huge quantities of big data on a daily basis.
3. Individuals, public sector, private sector. Th e World Economic 
Forum (WEF), by contrast, tends to think of data as generated from 
three diff erent sectors. Th e fi rst is individuals, who provide a par tic-
u lar type of data: “crowdsourced” information, social data from mobile 
phones, and other media that tend to be referred to as “data exhaust.” 
Th e WEF emphasizes, in this regard, that “the data emanating from 
mobile phones holds par tic u lar promise, in part because for many low- 
income people it is their only form of interactive technology, but it is 
also easier to link mobile- generated data to individuals.”129 And there 
is tons of this data being produced: “Online or mobile fi nancial trans-
actions, social media traffi  c, and GPS coordinates now generate over 
2.5 quintillion bytes of so- called ‘big data’ every day.”130 Th e second 
involves the public and development sectors. Th is includes govern-
mental census data, health and vital statistics and indicators, tax and 
expenditure data, and other “facility data.” Th e third sector is the pri-
vate sector, and it includes transaction data and information on pur-
chases, spending, consumption, and use.131
4. Structured and unstructured. Finally, another way to understand 
the architecture has to do with the texture of the data, whether it is 
structured or unstructured. Th e Economist reported in 2010 that “only 
5% of the information that is created is ‘structured,’ meaning it comes 
in a standard format of words or numbers that can be read by com-
puters. Th e rest are things like photos and phone calls which are less 
easily retrievable and usable. But this is changing as content on the 
web is increasingly ‘tagged,’ and facial- recognition and voice- recognition 
soft ware can identify people and words in digital fi les.”132 By 2013, the 
TechAmerica Foundation reported that about 15  percent of today’s 
data is structured, consisting of rows and columns of data; about 
85 percent consists of unstructured information that is humanly gen-
erated.133 Th is means a colossal amount of unstructured data that is 
www.Ebook777.com

140  The Birth of the Expository Society
diffi  cult to pro cess.134 But new technology is rapidly changing that. A 
good illustration is face recognition technology, which is rendering 
video data increasingly useful to intelligence ser vices.
In the nineteenth century, it was the government that gener-
ated data: statistics, vital rec ords, census reports, military fi gures. It 
was costly. It required surveys and civil servants. Th ere was a premium 
associated with publicity. But now we have all become our own publi-
cists. Th e production of data has become demo cratized. And we dig-
ital subjects have allowed ourselves to get caught in a tangled web of 
commercial, governmental, and security projects. Walter Benjamin 
remarked, “To live in a glass  house is a revolutionary virtue par excel-
lence. It is also an intoxication, a moral exhibitionism, that we badly 
need. Discretion concerning one’s own existence, once an aristocratic 
virtue, has become more and more an aff air of petit- bourgeois par-
venus.”135 Indeed, it seems that discretion is a thing of the past. At 
breakneck speed, we have built ourselves a mirrored glass house— 
translucent to diff erent degrees, refl ective in part, distorting as well, 
with pockets of obscurity. Just like Dan Graham’s “Two- Way Mirror 
Walkabout,” we can see ourselves in it and through it, all too well.

The criminal trial of Arnauld du Tilh in 1560 in the French 
Midi- Pyrénées has fascinated generations since the mid- sixteenth 
century.1 It was a remarkable case— truly incredible—of imposture 
and identity theft , which carried the risk of convictions for rape, adul-
tery, sacrilege, enslavement, robbery, and other capital crimes. Th e 
question presented to the diocese at Rieux was whether the man who 
for more than three years had claimed to be the long- lost Martin Guerre, 
who slept with Martin Guerre’s wife, gave her two daughters, acted as 
a father to Martin Guerre’s son, and laid claim to Martin Guerre’s es-
tate, was in fact Martin Guerre—or, instead, the man named Arnauld 
du Tilh, known by most as “Pansette” (belly), who was from the 
nearby village of Sajas, a good day’s  ride from Martin Guerre’s home in 
Artigat.2
Th e real Martin Guerre had left  his young wife, Bertrande de Rols, 
and their son, Sanxi, some eleven years earlier— abandoning them 
without leaving a trace. Th ere had been rumors that he had joined the 
Spanish army. It had even been said that he had been injured in 
F I V E
a genealogy of 
the new doppelgänger logic

142  The Birth of the Expository Society
battle and had a wooden leg.3 Eight years aft er his disappearance, 
though, during the summer of 1556, a man claiming to be Martin 
Guerre returned to Artigat and, received by his mother, four sisters, and 
neighbors as the true Martin Guerre, resumed his conjugal life with 
Bertrande— eventually living with her “like true married people, 
eating, drinking, and sleeping as is customary.” 4 Th e man claiming to 
be Martin Guerre gave Bertrande, in the words of Jean de Coras, the 
reporter of the case, “several private and personal proofs” that  were 
“much easier to understand than it is proper to speak of or write.” 5
Th e true Martin Guerre had left  some traces, but few: his appear-
ance in the eyes of loved ones and neighbors, personal memories of 
events and places, perhaps distinct physical marks on his body, the 
way he touched his wife. But few if any of these could be documented 
or tested in peasant life during the Middle Ages.
One can imagine, with Natalie Zemon Davis, that Bertrande may 
have had an inkling that the man claiming to be Martin Guerre was an 
impostor and that, for a certain period of time at least, she actively con-
spired with him to conceal the fraud.6 We may never know the truth of 
the matter, but it does seem telling that even aft er Martin Guerre’s 
uncle, mother, and four sisters—in other words, practically every close 
family member— and many neighbors had turned against the man 
who claimed to be Martin Guerre, aft er he had spent time in jail ac-
cused of arson, aft er a fellow soldier had told everyone in the village 
that the real Martin Guerre had lost his leg serving in battle for the 
king of Spain, Bertrande nevertheless stayed true to the man. Ber-
trande “received him [back from jail], and caressed him as her hus-
band, and as soon as he arrived, gave him a white shirt and even 
washed his feet, and aft erwards they went to bed together.”7 Bertrande 
also physically threw herself to his defense when her uncle and his 
sons- in- law physically attacked the man, striking him with hard blows. 
Th ey likely would have killed him had it not been for Bertrande 
“stretch[ing] herself upon him to receive the blows.”8
Th ere was, indeed, little by which to test his identity. And so at trial 
in Rieux, the witnesses compared his appearance to what they re-
membered, recounted tales of what they knew, and vouched for or 

A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  143
against the man. One hundred and fi ft y witnesses  were heard. About 
thirty or forty testifi ed that they recognized his features or marks or 
scars on his body. A slightly larger number claimed to recognize an-
other man, Arnauld du Tilh, the man called “Pansette.” Sixty or more 
other witnesses would not commit. And on appeal to the high court of 
Toulouse, the judges, aft er hearing from Bertrande— who at this point 
had fi nally turned against the man claiming to be Martin Guerre— 
from the uncle, and from the man himself, concluded that the court in 
Rieux had erred. Th e appellate court decided to conduct its own in-
quiry. Of the thirty- fi ve or forty witnesses heard by the appellate court 
in Toulouse, nine or ten vouched for the man who claimed to be 
Martin Guerre, seven or eight identifi ed him as Arnauld du Tilh, and 
the rest would not commit one way or the other.9 Th ere  were other, 
special witnesses— six types, according to Jean Coras. Some had par-
tic u lar knowledge or relations that would make them interested 
parties. For instance, one witness, Carbon Barrau, who was Arnauld 
du Tilh’s true uncle, broke down in tears, “immediately started to cry, 
and groaned bitterly” when confronted with the man claiming to be 
Martin Guerre. Others had been witnesses present at contracts, or ap-
parently had fi rsthand knowledge of the man’s fraud.
Th e visual identifi cation was practically evenly split, and unreliable. 
As Davis suggests, “the Guerres had no painted portraits by which to 
recall his features.”10 As for other biological or biographic features that 
could have served as identifi cation, record keeping was too inexact. 
“Th e greater part of the witnesses reported marks and made invincible 
presumptions—to wit, that Martin Guerre had two broken teeth in 
his lower jaw, a scar on his forehead, an ingrown nail on a forefi nger, 
three warts on the right hand and one on the little fi nger, and a drop 
of blood in the left  eye, which marks have all been found on the pris-
oner.”11 But none of those traits had been documented or recorded— and 
none of them could be certifi ed.
Th ere was only one piece of evidence of a slightly diff erent char-
acter, one data point of a diff erent kind: the size of Martin Guerre’s 
foot. “Th e cobbler who made shoes for Martin Guerre deposed that 
this Martin was fi tted at twelve points, whereas the prisoner is fi tted at 

144  The Birth of the Expository Society
only nine,” the reporter in Toulouse noted.12 Th e cobbler gets little 
play in the ensuing narrative. Natalie Zemon Davis notes in passing—
in a lengthy discussion of the other witnesses— that “the shoemaker 
told his story about the diff erent shoe sizes, Martin’s larger than the 
prisoner’s.”13 Perhaps, as Davis speculates, the cobbler had a motive to 
testify against the man who claimed to be Martin Guerre. Perhaps the 
latter had a good response to the cobbler. “What he said, we can only 
imagine,” Davis writes; “to the shoemaker: ‘Th is man is a drinking 
companion of Pierre Guerre. Let him show his rec ords about the size 
of my feet. And who  else can support his lies?’ ”14 Regardless of the man’s 
imagined response, the cobbler, it turns out, had some data: the shoe 
size of his customers. And he could use the data to check the man’s 
identity. It was a relatively small data set, naturally, subject to error 
and surely subject to human foibles. It was not digital, of course, and it 
was by no means “big,” like today. But it was some data.
Th e cobbler’s data, in the end,  were not determinative and did not 
weigh heavily, though they did confi rm the judge’s ruling in Rieux: 
Arnauld du Tilh was convicted of imposture and sentenced to be be-
headed and quartered. Th e man who claimed to be Martin Guerre was 
executed a few days later on the threshold of Martin Guerre’s  house in 
Artigat. Refl ecting on the full episode, Coras writes prosaically about 
the indeterminacy of physical features, observing that “it is no new 
thing that two people should resemble each other, not only in features 
and characteristics of the face, but also in some specifi c bodily marks.”15
Today, by contrast, we could so easily identify Martin Guerre and 
track his movements, follow his ATM and bank withdrawals, locate 
him with GPS, catch him on CCTV. We could use the FBI’s facial rec-
ognition technology, Next Generation Identifi cation, to fi nd him at 
the train station, pub, or ballpark. We could test his fi ngerprints using 
the FBI’s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identifi cation System, 
IAFIS, which contains more than 100 million prints and returns re-
sults in less than twenty- seven minutes. (IAFIS pro cessed in excess of 
61 million ten- print electronic fi ngerprint submissions in 2010.)16 We 
could use the FBI’s electronic Combined DNA Index System (CODIS). 
We could turn to computerized cryptanalysis. Today there are myriad 

ways to digitally diff erentiate and verify an identity. Our identities are 
 etched in the cloud in ways that even the cobbler could not have 
dreamed of. Computer algorithms can analyze our syntactic style and 
mannerisms, track our eye movements, study our habits and quirks, 
collect our discarded fragments, note our consumption, trace our 
friendships, and read right through us—at the same time as they shape 
the very identities they predict. It would be unimaginable for most 
husbands to disappear with such ease, without a concerted, deliberate, 
and costly eff ort at covering their tracks.17
Today, we have mastered identifi cation and  diff erentiation—
and, in the pro cess, we have learned to perfectly exploit resemblance. It 
is indeed nothing new, as Jean de Coras observed in 1561, that “two 
people should resemble each other.” But we have elevated that to an art 
form. Our digital condition is marked precisely by a new form of ratio-
nality that centers on matching each and every one of us, individually, 
to our twin—to fi nd, for each of us, our other half. Not just to iden-
tify—we mastered and surpassed that in the twentieth century— but 
to match. It is what I would call a doppelgänger logic: Find the person 
who fi ts our consumption patterns and digital behavior, and use that 
person to anticipate our every action, in a back- and- forth manner, 
constantly chasing the trace of the last digital click. Record what the 
other person is searching on the web, which items he is buying, which 
books he is reading, which sites he is surfi ng—in sum, know what he 
wants, in order to predict what the other will want. Th is new rationality 
suff uses the digital age.
Th e idea is to fi nd our doppelgänger and then model that person’s 
behavior to know ours, and vice versa, in the pro cess shaping each oth-
er’s desires reciprocally. It is not just feedback but feed forward: to look 
forward by looking backward, back and forth, so that someone is al-
ways in front of the other, behaving in a way that the other will want 
next. You never double back; you are always at the same time leading 
and following, abuzz with action, shaping and being shaped, infl u-
encing and being infl uenced. Netfl ix will tell you which fi lm to watch 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  145

146  The Birth of the Expository Society
next based on the one I just watched because I watched a fi lm that you 
had just seen— like a Möbius strip that circulates round and round 
between us.
Th is new logic— this doppelgänger logic— diff ers from the forms of 
rationality that governed earlier, but it grew out of them. Th e previous 
models did not involve fi nding the perfect match. In the nineteenth 
and early twentieth centuries, the main idea was to categorize people 
into groups and predict group behavior, intersecting groups where 
possible to increase accuracy. Th is started soon aft er the emergence of 
state statistics and probability, with a nascent logic of prediction based 
on actuarial methods and a rationality focused on group membership, 
on categorical reasoning. With the advent of mainframe computers 
and multivariate computing abilities, there emerged in the mid- twentieth 
century a “variables paradigm” that transmuted categorical thought 
into more linear relationships; with enhanced data storage and anal-
ysis, with the power to engage in large- n statistical regressions, a new 
logic of data control surfaced that sought to identify the exact equa-
tions that would properly relate diff erent variables to each other. Th e 
actuarial approach gave way to a more algebraic relationship that sought 
to relate in a multivariate equation the diff erent factors that produced 
an outcome— looking for causal connections, and trying to capture 
them errorlessly. Now, the dominant logic is one that tries to match at 
an individual level, to know exactly, for each one of us, regardless of 
the causal mechanism or reason. And with all the data we produce, 
mine, and analyze, it is becoming increasingly possible to do just that.
Today, the capabilities and logic have evolved toward the ideal of 
the perfect match. Yet there is one thing that runs through these dif-
ferent logics: data control. In the digital age, this means the control of 
all our intimate information, wants, and desires. Th is may be novel, 
but each step of the way, there was a machine, a desire- producing ma-
chine, a way to automate and perfect, to mechanize, to model, to take 
it out of human hands and place it in the object realm: the actuarial 
instrument, the multivariate regression, today the recommender algo-
rithm. And each step of the way, one leading into the other, there was 

a progression in exactitude, from the group to the relationship to the 
individual—or, now, the perfect match.
There are many places one could start— the Re nais sance, the 
classical age, the birth of statistics— but one truly stands out: the birth 
of actuarial instruments and logics at the turn of the twentieth cen-
tury. I have written at length and traced the history of the actuarial 
turn in a previous book, Against Prediction, and will not rehearse that 
history  here.18 Let me be brief with the chronology, then, in order to 
elaborate somewhat on the context and the form of rationality that 
arose and helped pave the way to our doppelgänger logic today.
Th e actuarial logic that emerged so robustly at the turn of the twen-
tieth century re oriented thought—or what we might call dispositions 
of the mind— toward the group and classifi cation, toward categorical 
ways of seeing. Th e use of actuarial tables extended rapidly from the 
narrow realm of the insurance industry and nascent workmen’s com-
pensation systems to many other domains, ranging from criminology 
and delinquency studies to the prediction of divorce outcomes, em-
ployment, and so on. Th ese developments  were founded on a logic of 
group identifi cation. Th e prediction instruments invented in the 1920s 
and early 1930s rested on the comparison of group base rates. Th ey de-
pended on a subgroup’s relative position vis- à- vis the overall group’s 
behavior: for instance, how did the recidivism rate of inmates with 
fathers of German ancestry, paroled from Stateville Penitentiary in Jo-
liet, Illinois, compare to the average recidivism rate for all parolees 
from Stateville? How did the group of “ne’er- do- wells” released from 
Pontiac prison compare to the average of all those paroled from Pon-
tiac? In the actuarial approach, each point of comparison required di-
viding the group into subgroups, in order to analyze their comparative 
rates of off ending or other behavior. Th is was group- based prediction, 
grounded on membership in categories: the individual could only be 
understood— analyzed, studied, predicted—in relation to the groups 
that he or she belonged to.
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  147

148  The Birth of the Expository Society
Th e turn to a group- based, actuarial logic was made possible by the 
accumulation of statistics, developments in empirical methods, and a 
perceived increase in the ability to predict human behavior. It went 
hand in hand with a probabilistic, risk- based way of thinking that had 
signifi cant eff ects on the practice of social control. As Ian Hacking 
persuasively demonstrates in Th e Taming of Chance, the laws of proba-
bility had largely displaced the laws of necessity in much of Western 
discourse by the late nineteenth century, and the turn from natural 
law to probabilistic reasoning, paradoxically, facilitated eff orts to con-
trol human behavior.19 It was behind one of the fi rst major drives to-
ward social engineering in the early twentieth century. It served to 
discipline uncertainty, as Nikolas Rose suggests, “by bringing uncer-
tainty under control, making it orderly and docile.”20 “Risk thinking 
tames chance, fate, and uncertainty by a paradoxical move,” Rose ex-
plains. “By recognizing the impossibility of certainty about the future, 
it simultaneously makes this lack of certainty quantifi able in terms 
of probability. And once one has quantifi ed the probability of a future 
event’s occurring, decisions can be made and justifi ed about what to 
do in the present, informed by what now seems to be secure, if proba-
bilistic, knowledge about the future.”21
Predictive risk analysis based on groups— using the laws of chance 
and the normal curve— would allow for greater control over behavior.22 
“Th e cardinal concept of the psychology of the Enlightenment had 
been, simply, human nature,” Hacking explains.23 “By the end of the 
nineteenth century, it was being replaced by something diff erent: 
normal people.”24 Normal distributions, the Gaussian bell curve, and 
the laws of chance would allow us to categorize people into the classi-
fi cations of “normal” and “abnormal,” or “delinquent,” or “dangerous.”25 
Most of this predictive analysis was fi rst done in the area of delinquency— 
crime, suicide, madness, and prostitution. Adolphe Quetelet, the Bel-
gian statistician, would write as early as 1832 of the statistical regulari-
ties concerning deviancy.26 He described the phenomenon as a “kind 
of bud get for the scaff old, the galleys and the prisons, achieved by the 
French nation with greater regularity, without doubt, than the fi nan-
cial bud get.”27

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
By the 1920s, there was a real thirst for group- based actuarial pre-
diction on this side of the Atlantic— a strong desire to place the study 
of social and legal behavior on scientifi c footing in order to better cor-
rect and discipline the delinquent. Doctoral students and researchers 
 were practically mesmerized by the possibilities. George Vold, a doc-
toral student in sociology at the University of Chicago, captured well, 
in reasoned and deliberate cadence, the sentiment of the times: “Th e 
principle of predicting future human conduct . . .  seems sound and 
worthwhile. Insurance companies have built up large business enter-
prises on this principle of predicting the future from the past. Th e 
present study [on prediction methods and parole] . . .  seems to estab-
lish the validity of that general principle for other phases of human 
conduct as well.”28 One of the leading minds behind the turn to group- 
based actuarial prediction, University of Chicago sociology professor 
Ernest W. Burgess, expressed the sensibility and the aspirations of the 
times. “Predictability is feasible,” he declared in 1928.29 “Th ere can 
be no doubt of the feasibility of determining the factors governing the 
success or the failure of the man on parole.”30
What emerged  were group- based prediction tables for prisoners—
an entire actuarial logic that would categorize and place people with 
certain risk factors in designated groups in order to determine their 
likely behaviors. It was a radical transformation that inaugurated a 
generalized turn to actuaries and actuarial logics. In 1933, by way of 
illustration, Ferris F. Laune, Ph.D., was hired as a “sociologist and ac-
tuary” at the Illinois State Penitentiary at Joliet to conduct actuarial 
analyses of all potential parolees.31 Laune would be the fi rst to offi  -
cially implement the actuarial method of parole prediction in the 
country and to produce the fi rst prognasio, as he called it— a report, 
based on group- trait off ending rates, that evaluated an individual pris-
oner’s probability of violating parole if released. By 1935, group- based 
actuarial methods  were being deployed in penitentiaries throughout 
Illinois.
Th e actuarial turn refl ected three important dimensions, the fi rst 
of which propelled the actuarial turn itself, but also the subsequent 
stages of technological development.
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  149
www.Ebook777.com

150  The Birth of the Expository Society
1. Th e desire to know. Th ere was a palpable desire to know, scientifi -
cally, these groups of delinquent men and to predict their behavior. 
Th ere was a drive to operationalize and model group behavior in the 
most parsimonious way, a quest for the most effi  cient instruments to 
better anticipate future actions. It was the same drive that had in-
spired the development of statistics in the eigh teenth and nineteenth 
centuries— and which would eventually push the actuarial toward 
even greater statistical power with multivariate regression analysis.
Th e desire to count, to predict, to know the group— the desire, in 
Hacking’s words, to tame chance— refl ects precisely this desire to 
control the future. Hacking describes well how this turn to probabili-
ties, originating in the natural sciences, fueled ideas of social control:
Th e more the indeterminism, the more the control. Th is is ob-
vious in the physical sciences. Quantum physics take for granted 
that nature is at bottom irreducibly stochastic. Precisely that 
discovery has immeasurably enhanced our ability to interfere 
with and alter the course of nature. A moment’s refl ection shows 
that a similar statement may be attempted in connection with 
people. Th e parallel was noticed quite early. Wilhelm Wundt, 
one of the founding fathers of quantitative psychology, wrote as 
early as 1862: “It is statistics that fi rst demonstrated that love fol-
lows psychological laws.”32
Th is is precisely what is refl ected so resoundingly in the triumphant 
declarations of researchers at the time: “Prediction is the aim of the 
social sciences as it is of the physical sciences.”33 Group prediction is 
not only feasible, it is necessary. “Prediction as to probable success on 
parole is,” Ferris Laune declared in 1936, “a self- evident necessity.”34
2. Th e desire to categorize. Th is desire to know went hand in hand 
with an urge to categorize—to slot people into the right box, to fi t 
them into the right rubric. Th is was the logic of groups. It formed a 
categorical way of interpreting reality— a group logic or sensibility 
that was at one and the same time embraced and promoted, but oft en 
resisted as well. Th ere was, simultaneously, a critique of the subjective 

nature of prior categories and an embrace of new (but surprisingly 
subjective) ones to replace them. Younger scholars would criticize older 
ones, but then ultimately propose similar group labels. Th e “ne’er- do- 
well” category, for instance, would be recycled alongside the “irrespon-
sible youngblood,” the “weak character,” and the “country bully,” re-
placing the “hobo,” “drift er,” and “tough guy.”35 Here, for instance, are 
the group labels developed by a younger scholar in 1931:
1. Responsible and substantial citizen
2. Respected workman
3. Irresponsible youngblood
4. Recent immigrant
5. Weak  character
6. Ne’er- do- well
7. Transient worker
8. Small town or country “bully”
9. City tough36
Despite all the introspection and criticism, scholars would recycle 
these labels in their research, grasping on to the logic of group identity. 
So Daniel Glaser, in his 1954 study, would redefi ne the “social types” 
into “seven general life patterns toward which the subjects seemed to 
be developing prior to their off ense,” but nevertheless retain the “ne’er- 
do- well” category, as well as the “fl oater” and the “dissipated.”37 Th e 
urge to categorize in groups was simply overwhelming.
3. Th e desire to insure. Th ird, the group logic was infl ected with a 
desire to insure—to spread risk, to diff use responsibility, to eliminate 
blame. François Ewald, in his book L’état providence (Th e welfare 
state), traces this subtle shift  in ways of thinking—in rationality—to 
the late nineteenth century. It was a transformation from an earlier 
time, marked by a stronger sense of individual responsibility and ac-
countability, to a logic of risk, categorical harms, and group compen-
sation. With regard to accidents, for instance, the model in the earlier 
nineteenth century was civil liability, with the associated allocation of 
fault; it relied on an individualized fault- based regime. Th e twentieth 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  151

152  The Birth of the Expository Society
century, by contrast, saw the emergence of workmen’s compensation 
regimes: accidents became perceived through the lens of risk and the 
predictable probability of harm. Employers  were no longer seen as re-
sponsible for factory injuries; those accidents became part of the pro-
cess of production; and compensation would become regularized by 
means of categorical tables of injuries.38 Ewald traces this moment to 
an important legal development in France in 1898 that inaugurated a 
workmen’s compensation regime for accidents, a system of automatic 
indemnities for workers injured in industrial accidents. Th e law of 1898 
launched, Ewald would write, “the philosophy of risk.”39 It was a phi-
losophy based on categories of harm and groups of injured workers. It 
rested on group- based logics.
Th ese notions of risk assessment and insurability would play an im-
portant role in the early twentieth century— one that served to spread 
responsibility and to reinforce group- based determinations. Th ere 
was a strong desire to mimic in other domains the supremacy of the 
actuarial as seen in the insurance industry. In his very fi rst study in 
1928, Ernest Burgess had emphasized that “the practical value of an 
expectancy rate should be as useful in parole administration as similar 
rates have proved to be in insurance and in other fi elds where fore-
casting the future is necessary.” 40 Practically all of the subsequent lit-
erature would return to this leitmotif.
Th e comparison to the insurance industry served, in part, to nor-
malize the research and to mainstream its application. Th e comparison 
was meant to reassure parole board members. Aft er all, the insurance 
industry had been using these group- based methods successfully for 
many years; parole boards did not need to fear them. Th ere was, in 
addition, an eff ort to relieve the decision makers of responsibility—to 
turn parole decisions into automatic or automated pro cesses about 
groups, not individuals. Th e goal of analogizing to insurance, at least in 
part, was to assuage those who had to make diffi  cult decisions, to 
make sure that they could sleep at night.41 Over and over again, the 
insurance analogy and the model of group prediction  were deployed 
to placate concern. Th e focus on the group was key to assuaging the 
anxieties of the time. Th e insurance model would calm nerves. So, for 

instance, Walter Argow would write in 1935, speaking about parole 
prediction: “Th is idea is not totally new or peculiar to our fi eld, for in-
surance companies have been using a similar device to compute the 
‘probable life- range’ of an individual on the basis of data regarding 
others in similar circumstances.” 42 By using a rationality that focused 
on groups, the idea was ultimately to create a machine— a mechanistic 
way—to solve problems.
The mid- twentieth century would experience a ge ne tic mu-
tation from this logic of groups to a more individualized, causal, linear 
rationality represented by multivariate statistical analysis. In large 
part, enhanced computing power caused the transfi guration, though 
it was also driven by a similar dream of machine knowledge and fan-
tasy of social control.43 In the pro cess, a diff erent rationality would 
emerge, an entirely diff erent logic based not on groups but on relations 
between individuals.
At the height of the Cold War in the late 1950s and early 1960s, a 
distinctive type of reasoning called systems analysis was perfected 
and began to be applied broadly to matters ranging from nuclear de-
fense strategy to domestic crime policy.44 Th e brainchild of the RAND 
Corporation, systems analysis drew on the innovations of “operations 
research” and the knowledge and techniques developed in the U.S. 
Army Air Force’s Offi  ce of Statistical Control during World War II.45 
Th e idea of statistical control itself came from Harvard Business School 
and the management sciences, which had looked increasingly to the 
model of data control— and to the very notion of “control”—to im-
prove manufacturing, production, and bud geting pro cesses.
Th e Army Air Force had turned to Harvard Business School in 1942 
to set up a training camp for their new offi  cers of statistical control, 
and the Air Force College began operating at Harvard that same year. 
Offi  cers would learn there everything they needed to know about data 
collection and quantitative analysis to eff ectuate studies of bombing 
accuracy and every other kind of effi  ciency analysis regarding refu-
eling, repairs, manpower, stocking, and so on. From there, the “stats 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  153

154  The Birth of the Expository Society
control” offi  cers would be scattered across the globe to diff erent air 
divisions to engage in data collection, data mining, research, and sta-
tistical analyses. Th e offi  cers would then report back to their superior 
commanding offi  cers with what they had discovered: the optimal alti-
tude, for instance, or the optimal fl ying formation for a bombing mis-
sion in order to maximize the accuracy of the operation and minimize 
casualties and equipment losses. But for that, of course, it was neces-
sary to collect more and more data— about sorties, bombing accu-
racy, losses, weather, cloud formations, wind conditions, and fl ying 
formations. More data  were needed, and better machines to store the 
data, retrieve it, and analyze it. Everything needed to be machine ac-
cessible. And, of course, better mathematical and statistical models 
 were needed to fi gure out the relations in the data. To mine the data. To 
discover a linear relationship between the individual observations.
Statistical control would mushroom aft er the war. Data- driven sys-
tems research would expand dramatically as the research wing of the 
air force peeled off  and become a major research institution, the 
RAND Corporation, in 1948. (Th e air force itself had become a sepa-
rate branch of the military in 1947.) Statistical control would migrate 
to the private sector as former “stats control” offi  cers returned to ci-
vilian life— several of them, notably, moving to Detroit, Michigan, to 
head research and management at the Ford Motor Corporation. And 
statistical control would make its way back into government and the 
core functions of governmentality when, for instance, Robert S. Mc-
Namara took over the Pentagon in 1961 as secretary of defense and, a 
few years later, President Lyndon B. Johnson imposed the methods of 
systems analysis across the board to all federal agencies under the ru-
bric of “planning- programming- budgeting systems” analysis. It 
would reach down into more localized forms of government as locally 
elected politicians began to deploy the same technologies. John Lindsay 
would be elected mayor of New York City in 1966 and take offi  ce 
promising to reform city government— specifi cally, by using planning- 
programming- budgeting systems analysis “to improve bud geting and 
operations.” 46

As the private sector, federal government, local offi  cials, higher ed-
ucation, and research all turned to methods of statistical control, there 
was increasing pressure to collect and store more data, to develop com-
puterized algorithms, to mine and analyze the data, and to build larger 
and better machine tools to read, store, manipulate, and or ga nize the 
massive quantities of data being accumulated. But it was not simply a 
question of collecting more data and analyzing it. Th ere was also a cer-
tain logic, a certain type of rationality, that emerged with statistical 
control and would expand, extending into every sphere and colonizing 
every domain. It was a type of rationality, a way of making decisions, 
that focused on the relationships between individual observations in a 
large data set and that let those relationships drive the decision making. 
Th at demanded more and more data in order to let the data speak. To 
let the data do the work.
Th e logic was simple: all that was needed was a lot of data about dif-
ferent possible policies and a clear, singular objective in order not just 
to evaluate the relationships individually (itself a data- intense project) 
but to compare the evaluations of diff erent programs. Th e data anal-
ysis and computations could determine the correct ordinal ranking of 
the policy alternatives along any criterion. Th is would also eliminate 
the need for po liti cal wrangling, for value judgments. Data- driven 
systems analysis, in eff ect, would put aside partisan politics, personal 
preferences, subjective values, and overinfl ated expectations. As a 
RAND analyst and future secretary of defense, James R. Schlesinger, 
would explain: “[Systems analysis] eliminates the purely subjective ap-
proach on the part of devotees of a program and forces them to change 
their lines of argument. Th ey must talk about reality rather than mo-
rality.” 47 And all that was necessary— that is, necessary to avoid talking 
about morality— was a lot of information and good statistical anal-
yses. If we could just collect more and more data about all of these dif-
ferent policies and grind them through our machine models, it might 
be possible to optimize any  objective.
Data- driven, statistical systems analysis: a machine that compares 
relationships. Th is was precisely the rationality that McNamara would 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  155

156  The Birth of the Expository Society
impose on the military upon taking offi  ce as secretary of defense. Mc-
Namara’s objective was to refi ne and perfect military decision making 
and, beyond that, to gain control of the military establishment. As a 
civilian with no combat experience, McNamara needed to fi nd a way 
to assert and maintain legitimacy with, and authority over, military 
generals. And that is precisely what he was trying to achieve by im-
posing at the Pentagon a new form of reasoning—an entirely new form 
of economic discourse that the military generals had no access to and 
no profi ciency in.
Th e drive for data and computational power during the Cold War 
would have profound transformative eff ects on ways of thinking, on 
forms of rationality. It would induce a foundational shift  from a group- 
based, actuarial logic to an individualized, “fi tted” way of thinking, as-
sociated with multivariate regression analysis. It would move us from 
the actuarial table to the regression equation.
Th e drive for more data and greater computing power would even-
tually make possible the kinds of complex statistical analyses un-
imaginable in an earlier day— from ordinary least- squares regression 
analyses to hierarchical linear or fi xed- eff ects models, logit and probit 
models, and Poisson regression models. All of these could now be 
performed in nanoseconds on mainframe computers, but would have 
taken days or weeks or months to accomplish only a few de cades ear-
lier. Th is computational power would transform our way of thinking, 
re orienting us from those earlier two- dimensional group- based tables 
to the statistical equation with its coeffi  cients, error terms, and confi -
dence intervals. Th e statistical analyses could tell us the function, the 
curve, the contributing factors. Th ey would off er a more individually 
tailored, more fi ne- grained probability for each individual observa-
tion, for each individual case, and highlight the potential magnitude 
of error. Th ey would shift  the logic from the group to the fi tted 
individual.
The shift from the statistical logic of the late twentieth 
century to today’s digital era would represent another quantum leap, a 

leap from individualized statistical prediction to the “match”— the 
logic of the doppelgänger. Th e object of the algorithmic data- mining 
quest of the digital age is to fi nd our perfect double, our hidden twin. 
It deploys a new rationality of similitude, of matching, without regard 
for the causal link. Th e goal, the aspiration, the object is to fi nd that 
second identical person, almost practically perfectly individualized, 
but not so individualized that she cannot be matched: not the unique 
individual, perhaps, but rather the matched duodividual.48
Expository power represents a par tic u lar form of power that deals 
less with total populations, groups, or individuals than with the 
twins, the matches, the doubles. NSA surveillance and Google recom-
mendations are not about groups or populations but about the doppel-
gänger: they are about matching, not about populating. It is about 
fi nding our twin in order to get us to download more apps and to do 
more on our computers— and to expose ourselves even more to the 
digital itself. It is about identifying our digital self by matching us to 
our digital double— what Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson might 
refer to as our “data double.” 49 It requires making sure that everything 
we do goes through the digital sphere, so that everything gets counted, 
all the clicks, all the watches, all the likes, all the attention, and also so 
that everything we do is seeable, transparent, surveillable. It works by 
accumulation and multiplicity. More is better. More information 
about us is needed so that we can be better matched to our twin. So 
that we can know more accurately, recommend more precisely.
A top engineer at Netfl ix, which has become a leader in the fi eld, 
explains the shift  in logics from group prediction to matching: “Testing 
has shown that the predicted ratings aren’t actually super- useful, while 
what you’re actually playing is. We’re going from focusing exclusively 
on ratings and rating predictions to depending on a more complex 
ecosystem of algorithms.” 50
Netfl ix employs about 800 engineers at its headquarters in Silicon 
Valley to do just this. Th e goal is to refi ne recommend technology to 
the utmost. And they seem to be succeeding. In March 2013, Netfl ix 
sent out its 4 billionth DVD, and in the fi rst quarter of 2013 alone, 
Netfl ix streamed more than 4 billion hours of fi lm. Of this, about 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  157

158  The Birth of the Expository Society
75 percent was driven by recommend technology.51 Th e key, according 
to Carlos Gomez  Uribe, vice president of product innovation and per-
sonalization algorithms, is just to look “at the metadata.” 52
Th e algorithms themselves are extremely complicated and derive 
from diff erent kinds of technologies, depending on whether they are 
memory- based or model- based and whether they take a content- based 
or collaborative fi ltering systems approach. For instance, memory- 
based algorithms can take a collaborative fi ltering approach and try 
“to fi nd users that are similar to the active user (i.e. the users we want 
to make predictions for), and use their preferences to predict ratings 
for the active user.” 53 Th e competition to improve these recommend 
technologies is intense. In 2006, Netfl ix off ered a million- dollar prize 
to anyone who could improve its recommend algorithm, Cinematch, 
by 10 percent.54 In 2014, Twitter opened up the source code of one of 
its algorithms, Dimension In de pen dent Matrix Square using Map-
Reduce (DIMSUM), in order to get other computer techies to im-
prove on it.55
Although the science behind the recommend algorithms may be 
extremely complex and require hundreds of engineers— and is too in-
tricate to detail here— the logic of matching is quite simple. As Xavier 
Amatriain, engineering director at Netfl ix, explains:
We know what you played, searched for, or rated, as well as the 
time, date, and device. We even track user interactions such as 
browsing or scrolling behavior. All that data is fed into several 
algorithms, each optimized for a diff erent purpose. In a broad 
sense, most of our algorithms are based on the assumption that 
similar viewing patterns represent similar user tastes. We can 
use the behavior of similar users to infer your preferences.56
Recommend technology is key to Netfl ix’s success, as it is at 
 Amazon . com and many other digital retailers. As Amatriain of Net-
fl ix explains, “Almost everything we do is a recommendation. . . . 
Recommendation is huge, and our search feature is what people do 
when  we’re not able to show them what to watch.” 57

Th e next frontier is to refi ne these matching algorithms by exact 
hour and location—to completely contextualize the recommend tech-
nology so we know exactly what changes depending on the hour of the 
day or where you are. As Amatriain explains, Netfl ix has “data that 
suggests there is diff erent viewing behavior depending on the day of 
the week, the time of day, the device, and sometimes even the loca-
tion.” 58 Netfl ix does not yet know how to capitalize on this data, but 
will soon. “We are currently working on [it]. We hope to be using it in 
the near future.” 59
All these matching algorithms serve to nudge our desires and curi-
osities in an infi nitely looping forward- and- backward motion, as we 
each glom on to new and diff erent “duodividuals.” And the algorithmic 
logic coaxes us to believe in its truth. As Tarleton Gillespie writes, 
“Google and its algorithm help assert and normalize this knowledge 
logic as ‘right,’ as right as its results appear to be.” 60
•  •  •
Finding each of our doppelgängers takes work. Cookies help—or 
helped. So did “people- based marketing,” which can follow us on our 
mobile phones when cookies fail. But now there is even more: “on-
boarding.” 61 Onboarding is the practice of merging all the digital knowl-
edge we have about an individual, culled from cookies, web tracking, 
and data mining, with the physical or material information we have 
about that person as well.
Th e link happens when someone sheds some of his digital informa-
tion in person, at a store, for instance. Th is allows the trackers to 
attach a real identity to the digital address. For example, when a 
shopper at the mall gives his email address to the store at the checkout 
counter, a data broker can take all of the physical information about 
the buyer (credit card, name, purchases, and any other identifying in-
formation) and link it, through the buyer’s email address, to an IP ad-
dress. And with the IP address, there is full access to all the buyer’s 
web activities— surfi ng, buying online, email contacts, social media, 
and so forth.
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  159

160  The Birth of the Expository Society
Th e tracking power  here is truly awesome. In the words of Scott 
Howe, chief executive of one of the largest data brokers in the United 
States, Acxiom, “Th e marriage of online and offl  ine is the ad targeting 
of the last 10 years on ste roids.” 62
Many social media are now using and off ering these digital adver-
tising ste roids. Twitter and Facebook, for example, off er their advertisers 
“onboarding.” 63 Twitter reports to its advertisers how it works. Th is is 
directly from the Twitter blog, straight from Kevin Weil (@kevinweil), 
who is Twitter’s “Se nior Director of Product, Revenue”:
Let’s say a local fl orist wants to advertise a Valentine’s Day spe-
cial on Twitter. Th ey’d prefer to show their ad to fl ower enthusi-
asts who frequent their website or subscribe to their newsletter. 
To get the special off er to those people who are also on Twitter, 
the shop may share with us a scrambled, unreadable email address 
(a hash) or browser- related information (a browser cookie ID). 
We can then match that information to accounts in order to 
show them a Promoted Tweet with the Valentine’s Day deal.64
In case you are wondering what a “hash” is, Facebook explains it 
nicely  here: “Hashing summarizes text into a short fi ngerprint that 
 can’t be decrypted.” 65 Apparently Facebook uses this hashing tech-
nology a lot in the context of trying to match email addresses and 
other information such as cell phone numbers to users. As the company 
explains on its website, “Facebook calculates the hash of the email ad-
dresses and phone numbers that people have given us and stores these 
hashes with the corresponding person.” 66
What this kind of onboarding technology permits social media, 
data brokers, and advertisers to do is to identify with much greater 
precision each of our doppelgängers. Facebook refers to those twins of 
ours as folks who are in our “Lookalike Audiences.” 67 Th at’s a good 
synonym— “lookalike”— and it refl ects well the underlying ratio-
nality: to try to match an individual to another. Facebook explains its 
“Lookalike Audiences” feature in relation to its other advertising tool, 
“Custom Audiences,” which are compiled “using email addresses, 

phone numbers, Facebook user IDs or mobile advertiser IDs.” 68 Here’s 
how Facebook explains it all, in lay terms:
What are lookalike audiences?
Lookalike audiences let you reach new people who are likely 
to be interested in your business because they’re similar to a cus-
tomer list you care about.
Lookalike audiences help you reach people who are similar 
to your current customers for fan acquisition, site registration, 
off - Facebook purchases, coupon claims and brand awareness.69
And once you have a “Lookalike Audience,” you can then “optimize” 
the matches using other tools (again, straight from the Facebook page):
What does it mean to optimize for “Similarity” or “Greater 
Reach” when creating a lookalike audience?
Lookalike audiences help you fi nd the people who are most 
similar to the people in your Custom Audience.
•  When you optimize for Similarity, your lookalike audience 
will include the people in your selected country who are most 
similar (down to the top 1%) to your custom audience. Th e 
reach of this new audience will be smaller, but the match will 
be more precise. Th is option is best when you want a very 
specifi c match or have a limited bud get.
•  When you optimize for Reach, your lookalike audience will 
include up to the top 10% of people in your selected country 
that are similar to your custom audience, but with a less pre-
cise match. Th is option is best if you want to get your mes-
sage in front of more people who are likely to be interested in 
your business.70
The logic has shifted toward the lookalike, the doppelgänger. 
Th e transformation from data to digits has changed the way we think. 
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  161

162  The Birth of the Expository Society
Th ere are, of course, some continuities and commonalities. All three ra-
tionalities share a common desire to know and a thirst for predic-
tion— for forecasting deviance and consumption, for example. Each 
values objectivity, the scientifi c method, and effi  cient technologies. In a 
very real sense, each one of these logics aspires to a form of positivism 
that avoids morality or anything approximating a normative judgment.
But at the same time, they are deeply diff erent, these logics. Th e 
new matching technologies are potentially more accurate—at least 
with respect to our digital selves: they refl ect progress from a rudi-
mentary focus on group traits (actuarial) to more individualized de-
terminations (regression equations) to the perfect match (algorithmic 
data mining). Th ey may be more powerful computationally: they evince 
a continuously growing technicity and exponentially increased com-
putational abilities. Th ey present as more objective, if possible: they 
are devoid of the moralizing touch. Consider that some of the early 
actuarians would refer to “white marks” and “black marks”; for ex-
ample, Clark Tibbitts wrote in 1931, “A record of no work . . .  which 
shows a violation rate of 38.5 percent would be an unfavorable sign or 
what we have chosen to call ‘a black mark,’ while a good work record 
with only 5.6 percent failure would be favorable or ‘a white mark.’ ”71 
Notice how seamlessly the science slipped into morality back then. 
Not so with statistical control, and certainly not with data mining in 
the digital age. We have entered the age of amoral machine logics.
And just as there is movement away from morality, there is also 
today a gradual shift  away from causality. Th e algorithmic approach 
does not care anymore about causation, as long as it has a match. Ken-
neth Neil Cukier and Viktor Mayer- Schoenberger develop this insight 
in their book Big Data: A Revolution Th at Will Transform How We Live, 
Work, and Th ink. Th ey run through the ever increasing number of ex-
amples where correlations alone—at Amazon, at Walmart, at Target, 
at UPS, at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention— result in 
nontheorized solutions. Where just the collection and analysis of mil-
lions of data points produce connections that solve problems. “Cau-
sality won’t be discarded,” they predict, “but it is being knocked off  its 

pedestal as the primary foundation of meaning. Big data turbocharges 
non- causal analyses, oft en replacing causal investigations.”72
What we have, then, is a genealogy of logics that have fed into each 
other, culminating in the present doppelgänger rationality of the ex-
pository society (see Table 5.1).
Th is is not to suggest that in our new digital age, the prior logics no 
longer hold sway. To the contrary, they continue to dominate in par-
tic u lar fi elds— actuarial logics in criminal justice, for instance, the 
variables paradigm in po liti cal science. Logics have long shadows—or 
bad hangovers. Technological innovation takes a long time to colonize 
a fi eld, but when it does, it lasts and lingers for de cades. Burgess intro-
duced actuarialism in the parole decision context in the late 1920s, but 
it is only today that the approach has colonized the fi eld. It was only 
when the federal government began to use an actuarial instrument, 
the Salient Factor Score, in the early 1970s that many other states 
would gravitate toward the actuarial method. Actuarial logics took 
about fi ft y years to take hold of the criminal justice fi eld, but now 
they have a lock on the business. Similarly, the discipline of po liti cal 
science is today overrun by regression analyses and rational choice 
models. It may have taken a number of years and much confl ict in the 
table 5.1
Th e birth of a doppelgänger logic
1920s
Actuarial Logics
1960s 
Statistical Control
2010s 
Doppelgänger Logics
Group-based predictions
Relationships between individuals
Matching technology
Actuarial prediction
Statistical regression
Data mining
Actuarial tables
Regression equations
Recommend algorithms
Ernest Burgess
Th e RAND Corp.
Netfl ix/Amazon/NSA
Mechanical calculator
Mainframe computer
Supercomputer
Moralistic
Amoral
Acausal
Table by Bernard E. Harcourt.
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  163

164  The Birth of the Expository Society
discipline, but the variables paradigm ultimately prevailed— and is 
hanging on, despite new methodological developments, the advent 
of experimentalism, the emergence of data mining, and so on. Th ese 
logics come with a heavy investment in methodological training, a 
buildup of know- how, and steep professional costs. Th ey do not cede 
easily. Th ey oft en overstay their welcome.
Hegemony takes time. In a number of domains, the doppelgänger 
logic has not yet displaced these others. But it is all around us. We ex-
perience it daily in our routine activities, in our social relations, in the 
commercial sphere— and, for many, in the carceral fi eld as well. Th e 
new logic of the digital match is  here, and growing.
It is a new logic, a new rationality— but it evinces a much older drive 
to know. Th e drive to quantify everything, the ambition for total aware-
ness has been with us for centuries. Recall the “paper- squeeze” of 
Jacques- François Guillauté. Or think back further to William Petty, 
who in his Po liti cal Arithmetick, published in 1691, proposed to mea sure 
and to count everything. “Instead of using only comparative and su-
perlative Words, and intellectual Arguments, I have taken the course 
(as a Specimen of the Po liti cal Arithmetick I have long aimed at) to 
express my self in Terms of Number, Weight, or Mea sure,” Petty declared.73 
Petty even calculated the value, in pounds sterling, of “each Head of 
Man, Woman, and Child” in En gland, using a complex or convoluted 
method of data extraction and inference:
I shall  here digress to set down the way of computing the value 
of every Head one with another, and that by the instance of People 
in En gland, viz. Suppose the People of En gland be Six Millions in 
number, that their expence at 7 l. per Head be forty two Millions: 
suppose also that the Rent of the Lands be eight Millions, and 
the profi t of all the Personal Estate be Eight Millions more; it 
must needs follow, that the Labour of the People must have sup-
plyed the remaining Twenty Six Millions, the which multiplied 
by Twenty (the Mass of Mankind being worth Twenty Years pur-
chase as well as Land) makes Five Hundred and Twenty Mil-
lions, as the value of the  whole People: which number divided by 

Six Millions, makes above 80 l. Sterling, to be valued of each 
Head of Man, Woman, and Child, and of adult Persons twice as 
much; from whence we may learn to compute the loss we have 
sustained by the Plague, by the Slaughter of Men in War, and by 
the sending them abroad into the ser vice of Foreign Princes.74
Th ese  were, perhaps, wild ruminations— a quixotic drive for exact 
empirical mea sure ment, quantifi cation, and knowledge— but Petty 
was not alone. Richard Cantillon, in the eigh teenth century, had the 
same ambition. In his Essai sur la nature du commerce en general, pub-
lished in 1755 (though written and distributed to specialists as early as 
1728), Cantillon included an entry for “coût de la vie” (cost of life).75 
Th ere he calculated, with exactitude, the amount of land necessary to 
sustain a peasant and, separately, a bourgeois: “le produit d’un arpent 
et demi de terre de moyenne bonté, qui rapporte six fois la semence, 
et qui se repose tous les trois ans” for the peasant, and “le produit de 
quatre à cinq arpents de terre de moyenne bonté” for the bourgeois.76 
Th ese ruminations proved to be fertile. Marx quoted Petty extensively 
in his Capital, specifi cally regarding Petty’s theory of surplus value, as 
did Adam Smith.77 And the development of po liti cal arithmetic was 
important to the larger scientifi c development in the seventeenth cen-
tury, exemplifi ed especially by Petty’s mentor, Th omas Hobbes, for 
whom “reality expresses itself by means of a quantitative structure.”78 
Th e drive to quantify, to mine data, and to achieve total awareness was 
not born yesterday. Th e doppelgänger logic, though, is new— and has 
signifi cant and unique eff ects on our subjectivity today.
A Genealogy of the New Doppelgänger Logic  165

The birth of the expository society has gone hand in hand with a 
gradual erosion of the analog values we once prized— privacy, au-
tonomy, some anonymity, secrecy, dignity, a room of one’s own, the 
right to be let alone. Commenting on a survey of British consumers— 
which found that most respondents “ were happy to have companies 
use their personal data, on the condition that they receive something 
in return”— Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson note that “privacy is 
now less a line in the sand beyond which transgression is not per-
mitted, than a shift ing space of negotiation where privacy is traded for 
products, better ser vices or special deals.”1 Facebook founder Mark 
Zuckerberg infamously remarked in 2010 that privacy is no longer re-
ally the social norm.2 Truth is, most Americans have reacted little to 
the Snowden revelations and the stories of social media and corporate 
surveillance. Only three- fourths of American Internet users report 
that they are aware of the Snowden aff air, and of those, only about a 
third report taking steps “to protect their online privacy and security 
as a result of his revelations.”3 According to a Pew survey from June 
2013, “A majority of Americans—56%— say the National Security 
Agency’s (NSA) program tracking the telephone rec ords of millions 
S I X
the eclipse of humanism

Th e Eclipse of Humanism  167
of Americans is an acceptable way for the government to investigate 
terrorism.” 4 Overall, there is a lack of concern about ongoing infringe-
ments of our privacy, whether by corporate giants like Google, Micro-
soft , and Facebook or by security agencies like the NSA, Britain’s 
GCHQ, or France’s DGSE. Th e most signifi cant pop u lar reform to 
date, the USA FREEDOM Act, barely scratches at the surface of the 
NSA’s myriad boundless collection programs.
Many of us have become complacent today— that is, when we 
are not actively craving publicity, or learning to love what we  can’t 
do without. We have gotten accustomed to the commodifi cation of 
privacy, of autonomy, of anonymity—to the commodifi cation of 
what  D.  A. Miller refers to as that “integral, autonomous, ‘secret’ 
self.” 5 Whereas we once viewed privacy and dignity as necessary in-
gredients for a fulfi lling life, as basic human needs, as the psychic 
equivalent of air and water, today we tend to view them as market 
goods, as commodities that are to be bought or sold in a marketplace. 
Th is has coincided with a larger shift  toward a neoliberal worldview, 
in which market rationalities dominate every sphere of life, including 
the social and personal. We have begun to think of ourselves, more 
and more, as calculating, rational actors pursuing our self- interest by 
means of cost- benefi t analyses that convert practically every good 
into commoditized form. Th is way of thinking and behaving has had 
tangible eff ects, not least on our valuation of privacy, autonomy, and 
anonymity.
In an earlier period, in the 1950s and 1960s, privacy was thought of 
along more humanistic lines—as something that we needed, like air 
or water, for our very existence. Autonomy and anonymity  were viewed 
as integral parts of our environment and ecol ogy, as essential ingredi-
ents necessary for human beings to thrive. We needed a room of our 
own, space to think and experiment, a place to be left  alone.6 We had a 
more spiritual or poetic appreciation of these values. With the increased 
commodifi cation of things today, though, privacy has itself been trans-
formed into a type of good that can be traded, bought, or sold. Rather 
than a human property, privacy protections have become private prop-
erty. Privacy has been privatized.

168  The Birth of the Expository Society
Although not logically necessary, this gradual transition from a hu-
manist mind- set to a rational choice framework has coincided with a 
shift  in our conception and valuation of autonomy and anonymity— 
from an earlier period marked by the idea of a penumbral protection 
necessary for human existence to the more contemporary view of pri-
vacy as a commodity that has to be purchased. And even though there is 
no necessary relation between the commodifi cation of privacy and its 
evisceration, there nevertheless has been a historical correlation between 
the dominance of market rationalities and the eclipse of privacy and an-
onymity. Ideas have eff ects. Th ey may not always be necessary eff ects, in 
the sense that they could well have produced other consequences, but 
oft en they have concrete eff ects, actual impacts. And in this case, there 
is a natural affi  nity that has tied the commodifi cation of privacy to its 
lower valuation. Th e point is, privacy fared a lot better when it was seen 
as an integral part of our human essence than when it is placed on a 
scale to be mea sured, monetized, and sold on the free market.
As privacy has become commodifi ed, many of us have begun to 
question its value. Many no longer believe that there is anything fun-
damentally essential about a more private or anonymous human exis-
tence. Many have lost faith in the autonomous realm of the self—in 
that mysterious physical space that once surrounded and protected 
us, in that cocoon of self and privacy. Many have embraced a more in-
strumental view of life, where everything, including privacy and ano-
nymity, is up for grabs. Th is is tied, in part, to a broader tendency 
toward the commodity form and neoliberalism during the past several 
de cades. With the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, there has come a renewed faith in market effi  ciency and no-
tions of natural order—in the Mandev illian fable of the bees, the prin-
ciple of “private vice, public virtues.”7 In the idea, in short, that each 
and every one of us should simply focus on our personal desires and 
self- interests. Th is is particularly true in the digital sphere, where entre-
preneurial dot- coms and start- ups rise and fall, where the free market 
and free enterprise reign. Siva Vaidhyanathan describes this tellingly 
in Th e Googlization of Everything:

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
In the 1990s— heady days of global prosperity, burgeoning 
freedom, and relative peace— I saw in digital networks the means 
to solve some of the problems we faced as a species. Back then I 
took seriously the notion that the world had stepped beyond the 
stalemate of the Cold War and had settled on a rough consensus 
on competitive open markets, basic human rights, and liberal 
democracy— even if the road to those goals was still long and 
rocky in much of the world. I assumed digitization would level 
the commercial playing fi eld in wealthy economies and invite 
new competition into markets that had always had high bar-
riers to entry. I imagined a rapid spread of education and critical 
thinking once we surmounted the millennium- old problems of 
information scarcity and maldistribution.8
Many of us internalized the basic tenets of economic neoliberalism 
and applied them to the digital sphere— this idea that government 
is incompetent in economic matters and should not be involved in 
regulating or planning the digital realm. Many of us internalized 
the neoliberal worldview, captured so succinctly by Google’s CEO, 
Eric Schmidt: “Th ere are models and there are countries where in 
fact the government does try to do that, and I think the American 
model works better.”9 And our growing faith in free enterprise, es-
pecially in the digital sphere, has gone hand in hand with a loss of 
humanist faith that has gradually marginalized traditional values 
like privacy.
None of this is to suggest that a humanist outlook is, in itself, any 
better or more accurate or more truthful than an economistic world-
view. None of this is to suggest that there really is such a thing as 
“human essence” or even “humanity.” No, humanism and the belief in 
human nature may well be just as much of an illusion as the free 
market, and surely they do not guarantee good outcomes. But in this 
case, the move away from a more spiritual humanism has had eff ects. 
We have witnessed a discursive shift  from the dominance of a hu-
manist sentiment in the postwar period to the reign of an economistic 
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  169
www.Ebook777.com

170  The Birth of the Expository Society
attitude in the twenty- fi rst century, and this shift  has made it easier to 
commodify privacy and, gradually, to eviscerate it. It is worth tracing 
that transformation in some detail.
The post– World War II period was marked by a humanist ori-
entation that, sad to say, was in large part a response to the atrocities of 
the Holocaust. In the wake of a historical period that had witnessed so 
much destruction and slaughter, there was a resurgence of interest in 
the capacities and nature of the human being and in the value of the 
human condition. Th is was certainly the case in Eu rope, in literature 
and philosophy. It was refl ected by the dominance of thinkers such as 
the young Jean- Paul Sartre, who espoused a form of existential hu-
manism succinctly articulated in his pop u lar tract Existentialism Is a 
Humanism.10 In Eu rope, humanist sentiment was refl ected not only 
in existentialist thought but also in more philosophically oriented 
Marxism, in Christian humanism, and in liberal philosophies. Key 
thinkers associated with these Eu ro pean trends included, in addition 
to Sartre, François Mauriac, Henri Lefebvre, and Karl Jaspers.
Existentialist humanism sought to understand “man” in relation 
to his exercise of “authentic freedom.” For many, as evidenced by the 
work of Karl Jaspers, it was a specifi c reaction to the horrors of German 
fascism.11 Jaspers argued for liberal demo cratic institutions as an ap-
propriate vehicle through which human beings could authentically re-
alize themselves.12 Marxist humanism, meanwhile, sought to empha-
size continuity between the early philosophical writings of the young 
Marx and his more mature economic writings, in order to show that 
his later economic theories did not abandon humanist principles but 
rather enriched them— for instance, by means of Marx’s analysis of 
how alienation under capitalism aff ected human relations. Th is was 
best captured by the French Marxist thinker Henri Lefebvre, who 
studied the alienation of man in urban settings and talked of the “right 
to the city” as a way for human beings to reclaim that social space from 
the forces of capital.13 Meanwhile, French thinker François Mauriac 
articulated a humanist vision from a very diff erent perspective, namely, 

Catholicism. Continuing his prewar po liti cal commitments, Mauriac 
tirelessly advocated for human perseverance in the face of the horrors 
of World War II and his own nation’s racist policies in its colonies.14 
His form of activism, though scorned by Sartre as being little better 
than “bourgeois humanism,” gave birth to other, diverse strands of 
humanist discourse.15
And it was not Eu rope alone that was ensconced in humanism. In 
the United States, a parallel trend toward humanism took shape in the 
postwar period. Its importance cannot be underestimated. In the words 
of the historian Carl J. Richards:
Immediately following World War II, the United States wit-
nessed a resurgence of humanism. As a result of the nation’s vic-
tory over depression and the Axis powers and its uncontested 
command of the global economy . . .  the United States . . .  largely 
reverted to humanism, which had . . .  strong roots in traditional 
American optimism. . . .  [P]ostwar prosperity formed the nat-
ural foundation for a resurgence of humanism. Furthermore, the 
totalitarian threats posed fi rst by the Axis powers, and then by 
the Soviet bloc, reinforced the American people’s sense of their 
liberal humanist mission to spread toleration (“human rights”), 
democracy, and capitalism.16
Th ere  were several currents to humanist thought in postwar America, 
as its roots  here  were somewhat diff erent than in Eu rope and its ex-
pressions diverse— more Protestant and Jewish.17 Émigré intellec-
tuals from Eu rope played a critical role in creating a distinctive Amer-
ican humanist ethic— one focused on the importance of a distinctive 
realm for the self. Hannah Arendt gave American humanism a dis-
tinctly po liti cal dimension, famously writing of vita activa, of active 
life, of truly human life as central to human existence.18 Another major 
infl uence on American humanism came from Paul Tillich, whose 1952 
book Th e Courage to Be proved pop u lar in the burgeoning fi eld of hu-
manistic psychology. Although American postwar humanism devel-
oped out of the same contextual impetus as its Eu ro pean counterpart, 
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  171

172  The Birth of the Expository Society
they parted company when it came to policy recommendations, with 
the American version privileging liberal demo cratic themes of human 
betterment, as opposed to the po liti cal radicalism espoused by certain 
postwar Eu ro pean humanists such as Sartre and Lefebvre. American 
humanism arose from a position of strength, bearing confi dence in 
the role of the United States as a harbinger of demo cratic values in the 
face of tyranny. Like its Eu ro pean counterpart, it was guided by a kind 
of secular spiritualism that would value the more intangible and ethe-
real realms of the self.
At the same time, American discourse was absolutely saturated 
with discussions of privacy, especially during the Cold War. As Deborah 
Nelson underscores in Pursuing Privacy in Cold War America, “During 
the period from 1959 to 1965 the perceived need for privacy was utterly 
transformed by its sudden visibility as a dying feature of modern and 
cold war American society.”19 Nelson demonstrates this in “an aston-
ishing variety of locations— journalistic exposés, tele vi sion programs, 
law review articles, mass- market magazines, fi lms, Supreme Court deci-
sions, poems, novels, autobiographies, corporate hiring manuals, scien-
tifi c protocols, government studies, and congressional hearings— and 
in response to an extraordinary range of stimuli— satellites, surveil-
lance equipment such as ‘spike mikes’ and telephoto lenses, job testing, 
psychological surveys, consumer polls, educational rec ords, databases 
and computers in general, psychoanalysis, suburbs, tele vi sion, celeb-
rity profi les, news reporting, and more.”20
Th e combination of humanist belief and privacy discourse would 
have tangible eff ects in the second half of the twentieth century. Th e 
liberal demo cratic tilt of American humanism—as opposed to the 
greater radicalism of Eu ro pean humanism— translated well into legal 
discourse. And as a result, this prevalent postwar humanism made its 
way into judicial opinions on constitutional issues of privacy and se-
curity. At the height of the Cold War, in the mid-1960s, the Supreme 
Court would create a constitutional right to privacy and peg it to the 
idea of “reasonable expectations of privacy.” Th is idea was intimately 
tied to a humanist conception of subjectivity, and there are many 
ringing examples of humanist discourse in the Supreme Court deci-

sions of the 1950s and 1960s. Justice William O. Douglas’s opinion in 
Papachristou v. Jacksonville in 1972, a famous case striking down laws 
against loitering on the grounds of vagueness, refl ects this humanist 
tendency well.21 Douglas’s opinion in Papachristou reads like an ode or 
a poem to the spiritual self— the self of refl ection, of meandering, of 
the lackadaisical life. It is an ovation to the realm of privacy that surrounds 
the self and nourishes it. In elaborating on the value of being free to 
wander by oneself, to think while strolling, to be left  alone, to have a 
realm of privacy, Justice Douglas would describe these activities as 
“historically part of the amenities of life as we have known them. Th ey 
are not mentioned in the Constitution or in the Bill of Rights. Th ese 
unwritten amenities have been in part responsible for giving our 
people the feeling of in de pen dence and self- confi dence, the feeling of 
creativity. Th ese amenities have dignifi ed the right of dissent and have 
honored the right to be nonconformists and the right to defy submis-
siveness. Th ey have encouraged lives of high spirits rather than hushed, 
suff ocating silence.”22
In defending the lackadaisical life, Justice Douglas would refer to 
poets and authors for guidance and inspiration. His muses are Walt 
Whitman and Vachel Lindsay: these amenities of life, he would note, 
“are embedded in Walt Whitman’s writings, especially in his ‘Song of 
the Open Road.’ Th ey are refl ected, too, in the spirit of Vachel Lind-
say’s ‘I Want to Go Wandering,’ and by Henry D. Th oreau.”23 Justice 
Douglas’s heroes include Luis Munoz- Marin, a former governor of 
Puerto Rico, who “commented once that ‘loafi ng’ was a national virtue 
in his Commonwealth and that it should be encouraged.”24
Justice Douglas’s defense of loitering and strolling transformed the 
private realm of the self into a prized and valuable good, “responsible 
for giving our people the feeling of in de pen dence and self- confi dence, 
the feeling of creativity.”25 Douglas drops a note in the margin to this 
evocative passage from Th oreau’s Excursions:
I have met with but one or two persons in the course of my life 
who understood the art of Walking, that is, of taking walks,—
who had a genius, so to speak, for sauntering: which word is 
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  173

174  The Birth of the Expository Society
beautifully derived “from idle people who roved about the 
country, in the Middle Ages, and asked charity, under pretence 
of going a la Sainte Terre,” to the Holy Land, till the children ex-
claimed, “Th ere goes a Sainte Terrer,” a Saunterer, a Holy- Lander. 
Th ey who never go to the Holy Land in their walks, as they pre-
tend, are indeed mere idlers and vagabonds; but they who do go 
there are saunterers in the good sense, such as I mean. Some, 
however, would derive the word from sans terre, without land or 
a home, which, therefore, in the good sense, will mean, having 
no par tic u lar home, but equally at home everywhere. For this is 
the secret of successful sauntering. He who sits still in a  house all 
the time may be the greatest vagrant of all; but the saunterer, in 
the good sense, is no more vagrant than the meandering river, 
which is all the while sedulously seeking the shortest course to 
the sea. But I prefer the fi rst, which, indeed, is the most probable 
derivation. For every walk is a sort of crusade, preached by some 
Peter the Hermit in us, to go forth and reconquer this Holy Land 
from the hands of the Infi dels.26
To be sure, Douglas was an idiosyncratic justice and his opinion in 
Papachristou was perhaps equally so. But he illustrated a larger ten-
dency toward a humanist conception of the self and privacy. Many of 
the plurality opinions of the Supreme Court resonated with this kind 
of soft  humanism. Th e very idea of a right to privacy emanating from 
the penumbra of various amendments— such as in the famous case of 
Griswold v. Connecticut— was itself infused with a certain form of hu-
manism.27 Th e same is true for the importance assigned to the right to 
privacy in the well- known case of Katz v. United States, which extended 
privacy broadly in the Fourth Amendment context involving the right 
to be free of unreasonable search and seizure.28 Similarly for the deci-
sion in Chimel v. California, where Justice Potter Stewart, writing for 
the Court, upheld the sanctity and privacy of the home against the 
power of the state to search incident to arrest.29 Th e impact of cases 
such as Stanley v. Georgia (1969), Eisenstadt v. Baird (1972), and Roe v. 

Wade (1972) expanded the scope and reach of the right to privacy. Th e 
cases rang of a humanist faith in the essential human need for autonomy. 
Th is was refl ected even in ordinary national security cases, such as 
United States v. United States District Court, where in 1972 the Supreme 
Court declared that surveillance without a warrant, even in the name 
of national security, was not constitutionally sanctioned.30
It would be hard to imagine a sitting justice of the Supreme 
Court today extolling the humanist virtues of privacy in the way that 
Justice Douglas did in Papachristou. Hard to imagine a Supreme Court 
justice writing today in such prosaic terms about the intrinsic value of 
being left  alone, of not being followed, watched, tracked, stalked— 
even by colossal social media corporations, giant retailers, and over-
sized government intelligence ser vices. Hard to imagine an opinion 
extolling the virtues of having such a robust personal sphere of privacy 
and autonomy—of the importance to human fl ourishing of having 
control over the dissemination of one’s thoughts, wishes, and desires, 
over the publicity of intimate photos, or over the distribution of pri-
vate aff ection. It sounds, today, so poetic, so analog, so passé.
In the digital age, we are far more likely to hear about the cost of pri-
vacy, not its virtues or even its value. We are far more likely to hear 
about trade- off s and opportunity costs. We are more likely to hear about 
necessary compromise and balancing of interests.31 We are, in eff ect, 
more likely to hear the discourse of economists or economistic judges 
like Richard Posner, who writes that privacy “is not an interest of pri-
vate individuals alone”: “Th e Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act is 
an attempt to strike a balance between the interest in full openness of 
legal proceedings and the interest in national security, which requires 
a degree of secrecy concerning the government’s eff orts to protect the 
nation. Terrorism is not a chimera. . . .  Conventional adversary proce-
dure thus has to be compromised in recognition of valid social inter-
ests that compete with the social interest in openness. And ‘compro-
mise’ is the word in this case.”32
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  175

176  The Birth of the Expository Society
“Compromise,” “balancing,” “the interest in national security”— 
these terms resonate much better with our current times, a period that 
is characterized by a dominant economistic rationality and cost- benefi t 
calculations. In Th e Illusion of Free Markets, I trace this rise of neolib-
eral economic thought during the past forty years, especially at the 
University of Chicago. I will not review that history  here, but rather 
pick up the thread. Neoclassical economic thought  rose in promi-
nence during the 1960s as a lens to decipher various aspects of social 
life, and it became somewhat dominant during the 1980s and 1990s. 
Gary Becker’s approach of extending economic analysis to facets of 
life as diverse as marriage, divorce, crime, punishment, and discrimina-
tion brought about a generalization of rational choice theory throughout 
the social realm and the academic disciplines. As a result, postwar hu-
manism got displaced by a far more rational, calculating view of the 
human subject. Th e logic of mea sur able self- interest, of transaction 
costs, of costs and benefi ts, and of the commodifi cation and privatiza-
tion of goods displaced the more nebulous notion of human essence.33 
Quantifi able material interests took pre ce dence over spirituality, less-
ening the hold of the more ethereal concepts, such as privacy, human 
self- development, autonomy and anonymity.
Th is shift  in our self- conception of human subjectivity has gone 
hand in hand with an important change in the extent and scope of pri-
vacy. Combined with a general po liti cal shift  of the Supreme Court 
toward a more law- and- order framework— which we usually describe 
as the shift  from the Warren Court to the Burger, Rehnquist, and now 
Roberts Courts— this transformation in conceptions of human sub-
jectivities has facilitated the encroachment of digital surveillance in 
our lives, unprotected by notions of human essence or of the fragility 
of our humanity, resulting in an erosion of privacy and autonomy in-
terests. Although it is not logically necessary, the transition from hu-
manist discourse to a rational choice framework is entirely consonant 
with the shift  in conceptions of privacy. Whereas privacy was previously 
framed in humanistic terms, it is now far more likely to be thought of as 
a type of property, something that can be bought or sold in a market. 
Privacy has become a form of private property.

It would be naive to think that the humanist tradition that Justice 
Douglas drew upon was inherently or necessarily more protective of 
individual privacy than the current neoliberal framework. Hu-
manism is not necessarily or always more liberal than an economistic 
worldview—it all depends, naturally, on how one defi nes human es-
sence, or what costs and benefi ts are thrown into our economic equa-
tions. Th ere are surely many free market economists today who are more 
liberal, in the sense of respecting individual liberty, than many human-
ists of the twentieth century. Milton Friedman’s position on the legaliza-
tion of illicit drugs, for instance, was far more liberal than that even of 
many contemporary humanists. So as a logical matter, there is no ne-
cessity to the opposition between Justice Douglas and Judge Posner.
But as a historical matter, turning privacy from an essential human 
attribute to a market commodity has gone hand in hand with an 
eclipse of the very values that Justice Douglas extolled in his writings. 
Th ose who have deployed most persuasively and powerfully the lan-
guage of economics in the past forty to fi ft y years have enlisted the 
discursive framework of trade- off s, costs and benefi ts, effi  ciency, and 
rational choice—in sum, market logics—in furtherance of a securi-
tarian agenda. Th ey have deployed economic analysis to reinforce a 
politics of national security, of intelligence gathering, of militarism.
One explanation for the historical conjuncture has to do with mate-
rial and po liti cal interests, and others have written admirably about 
this, especially Naomi Klein, David Harvey, and Noam Chomsky.34 
Th e top echelon in the administration of President George W. Bush 
had signifi cant fi nancial, material, po liti cal, and ideological invest-
ments in a conception of national security that was tied to the petro-
leum market and the military. President Bush’s close ties to the oil 
industry, Vice President Dick Cheney’s revolving- door relationship 
with Halliburton, and the ideological commitments of their chief 
aides, including Donald Rumsfeld, Paul Wolfowitz, and John Bolton, 
among others, attest to the material and po liti cal interests that fueled 
the war in Iraq. A number of simple facts— for instance, that Vice 
President Cheney was CEO of Halliburton aft er having served as sec-
retary of defense during the fi rst war in Iraq; that, under his leader-
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  177

178  The Birth of the Expository Society
ship, Halliburton  rose from number seventy- three to number eigh teen 
on the list of top Pentagon contractors, and earned $2.3 billion in gov-
ernment contracts; that Cheney received a retirement package worth 
more than $33.7 million and sold stock holdings worth more than $30 
million when he became vice president; and that Halliburton profi ted 
handsomely under his vice presidency— alone are enough to settle 
any question about motivations and material interests.35 Moreover, 
the ideological commitments of many neoconservative thinkers— 
including many of the top advisers to Republican administrations—
to a neoliberal paradigm highly infl uenced by par tic u lar readings of 
Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman, Leo Strauss, and more generally 
the Chicago School (whether or not faithful to those writings) also 
linked the neoliberal cluster to a strong national security agenda.36 
Th e concrete fi nancial ties and elite power relations between the intel-
ligence community, telecommunications companies, multinational 
corporations, and military leadership—in this country and abroad— 
reinforce the historical conjuncture as well.
All this is undoubtedly true, and explains in part the turn to national 
security during the rise of neoliberalism. In part, but not entirely— 
given that during the Cold War there was also a deeply embedded re-
lationship between the military, intelligence, po liti cal, and corporate 
elite, and yet there  were, at the highest echelons of po liti cal leadership, 
strong advocates of the right to privacy. Th ere  were leaders, like Justice 
Douglas and other members of the Warren Court, who defended a hu-
manistic conception of autonomy and control over one’s information 
and surroundings. Today, practically everyone in a position of po-
liti cal leadership seems far more likely to claim that he has “nothing to 
hide” and is not particularly troubled by NSA surveillance. Justice 
Douglas’s exhortations sound old- fashioned today, out of touch with 
our present securitarian condition.
Th is is refl ected at the Supreme Court. Th ere has been a tangible shift  
toward more of a rational- choice approach to human subjectivity, in 
tandem with a free- market conception of privacy. Th e movement to-
ward rational choice has been noticeable since the 1970s and 1980s. One 

can feel the turn away from humanism, for instance, in a case like Ver-
nonia School District v. Acton, 515 U.S. 646 (1995), where Justice Antonin 
Scalia, upholding a drug testing program for school athletes, analyzes 
everything through the lens of calculated choice. Athletes, essentially, 
give up their rights to privacy by deciding to participate in school sports, 
by making that choice. And Justice Scalia is not alone. One can detect 
the same kind of rational calculation in Justice David Souter’s opinion in 
Georgia v. Randolph, 547 U.S. 103 (2006), where the Court held that a co- 
tenant cannot consent to a search of the tenant’s property where the 
other tenant is present and objecting. Th e point is not the po liti cal direc-
tion of the decision but the form of rationality, the conceptualization of 
subjectivity. Souter focuses there on what a rational tenant, as rational 
actor, would want, rather than on a humanistic rights discourse. Roper v. 
Simmons, 543 U.S. 551 (2005), is another illustrative case. In holding that 
the execution of juveniles violates the Eighth Amendment, Justice An-
thony Kennedy discusses there how the lack of cost- benefi t analysis 
among juveniles is a reason to not impose the death penalty.37
Whether upholding or denying a privacy interest, it seems, the hu-
manist discourse has evaporated. Even in Kyllo v. United States, for in-
stance, where the Court fi nds that the use of heat- seeking technology 
constitutes a search because it infringes on the intimacies of the home, 
Justice Scalia mocks the humanist conception of privacy and autonomy.38 
Th e cases that deny privacy protections are also telling, insofar as they 
so oft en eviscerate any notion of human essence or human needs. We 
see this refl ected in the Greenwood case, permitting unwarranted 
searches of garbage, for instance, or in the King case, involving DNA 
testing.39 Th e limited set of cases where the Supreme Court extends 
human rights— for instance, by abolishing the death penalty for indi-
viduals with mental retardation or for juveniles, or maintaining habeas 
corpus protections over Guantánamo detainees— are also telling, for 
these are the most marginalized populations, the extremities of hu-
manity: children, the mentally ill, bare life. Th ese are the actors who 
are not always viewed as fully rational and who have not managed to 
calculate properly. If you restrict the notion of humanism to nonrational 
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  179

180  The Birth of the Expository Society
actors, these are the only fringes that are left . Th eir calculations cannot 
be trusted; the courts must then step in.
In sum, there has been a shift , at the level of reasoning and dis-
course, regarding the conception of human subjectivity shared by 
diff erent pluralities of the Supreme Court. In the postwar period, 
during the 1950 and 1960s, the Court tended to embrace a conception of 
human subjectivity that was marked by a form of postwar humanism 
and that exhibited a strong secular spiritual belief in the importance of 
the inner self and the subjectivity of individuals. Th is helped to pro-
duce a robust and original jurisprudence around the right to privacy, 
the human need to be left  alone by the government, and the importance 
of due pro cess to human self- development. Th at postwar humanism 
was refl ected most prominently in the writings of certain individual 
justices, but it also ran through many of the other decisions of the 
Warren Court.
Th e predominant lack of concern about privacy in the wake of the 
Snowden revelations is entirely consonant with this shift  from a hu-
manist conception of human subjectivity to one emphasizing rational 
choice. And given the present constitutional landscape, it is unlikely 
that constitutional privacy protections today are going to serve to put a 
halt to the kinds of NSA programs, like PRISM, that allow our govern-
ment access to all our Internet activities. Again, this is not to suggest that 
the connection is logically necessary. It would be possible to justify a po-
sition toward privacy that was based either in humanist discourse or in 
rational choice theory. Th e discourse is not determinative. But somehow, 
some discourses fi t better: humanist discourse, it turns out, fi ts better 
with notions of essential human values such as privacy; rational choice 
fi ts better with the idea of commodifi ed conceptions of privacy.
In the end, the humanism and spirituality that infused earlier con-
ceptions of privacy simply does not hold up well to economic ratio-
nality and commodifi cation, to a more calculating conception of the 
individual.40 Along with other cultural and technological changes, 
these shift ing conceptions of human subjectivity have had signifi cant 
eff ects on the materialism of our current times.41 Th e move from hu-
manist discourse to a more economistic view has facilitated a certain 

complacency in the face of the evisceration of our privacy and au-
tonomy interests.
We tell ourselves— and some of us sincerely believe— that 
there is nothing to worry about. Th at we have nothing to hide. Th at 
transparency benefi ts us more than it harms us. Th at our information 
will be lost in the mass of data, like a needle in a haystack. For some, 
there is an honest lack of knowledge— many digitally literate people 
do not even know the extent to which they can be tracked and fol-
lowed on the Internet. For others, the digital world appears innocuous, 
or even comforting. “Cookies”: who  wouldn’t want cookies? (We 
didn’t call them “crabs,” or “lice,” or “bacteria,” aft er all.) Who  wouldn’t 
want to store all our heavy baggage in the “cloud”? It’s so liberating, 
light, carefree- sounding. “Th e meta phors we use matter,” as Tim 
Hwang and Karen Levy remind us.42
Many others of us are lulled into giving our most sensitive data. No 
one sees us when we do it. We give the information in the privacy of 
our offi  ce, or behind the closed doors of our home. We do it quickly, 
discreetly. We slip our social security number to the IRS, our passport 
number to the airline, believing that it will get lost in the stream of in-
formation, in the fl ood of digits that are gushing over the Internet. It 
feels as if no one will even notice, no human will know; it is just data 
on a screen. From times past— from the analog age—we have been con-
ditioned to give our information, knowing that it would get lost in the 
mounds of paperwork. Th at was the beauty of bureaucracy. Th ere was 
no way that all the paperwork could be retrieved or used. Th e mounds 
of handwritten, illegible customs forms at the border— there was no 
possibility that those could be retained, properly fi led, retrieved, or 
transmitted to the fi scal or regulatory authorities. Th ere  were too 
many cabinets overfl owing with forms, far too many for humans to 
manage. Not so with digits and high- powered computing; but we got 
used to fi lling out forms and giving our information in analog times.
And aft er a few moments of doubt, when we fl inch at the disclosure, 
most of us nevertheless proceed, feeling that we have no choice, not 
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  181

182  The Birth of the Expository Society
knowing how not to give our information, whom we would talk to, 
how to get the task done without the exposure. We feel we have no 
other option but to disclose. And though it may feel ephemeral, it is 
permanent. Th e information we disclose is captured, recorded,  etched 
into the stone of digital memory. It is seared into the silicon. Engraved. 
It will not disappear. We think it is nothing more than a cloud, but it is 
tattooed on our digital subjectivity.
We want to believe the information will not be seen or used. Th at we 
are only giving the information to machines. But we know,  we’ve read, 
that this is not really true. We know far too well that humans are be-
hind the machines. We’ve heard that the young analysts who work for 
the NSA are sharing the intimate details they come across. It happens 
“routinely,” as Edward Snowden reveals— it’s a type of “fringe benefi t” 
associated with working for the intelligence ser vices.43 “You got young 
enlisted guys, 18– to–22  years old,” Snowden explains, who in the 
course of analyzing data come across, “for example, an intimate nude 
photo of someone in a sexually compromising situation, but they’re 
extremely attractive.” 44 Snowden recounts:
So what do they do, they turn around in their chair and show 
their coworker. And their coworker says, “Oh, hey, that’s great. 
Send that to Bill down the way.” And then Bill sends it to George, 
George sends it to Tom. Sooner or later, this person’s  whole life 
has been seen by all of these other people. It’s never reported, 
nobody ever knows about it because the auditing of these sys-
tems is very weak. Th e fact that your private images, rec ords of 
your private lives, rec ords of your intimate moments have been 
taken from your private communications stream, from the in-
tended recipient, and given to the government without any specifi c 
authorization, without any specifi c need, is in itself a violation of 
your rights. Why is that in a government database?45
We also know that some intelligence analysts use the database to 
spy on their loved ones and lovers. In the business this is called 
LOVEINT, and it is known to happen with some frequency. In Sep-

tember 2013, Reuters reported that “at least a dozen U.S. National Se-
curity Agency employees have been caught using secret government 
surveillance tools to spy on the emails or phone calls of their current 
or former spouses and lovers.” 46
But we ignore it. We wipe it out of our minds. We let ourselves get 
distracted. We tell ourselves it won’t happen to us. It may well happen 
to others, but not to us. Plus,  we’ve got “nothing to hide.” 47 So we con-
tinue to crave the digital life, to consume and be consumed in a stream 
of emails, scanned documents, digital photos, tweets, text messages, 
emoticons, and Instagrams. We contribute constantly to the digital 
stream, producing and reproducing it, feeding it, incessantly, inevitably, 
in the pro cess opening ourselves up, delivering ourselves to the digital 
voyeur. We search the web, buy things online, swipe access cards—to 
the gym, to work, to the garage, into the subway— retrieve money 
from the ATM, deposit checks by mobile phone, accumulate points at 
the grocery, scan shampoo at the pharmacy, swipe the credit card at 
Starbucks (or, rather, tap our cell phones). We hit the tip button in the 
taxi, on GrubHub, or on the Domino’s website— and never even think 
twice that our privacy might be worth the cost of that tip.
Th e Eclipse of Humanism  183


P A R T  T H R E E
Th e Perils of Digital Exposure


The digital economy has torn down the conventional bound-
aries between governing, commerce, and private life. In our digital age, 
social media companies engage in surveillance, data brokers sell per-
sonal information, tech companies govern our expression of po liti cal 
views, and intelligence agencies free- ride off  e- commerce. Th e cus-
tomary lines between politics, economics, and society are rapidly van-
ishing, and the three spheres are melding into one— one gigantic trove of 
data, one colossal data market, that allows corporations and governments 
to identify and cajole, to stimulate our consumption and shape our de-
sires, to manipulate us po liti cally, to watch, surveil, detect, predict, and, 
for some, punish. In the pro cess, the traditional limits placed on the state 
and on governing are being eviscerated, as we turn more and more into 
marketized malleable subjects who, willingly or unwittingly, allow our-
selves to be nudged, recommended, tracked, diagnosed, and predicted 
by a blurred amalgam of governmental and commercial initiatives.
Th e collapse of these diff erent spheres is disempowering to us as 
individuals. Resisting state excess— whether in the form of J. Edgar 
S E V E N
the collapse of state, 
economy, and society

188  The Perils of Digital Exposure
Hoover’s FBI and surveillance programs like COINTELPRO, loyalty 
oaths and McCarthyism, or ordinary civil rights violations— can be 
harrowing and diffi  cult.1 But trying to rein in a behemoth that includes 
the NSA, Google, Facebook, Netfl ix, Amazon, Samsung, Target, Skype, 
and Microsoft , to check a tenticular oligarchy that spans government, 
commerce, surveillance, and the private sphere, can feel even more 
daunting. Before, in the analog age, there  were ways to divide and con-
quer, or at least to try—to attempt to build bridges with civic institu-
tions to check the powers of the state. But today the interests are so 
aligned that the task feels practically impossible.
At the root of it all is the fact that the line between governance, 
commerce, surveillance, and private life is evaporating. What we face 
today is one unifi ed, marketized space. Th e famous lines drawn in 
the nineteenth century— for instance, in Max Weber’s seminal work 
on economy and society— are vanishing.2 Governing is collapsing 
into commerce as states such as China, Rus sia, and the United States 
increasingly seek to secure what Evgeny Morozov calls their “digital 
sovereignty” through trade regulation— passing laws that require tech 
companies to store their citizens’ data on servers located within the 
state’s territorial boundaries or placing restrictions on Internet pro-
viders for ser vices such as Gmail.3 Commerce is collapsing into sur-
veillance, right before our eyes, as retailers begin to collect all our 
data. And commerce is turning into governance as new data markets 
emerge, allowing businesses, employers, salespeople, bureaucrats, ad-
vertisers, the police, and parole offi  cers to track our physical movements, 
to follow our Internet browsing, to know what we read, what we like, 
what we wear, whom we communicate with, what we think, how we 
protest, and where we spend our money.
•  •  •
Josh Begley is a former graduate student at New York University who 
has been trying to raise awareness about the United States government’s 
use of drones and the number of civilian casualties resulting from 
drone strikes.4 Begley would like drone strikes to be known  here at 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  189
home—to be felt  here when they hit in faraway locations, when they 
accidentally kill children and civilians. Begley wants drone strikes to 
interrupt our lives, not just the lives of others across the globe. He wants 
the strikes to ping us when we are playing our video games, to disrupt 
our Facebook session, to interrupt our web browsing and shopping.
In the summer of 2012, Begley created an application for iPhones 
called Drones+. His app would provide instant, updated information 
about each and every drone strike and all of the facts about casualties. 
As a Vimeo demonstration of the app shows, Drones+ triggers an alert 
on your iPhone when a drone attack occurs and provides details about 
the number of people killed, as well as an interactive map of the area 
where the attack took place that identifi es other previous air assaults 
in the vicinity.5
Begley submitted his app to Apple on July 10, 2012, but Apple refused 
to off er Drones+ through its App Store. According to the Guardian, 
Apple notifi ed Begley that his app was “ ‘not useful’ enough and did not 
appeal to a ‘broad enough audience.’ ” 6 Begley reapplied in August 2012 
and got rejected again because, according to a Mashable article, “the app 
used Google Maps images without the ‘associated Google branding.’ ”7 
Begley tried to fi x that problem and reapplied a third time, on August 27, 
2012; this application was also denied. Th is time, Apple reportedly wrote 
him, “We found that your app contains content that many audiences 
would fi nd objectionable, which is not in compliance with the app store 
review guidelines.”8
Begley decided to move on and instead create a website called Dron-
estre.am that would provide, according to the site itself, “real- time and 
historical data about every reported United States drone strike.”9 Th e 
website has a searchable database and a real- time Twitter account, and 
it posts news stories about drone strikes.
With that website up and running, Begley tried again a year later to 
create an app for smartphones. What he did was to change the name 
of the app to Dronestream— just like his functioning website. Begley 
submitted that application on September 10, 2013, and then a second 
time on September 17. But to no avail— his applications got rejected 
both times.10
www.Ebook777.com

190  The Perils of Digital Exposure
Curiously, though, Begley then received an email from someone 
who worked on the Apple Review Team. It was now September 23, 
2013, and in the email the Apple employee asked Begley whether they 
could talk on the phone about the app. Th e Apple employee called 
Begley and asked him whether the application he was pitching was 
about United States government drone strikes. Naturally, Begley an-
swered yes. Th e Apple employee then reportedly told Begley, “If it’s 
going to be about that specifi cally, it’s not going to be approved. But if 
you broaden your topic, then we can take another look. You know, 
there are certain concepts that we decide not to move forward with, 
and this is one.”11
So in early 2014 Begley went back to the drawing board— this time 
with a new idea. What he did was to create an application that had 
no content at all, in order to test whether it would get approved. He 
called it Ephemeral and submitted it to Apple on January 17, 2014, to 
see what would happen. As he explained, “Th e point of it was to have 
no content at all.” Th at application, surprisingly, was accepted without 
any fuss a few days later.
On January 22, Begley then “submitted yet another empty app called 
‘Metadata+’ which promised ‘real- time updates on national security.’ ”12 
Th e Mashable piece tells us the rest of the story: “As with the previous 
test app, this one went through aft er just six days—no objections on 
usefulness or questionable content this time. At that point, all Begley 
had to do was fi ll the app with the historical archive of drone strikes. 
Now, apart from some design improvements, the app looks exactly as it 
did originally.”13 Th e app had fi nally been approved.
The Josh Begley incident illustrates the collapse of the boundaries 
between commerce and government. Apple was eff ectively “governing” 
for us— for profi t, it seems— refusing to allow a controversial or po-
liti cal app on the basis of commercial interests. Not much diff erent, 
perhaps, from the United States government putting a stop to media 
coverage of the return to the United States of the bodies of soldiers 
killed in the Iraq War in 1991. As you may recall, for more than eigh-

teen years the United States prohibited news coverage of the return of 
our soldiers killed in war.14 Th e Obama administration lift ed the abso-
lute ban in December 2009, allowing families of the deceased soldiers 
to decide for themselves whether the media could photograph the fl ag- 
covered caskets.15 Th e ban had originally been initiated by President 
George H. W. Bush during the Gulf War in 1991 and was upheld by his 
son President George W. Bush during the war in Iraq and Af ghan i-
stan. It was deeply controversial.16
Apple, it seems, has taken on that state function of censorship, 
though its only motive seems to be profi t. Apple may not have wanted 
Begley’s app because it was going to upset people, who would then 
consume less. And to be honest, that was part of Begley’s project: to 
interrupt our ordinary consumption of everyday life with the reality 
of drone strikes. To ping our complacency when we, through our gov-
ernment, accidentally or not kill others. But notice how Apple’s rejec-
tions make the exercise of power so much more tolerable. If the visibility 
of drone strikes is likely to raise our consciousness about these horri-
fying practices— for a wrenching taste of drone strikes and the weight 
of innocent casualties, you must take a look at the video that Pitch Inter-
active put together, called “Out of Sight, Out of Mind,” available on the 
web17— then the invisibility that Apple promoted can only serve to mask 
and hide the intolerable. By keeping the drones out of sight and out of 
mind, it makes it far easier for our presidents to continue to deploy 
drones. Th e same for body bags and the war in Af ghan i stan.
In another incident, Facebook deleted a post by a prominent Tibetan 
writer and critic of Chinese policies toward Tibet, Tsering Woeser. 
Woeser had written on her Facebook page about the self- immolation 
of a monk in Sichuan province, and provided a link to a video of the in-
cident. In response to inquiries, Facebook said it deleted Woeser’s post 
because it “didn’t meet Facebook’s community standards.”18 Facebook 
followed up with this statement:
Facebook has long been a place where people share things and 
experiences. Sometimes, those experiences involve violence and 
graphic videos. We work hard to balance expression and safety. 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  191

192  The Perils of Digital Exposure
However, since some people object to graphic videos, we are 
working to give people additional control over the content they 
see. Th is may include warning them in advance that the image 
they are about to see contains graphic content. We do not cur-
rently have these tools available and as a result we have removed 
this content.19
Th at is an astonishing avowal of technical incompetence in this dig-
ital age. (Meanwhile, Facebook is making strides in its eff orts to con-
quer the hearts and minds of Chinese citizens. In October 2014, Mark 
Zuckerberg impressed us all when, speaking Mandarin— which he is 
learning—he participated in a question- and- answer session at Tsinghua 
University in Beijing.20 One wonders whether there is no connection.)
Th ese are precisely the micropractices that render tolerable the in-
tolerable—in large part by eliding unreviewable, hidden commercial 
choices with po liti cal functions. Th e boundaries are vanishing, and in 
the pro cess, a new form of power is born. A form of power that is hard 
to see, precisely because it feels so natural, like a glove— just ordinary, 
everyday business as usual. It is almost transparent, unseeable, invis-
ible, illegible. Yet it is right there, right in front of our eyes:
“ ‘not useful’ enough”
“does not appeal to a ‘broad enough audience’ ”
“content that many audiences would fi nd objectionable”
“not in compliance with the app store review guidelines”
True, many of us would fi nd Begley’s app “objectionable” because 
we would rather not be reminded that each and every one of us partici-
pates in these drone strikes, with our tax dollars or our bodies. We 
don’t want to be reminded about the collateral damage to innocent 
children when we are taking our own darlings to the movies, spoiling 
them, taking them to a ballgame, or watching them score a run. We 
don’t really want to know every time another Pakistani or Arab child 
is killed. We need to carry on, and we must continue to consume. 
Consumer confi dence is good for consumption, and consumption is 
good for the economy and our country, we tell ourselves. We must not 

let these drones stop us. We should not let them interfere. We must 
continue to shop— and in the pro cess produce more data about our-
selves that can be shared, mined, analyzed, sold, and surveilled.
And just as the boundary between commerce and governing seems 
to be evaporating, so is the line between exchange and surveillance.
•  •  •
From 2007 until it was discovered in 2010, Google equipped its Street 
View cars— the ones that digitally photograph sidewalks and build-
ings so we can see them on the Street View function of Google Maps— 
with special technology that would vacuum up all of the unencrypted 
Wi- Fi traffi  c in the surrounding neighborhood, and probably the en-
crypted traffi  c as well.21 Google’s special technology captured highly 
sensitive data above and beyond the basic data that Google seized with 
the ordinary Wi- Fi antennas and soft ware mounted on its vehicles— 
basic data that included “the network’s name (SSID), the unique 
number assigned to the router transmitting the wireless signal (MAC 
address), the signal strength, and whether the network was encrypted.”22 
With its special technology, Google would also capture and record, in 
the words of a federal appellate court, “everything transmitted by a 
device connected to a Wi- Fi network, such as personal emails, user-
names, passwords, videos, and documents.”23 In technical jargon, this 
is called “payload data,” and it can include very private information. 
As the federal court noted in 2013, “Google acknowledged in May 2010 
that its Street View vehicles had been collecting fragments of payload 
data from unencrypted Wi- Fi networks. Th e company publicly apolo-
gized, grounded its vehicles, and rendered inaccessible the personal 
data that had been acquired. In total, Google’s Street View cars col-
lected about 600 gigabytes of data transmitted over Wi- Fi networks in 
more than 30 countries.”24
Google has since fi led a petition for writ of certiorari to the United 
States Supreme Court arguing that the collection of such unencrypted 
data is exempt from the federal Wiretap Act, 18 U.S.C. Sec. 2511, be-
cause the Wi- Fi communications are themselves “readily accessible to 
the general public”— a term of art that would make them an “electronic 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  193

194  The Perils of Digital Exposure
communication” exempt under the act. In other words, Google’s law-
yers maintain that the sensitive payload data should be freely accessible. 
Google took this position in response to a class action suit alleging that 
it violated the Wiretap Act.25
If Google’s position ultimately prevails, then it would be entirely 
legal for Google—or for anyone  else, for that matter—to vacuum up 
all of the encrypted and unencrypted Wi- Fi traffi  c in neighborhoods 
across the country, and possibly around the world. Paradoxically, 
Google’s argument rests in part on the claim that we would all be safer 
and more secure if that  were legal: Google contends that shielding 
Wi- Fi signals behind the Wiretap Act might actually decrease overall 
computer security because it would hinder legitimate security scan-
ning of those Wi- Fi signals. “IT professionals routinely use the same 
kind of technology as Google’s Street View cars did to collect packet 
data in order to secure company networks,” Google wrote to the Su-
preme Court.26 “And unlike Google, which never used the payload 
data it collected, security professionals also parse and analyze the data 
collected from wired and wireless networks, including networks oper-
ated by other persons or entities, to identify vulnerabilities in and 
potential attacks on the networks they protect.”27
Here too, the line between commerce and surveillance is evap-
orating. We know how the retail giant Target mines its customer’s con-
sumption data to predict pregnancy and other life- changing events, in 
order to target coupons and advertising to them.28 Target has excelled 
at data mining, creating for each shopper a unique code, referred to as 
a “Guest ID,” and capturing by its means all possible information 
about each shopper. As a marketing analyst at Target explained to the 
New York Times, “If you use a credit card or a coupon, or fi ll out a survey, 
or mail in a refund, or call the customer help line, or open an e- mail 
 we’ve sent you or visit our Web site, we’ll record it and link it to your 
Guest ID. . . .  We want to know everything we can.”29 So Target links 
all this data for each Guest ID to demographic data, marital status, resi-
dence, income level, and so on, and analyzes it all to predict consump-

tion and target marketing. And once that information is in the hands 
of third parties, it seems to become fair game for governing, ex-
changing, and securing.30
“Almost every major retailer, from grocery chains to investment 
banks to the U.S. Postal Ser vice, has a ‘predictive analytics’ depart-
ment devoted to understanding not just consumers’ shopping habits 
but also their personal habits, so as to more effi  ciently market to them,” 
Charles Duhigg reports.31 Th ese surveillance practices are creeping 
into the other areas of life, such as education and employment— and, 
through these, into governance. Universities such as Arizona State are 
increasingly using surveillance technology to monitor student activity 
during class and at home, as well as trajectories of student per for mance 
over semesters or years. Students receive automated messages telling 
them when they are “off - track” on a par tic u lar course of study, and al-
gorithms are used to inform the student of everything from peers 
they may like to meet to their likelihood of dropping out of or failing 
a class.32
Many companies have begun to use digital tracking systems to 
monitor their employees and the effi  ciency of their work habits across 
a range of industries, from nursing to trucking.33 Amazon is a leader in 
the fi eld, especially at its ware houses in the United States, the United 
Kingdom, and Germany. Th eir gigantic ware houses are, naturally, 
fully digitized, so all merchandise that comes in and is unpacked, 
transported, shelved, picked, repacked, and shipped out is tracked by 
computer soft ware. Th e same computerized pro cesses also direct em-
ployees to the right shelves— using soft ware that routes them in such a 
way as to maximize their effi  ciency— but at the same time monitor 
their every behavior and movements. At the facility in Rugeley, Staf-
fordshire, a huge ware house the size of nine soccer fi elds, employees 
reported that “several former workers said the handheld computers, 
which look like clunky scientifi c calculators with handles and big 
screens, gave them a real- time indication of whether they  were run-
ning behind or ahead of their target and by how much. Managers could 
also send text messages to these devices to tell workers to speed up, 
they said. ‘People  were constantly warned about talking to one another 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  195

196  The Perils of Digital Exposure
by the management, who  were keen to eliminate any form of time- 
wasting,’ one former worker added.”34
According to Simon Head, author of Mindless: Why Smarter 
 Machines Are Making Dumber Humans, this tracking technology is 
now in operation at Amazon ware houses across the globe: “All this in-
formation is available to management in real time, and if an employee 
is behind schedule she will receive a text message pointing this out 
and telling her to reach her targets or suff er the consequences. At Am-
azon’s depot in Allentown, Pennsylvania, Kate Salasky worked shift s 
of up to eleven hours a day, mostly spent walking the length and 
breadth of the ware house. In March 2011 she received a warning mes-
sage from her manager, saying that she had been found unproductive 
during several minutes of her shift , and she was eventually fi red.”35
Th ese new forms of Taylorism and control of employee time bear an 
uncanny resemblance to the types of disciplinary methods— regarding 
timetables and spatial control, as well as human capital— that Fou-
cault described so poignantly in La société punitive. Here is a chilling 
description by Simon Head of an Amazon ware house in Augsburg, 
Germany:
Machines mea sured whether the packers  were meeting their tar-
gets for output per hour and whether the fi nished packages met 
their targets for weight and so had been packed “the one best 
way.” But alongside these digital controls there was a team of 
Taylor’s “functional foremen,” overseers in the full nineteenth- 
century sense of the term, watching the employees every second 
to ensure that there was no “time theft ,” in the language of 
Walmart. On the packing lines there  were six such foremen, one 
known in Amazonspeak as a “coworker” and above him fi ve 
“leads,” whose collective task was to make sure that the line kept 
moving. Workers would be reprimanded for speaking to one an-
other or for pausing to catch their breath (Verschnaufpause) aft er 
an especially tough packing job.
Th e functional foreman would record how oft en the packers 
went to the bathroom and, if they had not gone to the bathroom 

nearest the line, why not. Th e student packer also noticed how, in 
the manner of Jeremy Bentham’s nineteenth- century panop-
ticon, the architecture of the depot was geared to make surveil-
lance easier, with a bridge positioned at the end of the worksta-
tion where an overseer could stand and look down on his wards. 
However, the task of the depot managers and supervisors was 
not simply to fi ght time theft  and keep the line moving but also 
to fi nd ways of making it move still faster. Sometimes this was 
done using the classic methods of Scientifi c Management, but at 
other times higher targets for output  were simply proclaimed by 
management, in the manner of the Soviet workplace during the 
Stalin era.36
Th e gesture to Jeremy Bentham is telling— and reminds us of paral-
lels from the past. Th e desire to control is not new; it is just the capa-
bilities today that are staggering. Th e panoptic principle was intended 
to be applied as easily to penitentiaries and asylums as to factories, 
hospitals, schools, and barracks. In this sense, Bentham foreshadowed 
the collapse of the diff erent spheres of life, including punishment, 
employment, and education. All of those spaces— including the Soviet 
workplace during the Stalin era— were spatial nodes or architectural 
forms of power relations, no diff erent from punching the clock or the 
hourly salary that would emerge in nineteenth- century capitalism. No 
diff erent from the GPS tracking systems today— but for the awesome 
power of today’s technology.
Commentators have begun to describe commercial surveillance 
practices as attempts to manufacture a “consuming subject”—or as 
practices of “manufacturing consumers.”37 On this view, the new in-
formation economy is part of a broad shift  in the relationship of 
production and consumption, one expressed through “fl exible” pro-
duction models such as “Toyotism” and “just- in- time and lean manu-
facturing.”38 Consumption and governing interrelate and operate “as a 
dynamic pro cess where existing surveillance and profi ling systems 
and personal information continuously inform each other with each 
new interaction between the system and consumers.”39 Part of the 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  197

198  The Perils of Digital Exposure
ambition of “manufacturing consumers” is to know in advance what 
they will purchase. Consumer data is used to narrow down categories 
of consumers, to fi lter out a population to whom a product or ser vice 
might most reliably appeal. Th e goal in the long run is to predict pref-
erences better than consumers themselves can. Indeed, Google CEO 
Eric Schmidt states that his company wishes to collect user informa-
tion such that “the algorithms will get better and we will get better at 
personalization. . . .  Th e goal is to enable Google users to be able to ask 
the question such as ‘What shall I do tomorrow?’ and ‘What job shall I 
take?’ ” 40 Or even “How shall I be governed?”
In sum, the boundaries between commerce, governing, and sur-
veillance have collapsed. Th e spheres are converging, and today they 
coincide in the production, exploitation, and shaping of our digital 
personalities. Practically every commercial advance in digital tech-
nology enhances the security apparatus, increases commercial profi ts, 
and facilitates more governing— and vice versa. Th e intelligence sector 
fuels business with consulting contracts, new R&D, and outlets for de-
veloping technology; new commercial products, like the Apple Watch, 
Google Drive, and Vine, increase potential surveillance.
What is emerging in the place of the separate spheres is a single 
behemoth of a data market: a colossal marketplace for personal data. 
In 2012 alone, the data brokerage market reached $156 billion in rev-
enue, which, as Sen. John D. Rocke fel ler IV noted, is “twice the size of 
the entire intelligence bud get of the United States government— all 
generated by the eff ort to detail and sell information about our private 
lives.” 41 Th ere are currently more than 4,000 data broker companies. 
Some of them are large, publicly traded corporations,  house hold 
names like Lexis- Nexis and Experian. Others are much smaller and 
less well known.42 Th e companies troll the Internet to collect all avail-
able data. In the words of Frank Pasquale, they “vacuum up data from 
just about any source imaginable: consumer health websites, payday 
lenders, online surveys, warranty registrations, Internet sweepstakes, 
loyalty- card data from retailers, charities’ donor lists, magazine sub-

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
scription lists, and information from public rec ords.” 43 Th ey then 
mine, analyze, or ga nize, and link the data, creating valuable data sets 
for sale, and generating an entire po liti cal economy of publicity and sur-
veillance that can only properly be described as neoliberal— privatized, 
deregulated, and outsourced. Th e mass of digital subjects give away 
their data for free, and private enterprise reaps the benefi ts, skimming 
the wealth off  the top, while the government facilitates and under-
writes the profi t in exchange for costless but invaluable intelligence.
Senator Rocke fel ler held hearings in December 2013 to investigate 
the data brokerage markets and throw some light on what can only 
be described as appalling practices. Th e hearings disclosed, for instance, 
that one data broker in Lake Forest, Illinois, named Medbase200, of-
fered to sell to pharmaceutical companies a list of “rape suff erers” at a 
cost of $79 for 1,000 names.44 Medbase200 marketed this list on its 
website as follows:
Th ese rape suff erers are family members who have reported, or 
have been identifi ed as individuals aff ected by specifi c illnesses, 
conditions or ailments relating to rape. Medbase200 is the owner 
of this list. Select from families aff ected by over 500 diff erent 
ailments, and/or who are consumers of over 200 diff erent Rx 
medications. Lists can be further selected on the basis of life-
style, ethnicity, geo, gender, and much more. Inquire today for 
more information.45
Medbase200 took the “rape suff erers” database off  its website aft er 
the revelations, and removed as well “lists of domestic violence vic-
tims, HIV/AIDS patients and ‘peer pressure suff erers’ that it had been 
off ering for sale.” 46 But the number and variety of other lists it off ers 
for sale are simply staggering. Table 7.1 is a list of categories starting 
with the letter A, with the data size and price information (in dollars 
per 1,000 pieces of information) in the right column.
If that’s not enough for your taste, take a peek at the B’s in Table 7.2.
As Senator Rocke fel ler exclaimed, “One of the largest data broker 
companies, Acxiom, recently boasted to its investors that it can provide 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  199
www.Ebook777.com

200  The Perils of Digital Exposure
table 7.1
Medbase200 data size and price information (letter “A”)
Allergy/Immunology Nurses
53423 Total Universe @ 59/M
AARP Members Mailing List
20435556 Total Universe @ 79/M
Abscess Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Abuse Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Acetaminophen Users
21092445 Total Universe @ 79/M
Achondroplasia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Acid Refl ux Disease (GERD) Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Acid Refl ux Disease (GERD) Suff erers at Home
5456709 Total Universe @ 79/M
Acne Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Addiction Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Addiction/Substance Abuse (Drug Abuse) Nurses
38009 Total Universe @ 59/M
Addison’s Disease Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Adenoma Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Adolescent Medicine Nurses
20198 Total Universe @ 59/M
Adult Medicine/Adult Care Nurses
98996 Total Universe @ 59/M
Advanced Practice Nurses
92231 Total Universe @ 59/M
Aestheticians at Home
116545 Total Universe @ 59/M
Agoraphobia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
AIDS and HIV Infection Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
AIDS/HIV Nurses
300893 Total Universe @ 59/M
Ailments, Diseases & Conditions—Hispanic Suff erers
17234554 Total Universe @ 79/M
Ailments, Diseases & Conditions—Suff erers
227453121 Total Universe @ 79/M
Ailments, Diseases & Conditions—Suff erers (Vol)
227453121 Total Universe @ 39.5/M
Ailments, Diseases & Conditions—Suff erers via Email
173209889 Total Universe @ 129/M
Albinism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Alcoholic Hepatitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Alcoholism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Allergies Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Allergy/Immunology Nurses
57886 Total Universe @ 59/M
Allergy Suff erers at Home
25698121 Total Universe @ 79/M
Alli Users
1985452 Total Universe @ 79/M
Alopecia (Th inning Hair/Hair Loss) Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M

Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  201
(table 7.1 Continued)
Altitude Sickness Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Alzheimer’s Disease Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Amblyopia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Ambulatory Care Nurses
72234 Total Universe @ 59/M
Amebiasis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Amnesia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anemia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anesthesiology Nurses
172339 Total Universe @ 59/M
Aneurdu Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Aneurysm Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Angina Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Animal Bites Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anorexia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anosmia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anotia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anthrax Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Antisocial Personality Disorder Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anxiety and Anxiety Disorders Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anxiety Disorders Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Anxiety Suff erers (GAD) Suff erers at Home
3983434 Total Universe @ 79/M
Appendicitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Apraxia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Argyria Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Arthritis Nurses
180371 Total Universe @ 59/M
Arthritis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Arthritis, Infectious Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Ascariasis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Aseptic Meningitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Asperger Disorder Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Asthenia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Asthma Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Astigmatism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
(continued)

202  The Perils of Digital Exposure
(table 7.1 Continued)
Atherosclerosis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Athetosis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Athlete’s Foot Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Atrophy Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Attention Defi cit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
 
Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Attention Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Autism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Autism Suff erers at Home
2983342 Total Universe @ 79/M
Avandia Users
6898545 Total Universe @ 79/M
Table and data source: Th is database was originally on the Medbase200 website but was removed 
aft er public backlash, according to Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Data Broker Removes Rape- Victims List 
aft er Journal Inquiry,” Digits blog, Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2013.
‘multi- sourced insight into approximately 700 million consumers 
worldwide.’ ” 47 Rocke fel ler went on: “Data brokers segment Ameri-
cans into categories based on their incomes, and they sort eco nom-
ically vulnerable consumers into groups” with names like “Rural and 
Barely Making It,” “Tough Start: Young Single Parents,” “Rough Re-
tirement: Small Town and Rural Se niors,” and “Zero Mobility.” 48
Th e New York Times recently reported that InfoUSA, one of the 
largest data brokers in the country, “advertised lists of ‘El derly Opportu-
nity Seekers,’ 3.3 million older people ‘looking for ways to make money,’ 
and ‘Suff ering Se niors,’ 4.7 million people with cancer or Alzheimer’s 
disease. ‘Oldies but Goodies’ contained 500,000 gamblers over 55 years 
old, for 8.5 cents apiece. One list said: ‘Th ese people are gullible. Th ey 
want to believe that their luck can change.’ ” 49 As you can imagine, these 
types of lists are oft en sold to people who then prey on those listed.50
Acxiom is “the quiet giant of a multibillion- dollar industry known 
as database marketing.” 51 “Few consumers have ever heard of Acxiom,” 
the Times noted. “But analysts say it has amassed the world’s largest 
commercial database on consumers— and that it wants to know much, 

Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  203
table 7.2
Medbase200 data size and price information (letter “B”)
Babesiosis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Back Pain Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bacterial Infections Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bacterial Meningitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bedsores (Pressure Sores) Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bedwetting (Enuresis) Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bell’s Palsy Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bends Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Beriberi Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Binge Eating Disorder Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bioterrorism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bipolar Disorder Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bipolar Disorder Suff erers at Home
1985233 Total Universe @ 79/M
Birth Defects and Brain Development Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bites and Stings Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bladder Cancer Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Blindness Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Body Dysmorphic Disorder Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Body Image Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bone Densitometry Nurses
27045 Total Universe @ 59/M
Botulism Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Brain Injuries Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Brain Tumor Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Breast Cancer Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Broken Bones and Fractures Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bronchiolitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bronchitis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bronchitis, Infectious Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Brucellosis Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bulimia Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Bullying Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
(continued)

204  The Perils of Digital Exposure
(table 7.2 Continued)
Bunions Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Burn Care Nurses
45814 Total Universe @ 59/M
Burns Suff erers
> (Inquire) Total Universe @ 79.00/M
Table and data source: Th is database was originally on the Medbase200 website but was removed 
aft er public backlash, according to Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Data Broker Removes Rape- Victims 
List aft er Journal Inquiry,” Digits blog, Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2013.
much more. Its servers pro cess more than 50 trillion data ‘transactions’ 
a year. Company executives have said its database contains informa-
tion about 500 million active consumers worldwide, with about 1,500 
data points per person. Th at includes a majority of adults in the United 
States.” 52 Here’s a fl avor of what that data broker knows: “It peers 
deeper into American life than the F.B.I. or the I.R.S., or those prying 
digital eyes at Facebook and Google. If you are an American adult, the 
odds are that it knows things like your age, race, sex, weight, height, 
marital status, education level, politics, buying habits,  house hold 
health worries, vacation dreams— and on and on.” 53
Th e data brokers obtain information from every possible source. 
Brokers gather information from store loyalty cards, purchase histo-
ries, government rec ords, credit reporting agencies, public voting rec-
ords, and all of our web surfi ng and activities— including “informa-
tion you post online, including your screen names, website addresses, 
interests, hometown and professional history, and how many friends 
or followers you have.” 54 One data broker, Datalogix, “says it has in-
formation on more than $1 trillion in consumer spending ‘across 
1400+ leading brands’ ” from store loyalty cards.55 And Acxiom boasts 
that it has 3,000 points of data on practically every consumer in the 
United States.56
Alongside these brokered data, there is a  whole new and emerging 
collection of consumer rankings and scoring— what the World Pri-
vacy Forum calls “consumer scores.” 57 A myriad of public and private 

entities are now engaged in massive ranking and scoring of us all, 
trying to place numbers on each of us to “describe or predict [our] 
characteristics, habits, or predilections.” 58 Following in the footsteps 
of the “credit scores” that  were developed in the 1950s, we are seeing 
today the proliferation and extension of this scoring logic to all facets 
of life. Th ere are today consumer scores including “the medication 
adherence score, the health risk score, the consumer profi tability score, 
the job security score, collection and recovery scores, frailty scores, 
energy people meter scores, modeled credit scores, youth delinquency 
score, fraud scores, casino gaming propensity score, and brand name 
medicine propensity scores,” among others.59
Pam Dixon and Robert Gellman document these diff erent scores in 
a fascinating and haunting report that includes, for instance, the Job 
Security Score, produced by Scorelogix and described by the company 
as follows: “Scorelogix is the inventor of the Job Security Score or JSS. 
Th e JSS is the industry’s fi rst income- risk based credit score and the 
only score that predicts borrowers’ ability to pay by factoring their in-
come stability. Th e JSS dramatically improves banks’ ability to re-
duce credit losses and marketers’ ability to reduce mailing costs.” 60 
Th e Donor Score, created and marketed by DonorTrends, allows non-
profi ts to rank their contributors according to a model that predicts 
future donations from the nonprofi ts’ internal data. Says Donor-
Trends: “Our scientifi c DonorScores system assigns a value from 0 to 
1,000 to each donor in your database. Th is value predicts the future 
actions each donor is likely to take. Th is enables you to target your 
donors more eff ectively to increase revenue and decrease cost.” 61
Practically none of these scores are revealed to us, and their accuracy 
is oft en haphazard. As Dixon and Gellman suggest, most consumers 
“do not know about the existence or use of consumers scores” and 
“cannot have any say in who used the scores, or how.” 62 Th e result is a 
type of virtual one- way transparency with complete opacity for those 
who are ranking and scoring us.
Collecting and providing information about individual consumers 
and their spending habits is now a competitive market.63 Th e going 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  205

206  The Perils of Digital Exposure
rate for information about individual consumers varies depending on 
its character, competition between data providers, and the “sheer 
ubiquity of details about hundreds of millions of consumers.” 64 In 
general, however, “the more intimate the information, the more valu-
able it is.” For instance, Emily Steel writes that “basic age, gender and 
location information sells for as little as $0.0005 per person, or $0.50 
per thousand people, according to price details seen by the Financial 
Times.” But information about individuals “believed to be ‘infl uential’ 
within their social networks sells for $0.00075, or $0.75 per thousand 
people.” Data about “income details and shopping histories” sell for 
$.001—so, $1 per thousand.65 Par tic u lar developments in a consumer’s 
life also increase the price of that individual’s information: “Certain 
milestones in a person’s life prompt major changes in buying patterns, 
whether that’s becoming a new parent, moving homes, getting engaged, 
buying a car, or going through a divorce. Marketers are willing to pay 
more to reach consumers at those major life events. Knowing that a 
woman is expecting a baby and is in her second trimester of preg-
nancy, for instance, sends the price to tag for that information about 
her to $0.11.” 66 Medical information is worth much more: “For $0.26 
per person, LeadsPlease . com sells the names and mailing addresses of 
people suff ering from ailments such as cancer, diabetes and clinical 
depression. Th e information includes specifi c medications including 
cancer treatment drug Methotrexate and Paxil, the antidepressant,” 
according to the Financial Times.67
Th ese data are complemented with surveillance of consumer be-
haviors outside the Internet, as department stores increasingly turn to 
“behavioral tracking” of their customers, involving careful analysis of 
customer behavior via CCTV, “web coupons embedded with bar codes 
that can identify, and alert retailers to, the search terms you used to 
fi nd them,” and “mobile marketers that can fi nd you near a store 
clothing rack, and send ads to your cellphone based on your past pref-
erences and behavior.” 68
Th e investigative reporter Yasha Levine documents how “large em-
ployers are turning to for- profi t intelligence to mine and monitor the 

lifestyles and habits of their workers outside the workplace.” 69 As the 
Wall Street Journal elaborates, “Your company already knows whether 
you have been taking your meds, getting your teeth cleaned and going 
for regular medical checkups. Now some employers or their insurance 
companies are tracking what staff ers eat, where they shop and how 
much weight they are putting on— and taking action to keep them in 
line.”70 Th e idea, essentially, is to track employee consumption, exer-
cise, and living habits in order to reduce insurance costs— which is 
attractive from both the employer’s perspective and that of the in-
surance industry. Retailers use the data markets to predict future 
buying behavior; to classify existing behavior into “predetermined cat-
egories”; to associate certain behaviors with others, such as when (to 
borrow an example from a recent article in the Atlantic) Amazon 
makes a recommendation for martini glasses based on the recent pur-
chase of a cocktail shaker; and to form “clusters” of information based 
on consumer behaviors, as when a group of consumers are separated 
into their specifi c hobbies and interests.71 Consumer surveillance, as 
David Lyon notes, is “the most rapidly growing sphere of surveillance . . .  
outstripping the surveillance capacities of most nation- states. And 
even within nation- states, administrative surveillance is guided as 
much by the canons of consumption as those of citizenship, classically 
construed.”72
Th e data market— our new behemoth—is this agglomerated space 
of the public and private spheres, of government, economy, and society. 
Th ere, corporations surveil and govern, governments do commerce, in-
dividuals go public. Th e private and the public sphere enmesh. Em-
ployers spy on their workers, tech companies govern our app tastes, 
and intelligence ser vices vacuum up corporate secrets. And as the 
world becomes a digital market, this feeds back and reinforces our 
complacency: with everything around us being marketized, we no 
longer have any basis to question or object when we too are cata logued 
and classifi ed based on our desires and tastes, when we too become 
marketed, even when the technology invades our privacy. We become 
marketized subjects of this vast digital economy, driven by the same 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  207

208  The Perils of Digital Exposure
market logics— ways of seeing and being that gradually displace our 
social and po liti cal selves as citizens and private subjects.
The collapse of the classic divide between state and so-
ciety, between the public and private spheres, is particularly debili-
tating and disarming. Th e reason is that the boundaries of the state had 
always been imagined in order to limit them: Liberalism depended on a 
clear demarcation, without which there never could be a space for the 
liberal self to pursue its own vision of the good life. For centuries, lib-
eral legal thinkers and policy makers tried to strengthen the hedges 
between the public and private realms— between state and society—
in order to place more robust limits on the state. With written consti-
tutions and bills of rights that placed restraints on state power, with 
constitutional doctrines requiring “state action,” with common law 
principles requiring “harm to others” or tangible injuries before gov-
ernment could interfere— all these  were eff orts to police the public 
sphere and simultaneously to liberate individuals to pursue their own 
diff erent ways of life in the private realm. Th e central device of liberal 
legalism was to demarcate the public sphere in order to allow the pri-
vate pursuit of individual conceptions of the good.
Critics, on the other hand, relentlessly tried to show that the neat 
separation between public and private was an illusion, and that the reg-
ulation of the public necessarily bled into the private realm, both per-
sonal and socioeconomic. Th e eff ort was to demonstrate how the reg-
ulation of the public sphere actually pervasively shaped the private 
sphere: how public policies ranging from mandatory arrest in domestic 
abuse cases to heat- of- passion defenses in hom i cide cases to re sis tance 
requirements in rape prosecutions actually aff ected personal relation-
ships in the home. Th e slogan “the personal is po liti cal” captured the 
critique perfectly: there was no clean border between the two, and we 
had to be constantly vigilant about the unexamined eff ects of liberal 
governance on our private lives. By exposing the interconnectedness 
of the public and private spheres, the critics hoped to initiate a ro-
bust public debate over our shared values and ideals. By rendering 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
the seemingly invisible visible, the critics hoped to stimulate delibera-
tive demo cratic conversations— debates in which the values of soli-
darity, they hoped, would ultimately prevail. Th e goal was to render 
everything truly po liti cal, and then to persuade on the strength of 
their po liti cal values and beliefs. Th e key critical move assumed and 
placed as its target a liberal legal imaginary of rights discourse, bound-
aries, and progress.
But today there is no longer even the pretense of a liberal ambition 
to seriously cabin the state. Th ere is no longer a genuine eff ort to limit 
governing or commerce—or what ever this behemoth is. Most of our 
liberal guardians of the Constitution have essentially abdicated their 
role and do not even pretend to delimit constitutional powers. At the 
very moment that journalists  were revealing NSA programs, such as 
BOUNDLESS INFORMANT, that  were literally “collecting, ana-
lyzing, and storing billions of telephone calls and emails sent across 
the American telecommunications infrastructure,” President Barack 
Obama, a Demo cratic, liberal, rule- of- law president, former lecturer 
on constitutional law at the University of Chicago, was simultaneously 
telling the American people, “If you’re a U.S. person, then the NSA is 
not listening to your phone calls and it’s not targeting your emails 
unless it’s getting an individualized court order. Th at’s the existing 
rule.”73 Apparently the liberal legalists themselves are prepared to 
fudge the facts and mislead the American people into believing that 
nothing has really changed since the 1960s. Even aft er the Snowden 
leaks, even aft er we learned about PRISM and UPSTREAM, even 
aft er we know the intelligence agencies will listen to and read content 
by an American citizen so long as a foreign national is believed to be 
involved, President Obama would tell us:
What I can say unequivocally is that if you are a U.S. person, the 
NSA cannot listen to your telephone calls . . .  and have not. Th ey 
cannot and have not, by law and by rule, and unless they— and 
usually it  wouldn’t be “they,” it’d be the FBI—go to a court, and 
obtain a warrant, and seek probable cause, the same way it’s al-
ways been, the same way when we  were growing up and we  were 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  209
www.Ebook777.com

210  The Perils of Digital Exposure
watching movies, you want to go set up a wiretap, you got to go 
to a judge, show probable cause.74
Neither President Obama nor his liberal legal advisers even recognize 
that things have changed—or they do not seem to care. Th ey appear 
to have given up on the boundaries delimiting the state.
Th is is entirely disarming to the critics, who can no longer even 
hold the liberals to their own aspirations and principles. Th ere are, 
to be sure, valiant eff orts by the ACLU, the Center for Constitutional 
Rights, and other nongovernmental organizations to keep the Amer-
ican government accountable to liberal ideals. But it is unclear how 
the traditional legal remedies— neutral magistrates in de pen dently de-
ciding whether there is reasonable suspicion— can function any longer 
when secretive courts, such as the U.S. Foreign Intelligence Surveil-
lance Court, set up under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
(FISA), do not deny a single request by the NSA and when, in the face 
of that, liberals maintain, in the words of President Obama, that the 
FISA court “is transparent, that’s why we set up the FISA court.”75 
Given that the liberal guardians of the Constitution themselves no 
longer genuinely care about the limits of the state, there is hardly any-
thing left  for the critics to critique. Liberalism may have been mis-
taken in assuming that state action could be cabined, but the ambition 
was noble. We seem to have lost even that ambition today.
Th is is all the more troubling because the combinations we face 
today are so utterly powerful. Th e combination of the computing power 
and fi nancial resources of the federal government with those of digital 
giants like Apple, Hewlett- Packard, Intel, Cisco, Samsung, and Micro-
soft , with the colossal advertising power of Google, Facebook, and 
Yahoo!, with the marketing ambitions of gigantic digital advertisers, 
and with the security interests of the intelligence industry is simply 
daunting. Apple earned $182 billion in revenue for the fi scal year ending 
October 2014. It made $39.5 billion in net income and has cash reserves 
around $137 billion— yes, cash reserves of $137 billion. Samsung re-
ported net income of over $30 billion on revenues of $327 billion in 
2013. It employs almost half a million people. Hewlett- Packard had 

revenues over $111 billion in 2014, and Facebook has an equity value 
over $15 billion.76
Th e idea that individuals could securely encrypt their personal 
communications in order to maintain some level of privacy in the face 
of Microsoft  working with the NSA and the FBI to allow them better 
access to its cloud products—in the face, essentially, of the combined 
computing power of Microsoft  and the intelligence agencies—is hard 
to imagine. Not impossible, but certainly daunting. Eben Moglen be-
seeches us to not give up hope. “Our struggle to retain our privacy is 
far from hopeless,” he emphasizes. “Hopelessness is merely the condi-
tion they want you to catch, not one you have to have.”77 True, but main-
taining hope in the face of these giant collaborators requires real force 
and courage.
Critics traditionally resisted defi nitional clarity at the 
boundary of state and society, precisely to politicize the personal and 
to personalize the political—to get each and every one of us invested 
in the public debate.
Many critics, in times past, expressly avoided the term “the state,” 
in order to better understand po liti cal relations, both in the United 
States and on the Continent. A number of American po liti cal scien-
tists, as early as the 1950s, tried to eliminate the term from their lex-
icon. David Easton, Gabriel Almond, and others turned to the systems 
analytic framework discussed earlier—to the broader notion of the 
“po liti cal system” that included po liti cal parties and the media— 
precisely because the state was nothing more than an ideological con-
struct, or, in their words, “a myth.”78
On the Continent, the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu carefully avoided 
using the term “the state” in most of his work throughout the 1970s, 
only beginning to theorize it in the lectures he delivered at the Collège 
de France in the 1980s and early 1990s.79 In those lectures, Bourdieu 
took as his point of departure the classic Weberian defi nition of the 
state, but he spent most of his time deconstructing it, at least in the 
early lectures. Th e state, for Bourdieu, appears fi rst as mere fi ction, a 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  211

212  The Perils of Digital Exposure
myth— the most powerful of all myths. Th e “state” is the product of 
our collective imaginary and gains its force precisely from our imag-
ining it together— from a consensus that we craft . “Th e State is this 
well- founded illusion, this place that exists, essentially, only because 
we believe it exists,” Bourdieu lectured. It is “this illusory reality, col-
lectively validated by the consensus,” “this mysterious reality that ex-
ists by our collective belief in its existence.”80 We simply come to agree 
that there is an entity called “the state,” which then exercises norma-
tive force over our everyday lives. It becomes the Archimedean point, 
what Bourdieu calls “the point of view of all points of view.”81
Other critics focused on the overlap and intrusions of state and so-
ciety. Th e sociologist Th eda Skocpol, for instance, who originally 
“brought the state back in”— that is, refocused American academic in-
terest on the state, drawing on Weber as a counterweight to Marx— 
soon found herself studying the interplay and interrelationship between 
the state and civic organizations, specifi cally women’s groups.82 Skocpol’s 
original “ ‘state- centered’ theoretical frame of reference” would evolve, 
in later work such as Protecting Soldiers and Mothers, “into a fully 
‘polity- centered approach’ ”: a more intersectional perspective that 
focused on women’s organizations and their role in promoting a ma-
ternalist welfare system in the early twentieth century and, more gen-
erally, on issues of gender and identities.83 Th e state, it turned out, had 
to be studied in relation with nonstate actors to understand how the 
interaction shaped our society.84
Others explored what work the boundary itself— the boundary 
between state and civil society— actually performs. In other words, 
rather than defi ne the border, they analyzed how it functions, what it 
achieves. Th e po liti cal theorist Timothy Mitchell, for instance, took 
this approach, and, rather than deconstructing defi nitions of the state, 
showed how the discourse surrounding the division of state and society 
serves to distribute power.85 “Th e boundary of the state (or po liti cal 
system) never marks a real exterior,” Mitchell emphasized. “Th e line 
between state and society is not the perimeter of an intrinsic entity, 
which can be thought of as a free- standing object or actor. It is a line 
drawn internally, within the network of institutional mechanisms 
through which a certain social and po liti cal order is maintained.”86 It 

is precisely in the struggle over the boundaries of the state, in the eff ort 
to delineate society, in the exercise of pitting one against the other, that 
power circulates between institutions. From this perspective, “pro-
ducing and maintaining the distinction between state and society is 
itself a mechanism that generates resources of power.”87 And it gener-
ates those resources because of the meanings, duties, and rights we as-
sociate with the public or private spheres.
Timothy Mitchell’s intervention in his 1991 article “Th e Limits of 
the State” is a classic illustration of the critical move to deconstruct 
the state- society divide. As Mitchell argued, “the state” does not really 
have, and never has had, a fi xed boundary. It is not a fi xed object. Rather, 
its boundaries are endlessly contested and the very struggle over its 
boundaries is a key site for the circulation of power.88 By drawing dis-
tinctions between the private sector and the state, for instance, multi-
national corporations can seek tax advantages that subsidize private 
investment, without necessarily politicizing the activities or sub-
jecting them to public debate; at the same time, the state can pursue 
national interests under the guise of private investment. As Mitchell 
carefully showed, “the fact that [the multinational] can be said to lie 
outside the formal po liti cal system, thereby disguising its role in inter-
national politics, is essential to its strength as part of a larger po liti cal 
order.”89 (An excellent contemporary illustration, discussed earlier, 
would be the NSA compensating the private telecoms for storing bulk 
telephony metadata— the drawing of a fi ctitious line that keeps the 
metadata collection program alive, achieves the same goals, serves the 
interests of both parties, and yet supposedly does not raise any privacy 
concerns because the telecoms are nonstate actors). Mitchell’s critique 
demonstrated brilliantly how institutional actors— governmental, 
corporate, civilian, et cetera— play with the boundaries of the state in 
order to advance their interests. Using a number of examples, Mitchell 
showed that “the state- society divide is not a simple border between 
two free- standing objects or domains, but a complex distinction in-
ternal to these realms of practice.”90 Th e critical enterprise  here was to 
explore the discursive struggles over the boundaries of “the state” and 
how power circulates as a result. Or as Mitchell would write, “Th e task 
of a critique of the state is not just to reject such metaphysics, but to 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  213

214  The Perils of Digital Exposure
explain how it has been possible to produce this practical yet ghost- 
like eff ect.”91
Mitchell’s critique drew on a discursive analysis that had been cham-
pioned by Foucault, though Foucault himself also directly addressed—
and resisted— the concept of “the state.” Foucault’s most direct en-
gagement occurred in the early 1970s, in the lectures published as 
Penal Th eories and Institutions and Th e Punitive Society.92 At the time, 
Foucault was writing against the backdrop of Louis Althusser’s focus 
on state apparatuses— what Althusser referred to as les appareils 
d’État— and to this notion, Foucault would propose a more fl uid con-
cept. Foucault drew attention to the intermingling of governing and 
private enterprise.93 He took as an example the sequestration of 
women laborers at the penitentiary- style private factory- convents that 
manufactured silk cloth in the Ain department of France in the nine-
teenth century. Th ese  were private enterprises that depended on the 
state and administrative regulations but themselves regulated practi-
cally every aspect of their workers’ lives— their sexuality, their recre-
ation, their spirituality, their religious faith, their habits, their vices, 
their moral upbringing. Th ese  were private enterprises that benefi ted 
from, meshed with, resisted, and manipulated state initiatives, such as 
laws requiring workers to carry with them at all times their livrets (an-
notated notebooks that functioned as identifi cation and registration 
cards), so that the shop foreman as well as the policeman could mon-
itor the workers, as could the bartender, the night attendant—in short, 
anyone who came into contact with them. Th e laws requiring manda-
tory livrets would extend to other domains, such as the workers’ savings 
accounts. Th e livrets allowed the employer to annotate and comment 
for future employers and to evaluate each worker, facilitating his hold 
on his workers through a system of micropunishments that accompa-
nied the women through the revolving doors of employment, debt, 
and the penal system.
Foucault elaborated a fl uid conception of quasi- public, quasi- 
private institutions, multifaceted practices, and normalizing relations 
of power, all complexly tied up within “statelike” nodes. Th ey are state-
like in the sense that they harked back to the styles of governing that 

we  were accustomed to associate with “governing.” Th ey are not the 
state, but they have statelike attributes. Foucault would jot down in 
his notes for his 1973 lectures, as if he  were speaking directly to Al-
thusser: “It is not a state apparatus, but rather an apparatus caught in a 
statelike knot. An infra- statelike system.”94 In other words, these mul-
tifaceted quasi- private, quasi- public institutions at times borrowed 
statelike governance methods and took on a statelike appearance. It is 
precisely this approach that would serve, in Foucault’s research, “as a 
historical background to various studies of the power of normaliza-
tion and the formation of knowledge in modern society.”95 A few years 
later, in this vein of studying fl uid, multidimensional practices and in-
stitutions complexly tied up within statelike knots, Foucault would 
turn to the study of neoliberal governmentality.96
It is important to emphasize that the term “statelike”— étatique in 
French— serves as a referent. It describes the type of act we intuitively 
associate with the state. Diff erent relations of power emerge over time— 
sovereign and majestic forms of power that create truth by marking the 
body, disciplinary and capillary forms of power that correct and indi-
vidualize, or equilibrating forms of power that seek to balance and max-
imize certain objectives. Th ese diff erent forms of power overlap. Th ey 
fi ll the space of social relations, are oft en instantiated in part by state 
actors, and become associated with governance. Th ey are what we con-
sider “statelike.” As the writings of Timothy Mitchell suggest, “state-
like” is something that we contest, that is deployed, that does work.
Knots of statelike power: that is what we face. A tenticular 
amalgam of public and private institutions that includes signals intel-
ligence agencies, Netfl ix, Amazon, Microsoft , Google, eBay, Facebook, 
Samsung, Target, and others— a behemoth that spans government, 
commerce, and our intimate lives— all tied up in knots of statelike 
power. Economy, society, and private life melt into a giant data market 
for everyone to trade, mine, analyze, and target.
We are told, by this voy eur is tic amalgam, that everything is being 
done for our benefi t only—to protect us from terrorist attacks, to keep 
Th e Collapse of State, Economy, and Society  215

216  The Perils of Digital Exposure
us safe from digital threats, to make our digital experience more 
pleasant, to show us products we desire, to better avoid spam and un-
wanted communications, to satisfy us better. . . .  But there are other 
interests at stake, naturally— and little pretense about that. President 
Obama prominently mentioned in his speech on surveillance “our 
trade and investment relationships, including the concerns of Ameri-
ca’s companies,” and he made sure to reference “malware that targets a 
stock exchange.”97 Clearly, there are signifi cant profi t motives— the 
cash reserves of the high- tech companies are staggering. Th ere are 
deep competitive interests as well, in a seething world of corporate es-
pionage. Th ere are po liti cal and economic questions of dominance in 
the most valuable currency of all today, what has become the single 
most important primary resource: electronic communication capa-
bilities in a digital age.
Th e prevalence of economic espionage in the archive of NSA docu-
ments leaked by Snowden is telling. As Glenn Greenwald showed 
us, “much of the Snowden archive revealed what can only be called 
economic espionage: eavesdropping and email interception aimed at 
the Brazilian oil giant Petrobras, economic conferences in Latin America, 
energy companies in Venezuela and Mexico, and spying by the NSA’s 
allies— including Canada, Norway, and Sweden—on the Brazilian 
Ministry of Mines and Energy and energy companies in several other 
countries.”98 Th e NSA documents reveal targets that include, in addi-
tion, Rus sian companies such as Gazprom and Aerofl ot.99
So is it really our interests that are at stake, or is it other ambitions? 
Will we, in the long run, be protected in our intimacy, in our sociality, 
in our po liti cal struggles— which at times may be more radical for 
some than for others? Hard to tell, is it not, when the drives of this 
tenticular oligarchy may include such pressing strategic global interests, 
such intense fi nancial and commercial competition, not to mention 
world dominance, given our position, in President Obama’s words, as 
“the world’s only superpower.”100

Exposed, watched, recorded, predicted— for many of us, the 
new digital technologies have begun to shape our subjectivity. Th e in-
ability to control our intimate information, the sentiment of being fol-
lowed or tracked, these reinforce our sense of vulnerability. Our constant 
attention to rankings and ratings, to the number of “likes,” retweets, 
comments, and shares, start to defi ne our conception of self. For some 
of us, we depend increasingly on the metrics. We start judging and 
evaluating ourselves by the numbers. A sense of insecurity may begin 
to erode our self- confi dence. Th e new platforms start to shape what we 
like about ourselves. Th e recommendations mold our preferences.
We have known for a long time that our selves are shaped by our in-
teractions with others. From George Mead through Erving Goff man, 
we have learned that “the self is not something we are born with or 
something that is innate in us; instead, it is something we acquire 
through interaction with others.”1 It should come as no surprise, then, 
that the digital is reconfi guring our subjectivity. For many of us, the 
technologies we depend on for our own fl ourishing, for our professional 
advancement, for our personal development, have eff ects on us. Th e 
doppelgänger logic itself has a looping eff ect: it shapes our subjectivity 
E I G H T
the mortification of the self

218  The Perils of Digital Exposure
on the basis of others’ tastes, while shaping others’ subjectivities on 
the basis of our own. Th ese algorithms challenge our self- reliance, make 
us aware of our fragility, and produce a feeling of things being out of 
our personal control.
Research suggests that online visibility and the exposure and trans-
parency of social media may have a damping eff ect on our willingness to 
voice our opinions and express ourselves, particularly when we think 
that we are in the minority— feeding into a “spiral of silence.”2 Studies 
show that being electronically watched at work by a supervisor has ad-
verse eff ects on productivity, creativity, and stress levels: in more tech-
nical terms, “electronic per for mance monitoring can have adverse ef-
fects on employees’ perceptions of their jobs’ stressors and on their 
self- reported levels of physical and psychological strain.”3 Th ere is even 
biometric data to support the fi ndings: “Th eir per for mance of tasks suf-
fers and they have elevated pulse rates and levels of stress hormones.” 4 
Th ere is a large body of psychological research, associated with “objec-
tive self- awareness theory,” suggesting that stimuli that prompt self- 
awareness (for example, mirrors, photos, autobiographical information, 
or now digital posts) may activate discrepancies between one’s perceived 
self and social standards, and as a consequence lower self- esteem.5 
Other research suggests that the feeling that one is exposed to others or 
being watched is associated with lower self- esteem and heightened 
stress and anxiety: “privacy research in both online and offl  ine environ-
ments has shown that just the perception, let alone the reality, of being 
watched results in feelings of low self- esteem, depression and anxiety.” 6
In a fascinating study of children at boarding school in the United 
Kingdom who are subject to these forms of digital surveillance, re-
searchers found that the children express an “out- of- control” feeling. Th e 
students, particularly those in the En glish private school setting,  were 
acutely aware of being watched, with CCTV and computer “watch-
ware,” and felt they  were simply losing control:
Pupils said that they  were subject to “real- time” computer moni-
toring which included the teachers or IT people being able to 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  219
“see what  we’re doing on the computer” . . .  ; watching “what you 
type” . . .  ; watching “what’s on everyone’s screen” . . .  ; seeing 
“who’s logged on to where” . . .  ; and taking “control of your com-
puter” . . .  “Th e teacher can see it but also the IT people can do it 
as well. So they can write a message like ‘Get off  this site.’ Or 
they’ll just say ‘go see X.’ ”7
Some of the pupils expressed concern that this would interfere with 
their schoolwork. One boy feared that “just by the touch of a button, 
they can shut down your computer. So your work could disappear and 
everything . . .  it’s just a cause of worry that you’re going to get a mes-
sage and he’s just going to shut your computer down and you’re going 
to lose your work. It’s just a constant threat of a teacher just killing 
your computer.”
Th e research on these schoolchildren suggests that these feelings of 
vulnerability have signifi cant eff ects on them as subjects. Such feel-
ings act as a depressant, they wear on the soul, they undermine the 
children’s self- confi dence. Th e surveillance inhibits them, shakes 
them, makes them lose their sense of self.
A number of studies dating back to the 1970s— during and fol-
lowing a previous FBI surveillance scandal— documented the eff ects 
of omnipresent surveillance, including some of the famous Stanford 
University experiments of Philip Zimbardo, specifi cally the 1975 study 
Zimbardo conducted with Gregory White.8 More recently, the jour-
nalist association PEN America confi rmed a chilling eff ect on jour-
nalists resulting already from the NSA surveillance disclosures.9 Th ere 
is a loss of the self in the face of so much digital knowledge about the 
self. A feeling that one has no control over one’s self. Th at everything 
can be known, will be known, is known. Th at there is nothing that can 
be kept from the other. Similar fi ndings have surfaced in other indus-
tries that are subject to increasing digital monitoring of employees 
using real- time location systems, implantable radio- frequency identi-
fi cation devices, electronic onboard recorder devices, and electronic 
driver logs.10
www.Ebook777.com

220  The Perils of Digital Exposure
Daniel Soar, in an essay in the London Review of Books, gives expres-
sion to this overwhelming sense of loss and lack of control:
I know that Google knows, because I’ve looked it up, that on 
30 April 2011 at 4.33 p.m. I was at Willesden Junction station, trav-
elling west. It knows where I was, as it knows where I am now, 
because like many millions of others I have an Android- powered 
smartphone with Google’s location ser vice turned on. If you use 
the full range of its products, Google knows the identity of 
 everyone you communicate with by email, instant messaging 
and phone, with a master list— accessible only by you, and by 
Google—of the people you contact most. If you use its products, 
Google knows the content of your emails and voicemail mes-
sages (a feature of Google Voice is that it transcribes messages 
and emails them to you, storing the text on Google servers indefi -
nitely). If you fi nd Google products compelling— and their promise 
of access- anywhere, confl agration and laptop- theft - proof docu-
ment creation makes them quite compelling— Google knows the 
content of every document you write or spreadsheet you fi ddle 
or pre sen ta tion you construct. If as many Google- enabled ro-
botic devices get installed as Google hopes, Google may soon 
know the contents of your fridge, your heart rate when you’re ex-
ercising, the weather outside your front door, the pattern of elec-
tricity use in your home.
Google knows or has sought to know, and may increasingly 
seek to know, your credit card numbers, your purchasing history, 
your date of birth, your medical history, your reading habits, 
your taste in music, your interest or otherwise (thanks to your 
searching habits) in the First Intifada or the career of Audrey 
Hepburn or fl ights to Mexico or interest- free loans, or what ever 
you idly speculate about at 3.45 on a Wednesday aft ernoon. 
Here’s something: if you have an Android phone, Google can 
guess your home address, since that’s where your phone tends to 
be at night. I don’t mean that in theory some rogue Google em-
ployee could hack into your phone to fi nd out where you sleep; I 

mean that Google, as a system, explicitly deduces where you live 
and openly logs it as “home address” in its location ser vice, to put 
beside the “work address” where you spend the majority of your 
daytime hours.11
Th is omnipresent knowledge deprives us of a secure space of our 
own, a place to feel safe, protected. Th e schoolchildren at one of the 
U.K. boarding schools in the study spoke about this in terms of “their 
expressed desire to have a ‘backstage’ area of ‘emotional release.’ . . .  
Or as one pupil put it, in relation to the use of CCTV cameras in toilets 
or changing rooms, ‘Why won’t they let you sort yourself out, your 
face and stuff ? . . .  It’s somewhere where I can sort myself out’ ” (282). 
Th ere is something about feeling that someone  else has control over 
your personal life, your intimate self, your laptop or smartphone— the 
very extension of your person, with all your fi les, your photos, your tax 
forms, your intimate correspondence. It is destabilizing. It is corro-
sive. Some, like Erving Goff man, even suggest it is mortifying.
In his book Nothing to Hide, Daniel Solove explores these issues 
through the literary meta phor of Franz Kafk a’s novel Th e Trial.12 It is 
not, he suggests, the Orwellian lens but Kafk a that sheds the most 
light on our digital condition. And the problem that Kafk a identifi ed 
is, in Solove’s words, that of “a suff ocating powerlessness and vulnera-
bility created by the court system’s use of personal data and its denial 
to the protagonist of any knowledge of or participation in the pro-
cess.”13 Th e real harm is not just that we inhibit our own behavior; it 
involves “bureaucratic ones— indiff erence, error, abuse, frustration, 
and lack of transparency and accountability.”14 Th ese are what create 
the eff ects of powerlessness and vulnerability on human subjectivity.
•  •  •
I recently walked into the Bloomberg building in Manhattan. I was there 
to speak at a University of Chicago reception. It was about 6:00 p.m. 
and already dark outside when I arrived. When I asked for directions 
to the function, I was sent to the reception area on the main fl oor. I 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  221

222  The Perils of Digital Exposure
soon realized the receptionist was a security guard, and that I needed 
to present some ID and get a badge so that I could get on the elevators. 
It then dawned on me that they wanted a photo of my face. Th ey  were 
going to place it on the temporary ID card. Th ere was nothing I wanted 
less. But it was all done so seamlessly and quickly. Th e security guard 
just asked me to look behind him, where a camera lens was hidden 
somewhere on the wall in a bank of black glass. I could barely see the 
camera. I hadn’t even noticed it coming into the lobby. Hadn’t noticed 
it when I was showing my driver’s license. But in a swift , rapid move, 
the security guard asked me, in an offh  and way, to look behind him 
into the camera.
And click—it was done.
Next thing I knew, I had a badge with my photo on it and a personal 
Wi- Fi identifi er and password. I could not resist. I did not resist. I 
could not challenge the security protocol. I was embarrassed to chal-
lenge it, so I gave in without any re sis tance. But it still bothers me 
today. Why? Because I had no control over the dissemination of my 
own identity, of my face. Because I felt like I had no power to chal-
lenge, to assert myself. And, really, who wants to be the person who is 
constantly challenging the hapless security guard? It’s just his job. It 
sounds so paranoid.
•  •  •
I had been reading a fascinating article about how Facebook widgets 
track you even if you are not a Facebook member. I found the topic 
gripping. I should have been writing my book or preparing a lecture, 
but I  couldn’t stop reading about these new digital technologies. My 
insightful friends and my partner usually send any news articles about 
this to me. I am not a Facebook member, so I was getting slightly 
concerned.
I then started reading about how Google was vacuuming up data 
with its Google Street View technology. Th e article was on a website 
called AlterNet . org. All of a sudden, every time I would change pages 
on the article, a pop-up from Facebook would intrude on the bottom 

right of my screen, asking me to “like” AlterNet on Facebook. Th en the 
same thing started happening at ProPublica . org as I was reading an 
article titled— get this— “Why Online Tracking Is Getting Creepier.”15 
I kept getting hit with this pop-up window on the side of my screen: “Like 
ProPublica on Facebook. For investigations, news, data, discussions & 
more. 89,016 people like this. Sign up to see what your friends like.”
I was surprised. But then I realized the AlterNet website naturally 
could track me, since I was visiting it, even if I didn’t “like” Facebook. 
So could ProPublica. As well as Google, where I’d been searching 
before. And so can Facebook—as well as the NSA. I’m exposed, 
regardless.
In his masterful ethnography Asylums, published in 1961, 
Erving Goff man minutely dissected how our surroundings shape us 
as subjects. Goff man gave us a phenomenology of the structure of the 
self— what he himself described as a “so cio log i cal version of the struc-
ture of the self.”16
Goff man was studying, of course, the “analog”: the asylum, the 
prison, the sanatorium, those institutions born in the early nineteenth 
century that contributed to a pervasive disciplinary power circulating 
through society. Goff man’s research was based on ethnographic fi eld 
work conducted in 1955–1956 at St.  Elizabeth’s Hospital in Wash-
ington, D.C., one of the largest asylums in the United States at the time, 
with over 6,000 patients. Goff man was writing during a period that 
produced much of the classic, critical literature on these institutions. 
It was several de cades before the onset of our current crisis of massive 
overincarceration; but it was a time when people  were beginning to 
question the concentration of patients that had built up in asylums 
and mental hospitals and would later take hold of the prison.17 
Goff man wrote on the asylum in 1961, as did Foucault, the same year, 
in his History of Madness, and as would David Rothman in 1971 in Th e 
Discovery of the Asylum, as well as R. D. Laing, David Cooper, Th omas 
Szasz, and others.18 Th ere was a growing awareness at the time of how 
psychiatric institutions and practices— and analog security mea sures 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  223

224  The Perils of Digital Exposure
more generally— shaped us as subjects. Th e experience in these insti-
tutions, Goff man showed, transformed the subject through a staged 
pro cess that began with the mortifi cation of the self.
Goff man’s research would come to defi ne the notion of the “total 
institution”: a space where a large number of patients are cut off  and 
separated from society for a long period of time and live together in a 
fully administered space, under the supervision of a separate group of 
guards and doctors who have open access to the free world. Goff man 
studied how that kind of institution aff ects patients, and what inter-
ested him deeply was this notion of the “mortifi cation of the self”— the 
fi rst of four stages of the shaping of subjectivity in the asylum. Mortifi ca-
tion, according to Goff man, was followed by reor ga ni za tion of the self, 
which led him to analyze all the infl uences that reor ga nize the subject 
(for example, the systems of punishments and privileges that reconsti-
tute a subject). Th is was followed by a set of responses that are pro-
duced by the inmates themselves in reaction to this reor ga ni za tion; 
and then fi nally by the production of cultural milieus that develop 
around these sets of responses, systems of power, and re sis tance.
Th ese four stages are relevant to us today in the digital era because 
they demonstrate how power relations within an institution or larger 
system produce a moral experience. Th ey off er a phenomenology of 
the analog carceral experience that may shed light on our digital con-
dition. Goff man in fact called his study the analysis of the “moral ca-
reer” of the patients. He interpreted these stages of their life course 
through the meta phor of a “career” by means of which, or through 
which, the patients become diff erent moral agents. Goff man explored 
a sequence of changes in the life of an individual, of transformations of 
their subjectivity. And what is important is that it is a moral experi-
ence: the subject adjusts to his environment, is infl uenced by it, cre-
ates a new identity, transforms himself, all in relation to the forms of 
power that circulate around him.
Th e fi rst step, then, the mortifi cation of the self, happens in the 
asylum through a continual pro cess of humiliation and degradation. 
Th ese humiliating practices are carried out through a  whole set of tech-
niques. Th ere is, for example, a rule in Benedictine monasteries that 

all private property must be seized from the young monk in order to 
prevent any form of attachment.19 Th e monk must not even be allowed 
to attach himself to his bedding, his blanket, his mattress. Not even his 
room. Th e young monk shall be moved from room to room, displaced 
so that he cannot form any bonds and cannot develop an identity. Th ere 
must be no association whatsoever with possessions or private prop-
erty, because any attachment to property can create the possibility 
that the monk might develop an identity or a subjectivity that could 
comfort him. In the male prison, mortifi cation happens through the 
loss of masculinity. Th is detachment serves to loosen the prisoner’s 
identifi cation with his conception of self. Th e detainees learn that 
their time and eff ort are worth nothing— that they are incapable of 
doing anything, of responding, of acting. Th e prison administration 
cuts the detainees’ links to their prior selves, making it so that the 
subjects cannot and do not have the internal strength to respond or 
resist.20
Mortifi cation operates through the contamination of the body and 
forced encounters with dirt and fi lth. Th e prisoners have to be dispos-
sessed, stripped of their roles, so that they can maintain no control 
over their actions. Th eir actions must become so routinized and sched-
uled that they have no possibility of in de pen dence or choice. Th is is 
achieved through strict time schedules that dispossess inmates of any 
possible sense that they are acting for themselves.21 It is a pro cess, simul-
taneously, of social control: at 5:30 a.m., the inmates are awakened; on 
the count of one they wake up, on two they stand at attention, on three 
they make their bed. Th ey dress by numbers, socks at two, at three, 
shoes, any noise is enough to send the inmate to the line . . .  A strict 
regulation, a regimentation, continual, pervasive, running across every 
aspect of time and space, is presented as being necessary for the secu-
rity of the establishment. It is always justifi ed on the basis of security. 
These are the practices that mortify the self, that detach it from its 
former identity. Th is is the deconstruction, piece by piece, of the 
subject.
Th e mortifi cation of the self is followed by practices that reor ga nize 
and reconstruct the subject. Th ese are the systems of punishments 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  225

226  The Perils of Digital Exposure
and privileges: a  whole new set of norms and rules that are used to 
govern the individual, who is in the pro cess of losing his own concep-
tion of self and taking on a new subjectivity. Th ese are the “house 
rules” that determine who is privileged, how they may gain favor, what 
are the benefi ts, and what is the punishment.22 Th e privilege system 
and the  house rules distribute plea sure and mete out pain. Th e ex-
plicit and formal set of prescriptions lays out the main contours of per-
mitted inmate conduct.
Goff man then turns to the diff erent types of responses that inmates 
and patients formulate in reaction to these forms of reor ga ni za tion. 
Some respond by withdrawing entirely, regressing to earlier stages of 
moral development, focusing obsessively on a momentary activity, or 
ceasing to participate in common life. Others refuse to cooperate and 
create lines of intransigence. Some invest themselves in their acts of 
re sis tance. Yet others become docile, or worse, take on the role of the 
disciplining superior. Some become fully “colonized”: for them, the 
asylum turns into their ideal world.23 Th ey fi nd their comfort zone, 
they believe they have “found a home, never having had it so good.”24 
Th is is a completely diff erent reaction, but one that also represents, in 
its extremity, a type of re sis tance. To adopt the total institution as the 
greatest place in the world is re sis tance to power; it is almost as if the 
inmate is appropriating the space to himself.
Conversion is another way to react: to try to be the perfect inmate, 
to adopt all the rules— not just to be happy or fully colonized, but to 
become an even more perfect detainee than the staff  wants the inmate 
to be. Goff man gives the example of Chinese prisoner camps, where 
the detainees embraced communism and the communist way of 
life even more fervently than the guards. To convert is to become even 
more invested than what is expected or imposed by the guard staff — 
more than what the very ideology of the institution demands. It is to 
embrace the surveillance completely and become a part of it.
And, fi nally, at the fourth stage, the inmates form cliques within the 
institution to deal with their situation. Th ey sort themselves by means 
of their various reactions and responses. Relations develop between 

par tic u lar inmates who express the same types of re sis tance. Cultural 
milieus emerge and crystallize around certain relations to time—to 
“doing time.” Together, some inmates exploit, others abandon, and 
still others destroy time in the total institution. Th e control of time, 
it turns out, becomes one of the most important forms of power and 
re sis tance.
Th ese pro cesses of subjectivation reach deep into the structure 
of the self— much further down than the ideational realm. Th ey pen-
etrate below those layers of the self that can more easily be peeled 
away, like a mistaken conclusion or an ill- formed belief. Th e notion of 
false consciousness does not serve us well  here; we need to explore, 
instead, the deeper regions of desire, with a full recognition that those 
very desires may be shaped and molded by the digital age itself.25 As 
Deleuze and Guattari remind us:
It was not by means of a meta phor, even a paternal meta phor, 
that Hitler was able to sexually arouse the fascists. It is not by 
means of a meta phor that a banking or stock- market transaction, 
a claim, a coupon, a credit, is able to arouse people who are not 
necessarily bankers. . . .  Th ere are socioeconomic “complexes” 
that are also veritable complexes of the unconscious, and that 
communicate a voluptuous wave from the top to the bottom of 
their hierarchy (the military- industrial complex). And ideology, 
Oedipus, and the phallus have nothing to do with this, because 
they depend on it rather than being its impetus. For it is a matter 
of fl ows, of stocks, of breaks in and fl uctuations of fl ows; desire 
is present wherever something fl ows and runs, carry ing along 
with it interested subjects— but also drunken or slumbering 
subjects— toward lethal destinations.26
Th e constant monitoring, the Netfl ix recommendations, Twitter’s 
“pop u lar accounts” and “fi nd friends” do their work. Th ey shape our 
digital selves. Th ey constitute our distinctive “looking glass.”27 Th ere 
is no authentic self down there, nor layers of false consciousness that 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  227

228  The Perils of Digital Exposure
can be peeled away. Th ere is instead a deeply embedded self, shaped 
by these new digital technologies, that cannot easily be pried open. 
We are deeply invested— with “investments of desire,” as Deleuze 
suggested— and these investments need to be explored. “We never de-
sire against our interests,” Deleuze explained, “because interest always 
follows and fi nds itself where desire has placed it. We have to be willing 
to hear the call of Reich: no, the masses  were not deceived; at a par tic-
u lar time, they actually wanted a fascist regime!”28
Drawing on Deleuze and Guattari, who tried to move us beyond 
psychoanalysis to what they called “schizoanalysis,” we might say that 
digital technology “liberates the fl ows of desire”— much like capi-
talism does in their work.29 Th at it shapes and produces desires locked 
onto other desiring machines. Th ose other machines, we know them 
well today. We are glued to them. Inseparable. And we give ourselves 
up to them—in the pro cess, giving ourselves away. Th is may also help 
to explain the self- destructive nature of some of the digital cravings. 
Th e objective of the material psychology that Deleuze and Guattari 
developed reached deep into the recesses of desire to understand how 
we might end up in obscene places. Th e “goal of schizoanalysis,” they 
argued, is “to analyze the specifi c nature of the libidinal investments 
in the economic and po liti cal spheres, and thereby to show how, in the 
subject who desires, desire can be made to desire its own repression— 
whence the role of the death instinct in the circuit connecting desire 
to the social sphere.”30 Th e technologies that end up facilitating sur-
veillance are the very technologies we crave. We desire those digital 
spaces, those virtual experiences, all those electronic gadgets— and 
we have become, slowly but surely, slaves to them. Slaves to them and 
to our desires, our desires for shares, clicks, friends, and “likes.” Kevin 
Haggerty and Richard Ericson deploy the term “surveillant assem-
blage” to describe the broader trend of surveillance in virtually all 
sectors of life that “operates by abstracting human bodies from their 
territorial settings and separating them into a series of discrete fl ows. 
Th ese fl ows are then reassembled into distinct ‘data doubles’ which 
can be scrutinized and targeted for intervention.”31 Th e surveillant as-

semblage becomes normalized and ubiquitous— and it has deeply 
normalizing eff ects on the self. It shapes us.
Goffman’s analysis of moral careers sheds light on our new 
condition of digital exposure. It may be possible, in fact, to identify the 
phenomenological steps of the structuration of the self in the age of 
Google and the NSA. To describe the moral careers that we digital 
subjects experience— just like the inmate in the asylum. Th ere are 
striking parallels. Th e monk in his Benedictine monastery, who is 
deprived of his possessions and any form of attachment, has much in 
common with us digital subjects today, who are deprived of an inti-
mate space of our own, of any anonymity or genuine privacy, who 
cannot control the dissemination of our secrets and of our most 
cherished moments. Many of us become increasingly detached even 
from our selves, as we know and get used to the fact that others can 
watch us. It is as if we begin to dissociate from our materiality and 
look at it from a distance. For many of us, especially for the youths in 
the British school study, we begin to feel like we are being watched 
in a demeaning way. In fact, some of the schoolchildren in the U.K. 
study explicitly refer to digital security as “big brother” (281). It be-
gins to take on the same symbolic meaning as the custodial staff  
in Goff man’s asylum— with features common to the fi rst stage of 
mortifi cation.
Th ere is, for instance, humiliation and degradation when the CCTV 
cameras look into the girls’ toilets or changing rooms, and watch them 
when they are undressing (281–282). Some of the pupils said that they 
“had heard stories making an explicit connection between ‘surveil-
lance’ and ‘voyeurism,’ including fi remen in he li cop ters using cameras 
to go around gardens looking at ladies sunbathing . . .  and police offi  -
cers radioing each other to say ‘oh there’s a MILF over  here, come over 
 here’ ” (282–283). Some of the pupils experienced this fi rsthand: being 
seen on camera and identifi ed as not having had a top on in a park, even 
though they had a bikini top on— with the police saying repeatedly, 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  229

230  The Perils of Digital Exposure
“We just saw you on camera” (283). We know, from Snowden’s revela-
tions, that this takes place all the time among young analysts working 
for the NSA, who share pictures of naked women or people in compro-
mising positions.32 Recall the trove of X- rated images gleaned by op-
eration Optic Nerve.33
Th en there is the opprobrium and increased surveillance for those 
who wear certain items of clothing: in the study of British schoolchil-
dren, it was hoodies, tracksuits, or trainers (279). Th ere is special at-
tention to those who are not conforming, who display re sis tance, even 
the slightest re sis tance, to the mainstream norm. Th e schoolchildren 
said that what draws the most attention is wearing hoodies. It is, ac-
cording to the upstanding children (the “angels”), “those who dress in 
‘subcultural’ attire,” or more simply the “chavs,” who draw attention 
(279). Th e term “chavs” refers to “members of the working class who 
dress in tracksuits and baseball caps”—or, as the authors elaborate, 
“the term is also applied to members of the working class who are 
perceived by ‘superordinate classes’ to be ‘aesthetically impoverished’ 
due to their ‘vulgar’ and ‘excessive’ consumption habits” (280 n. 6). We 
focus more attention, more of our digital surveillance, on those whom 
we deem more vulgar— and that is oft en us, or at least our perception 
of ourselves.
Th ere is, as well, the dimension of turning us into marketized ob-
jects of consumption. Th e doppelgänger logic constantly reminds us 
that we are hardly more than consuming things. “Th e working logics 
of these algorithms not only shape user practices,” Tarleton Gillespie 
tells us, “but lead users to internalize their norms and priorities.”34 
Many of us get “habituated” by “the code of commercial platform” to 
understand ourselves as targets of advertising, as objects of consump-
tion; in this, “the principles of capitalism are embedded in the workings 
of search engines.”35 Targets of advertising, or simply targets. Some of 
the children say that “when they  were in shops and supermarkets they 
sometimes wondered whether their actions could be misinterpreted 
by CCTV operators” (283).
Th e surveillance also aff ected the schoolchildren’s relations with 
their teachers, parents, and others:

In terms of the “subjective impact” of these systems, some chil-
dren explained how they impacted on patterns of “sociation” or 
“face- to- face” interaction with parents, teachers, and their peers. 
Th ere was “no negotiation,” for example, with the teacher for 
“late arrivals”; pupils could no longer buy their friends dinner 
due to the introduction of the “cashless” dinner programme; and 
the “automated text messages” could “really land you in it” with 
parents. (287)
Th ese technologies have a diff erent objectivity that under-
mines the possibility of negotiation, fudging, playing with facts and 
circumstances— something that is so important to human interaction.
To be sure, some research suggests that certain forms of social 
media— particularly those that are “nonymous” rather than 
“anonymous”— may promote self- esteem by allowing us to present our-
selves in more fl attering or self- pleasing ways, given that the narratives 
we construct are oft en those that make us more confi dent about our-
selves. In one par tic u lar study, the researchers fi nd that the opportunity 
to present more positive information about oneself and to fi lter out neg-
ative information—in other words, the selective self- presentation that 
is made possible by digitally mediated environments— has a positive 
infl uence on self- esteem.36 Th ey fi nd that while an unedited view of 
the self (for instance, in a mirror) is likely to decrease self- esteem, the 
extra care involved in digital self- representation on online platforms 
may improve self- esteem.
But that does not seem to be the experience for many of the school-
children under digital supervision— especially those who feel less en-
titled.37 Many of the schoolchildren sense that the digital platforms 
are trying to shape them. One of the pupils explains, “Everyone’s 
watching each other. And they’re all trying to make us all perfect” 
(283). As the U.K. study reports:
For some pupils these pro cesses could lead to “self- policing” of 
the body.” As one girl explained, “CCTV just encourages— you 
know— beauty, and everyone wanting to be perfect . . .  Like 
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  231

232  The Perils of Digital Exposure
 everybody wanting to be size 8 or really skinny and really, 
 really, beautiful” . . .  Th e emergence of a “surveillance society” re-
minded some of the pupils of a “futuristic” school play they had 
recently performed called “Th e Perfect Generation.” “Th e cam-
eras,” as one girl explained, “are trying to control us and make us 
perfect.” (287)
“Th e perfect generation”: these technologies have eff ects on our 
subjectivity. Th ey have “chilling eff ects,” according to the pupils in the 
British study. Th ey made the students “acutely aware that their actions 
 were being monitored and led them to change ‘legitimate’ forms of be-
haviour or activities due to a concern that their actions could be mis-
interpreted by the ‘surveyors’ ” (283).
Digital exposure is restructuring the self in the ways that Goff man 
identifi ed. We are experiencing a moral transformation, undergoing a 
moral career, becoming diff erent moral agents. For many of us, the 
virtual transparence has begun to mortify our analog selves— they are 
fading away like the image on an old Polaroid instant photo. Google, 
Facebook, Amazon, Scorelogix, the NSA— through their rankings, rat-
ings, recommendations, scores, and no- fl y- lists— are putting in place a 
new system of privileges and punishments that are restructuring our 
selves. We each react and respond diff erently to these incentives, and 
we sort ourselves out into diff erent cliques— some who do not seem to 
care, others who feel targeted, some who resist, others who feel they’ve 
“never had it so good.” Th is new digital age has not only given birth to 
our data doubles— our second bodies— but is having profound eff ects 
on our analog selves. In combination, it is radically transforming our 
subjectivity— even for those, perhaps even more, who believe they have 
nothing to fear.
Sometimes it would almost appear as if the  whole of our 
digital society is divided into two diff erent types of people: those who 
say they have nothing to hide and feel protected by the surveillance, 
and those who feel vulnerable and fear they will be the targets of dig-

ital surveillance. In Asylums, there is a haunting passage where Erving 
Goff man asks provocatively: “May this not be the situation in free so-
ciety, too?”38 Perhaps we should ask ourselves the inverse question 
today: What if our expository society is a total institution, too? Could 
it be that there are some people who see themselves as virtual prisoners 
of digital exposure, as potential targets, as the usual suspects, and 
others who, because of their privilege or for what ever other reason, 
feel that they are protected by the digital surveillance?
Perhaps it is society as a  whole that has become the totalizing insti-
tution, with two categories of subjects: those who perceive themselves 
as under surveillance (the captive subjectivities) and those who be-
lieve they are being protected (the guardians of society). Aft er all, there 
are many of us who believe, almost refl exively or unthinkingly, that 
the state is protecting our interests, that our self- interests line up with 
those of the NSA, Google, Microsoft , Instagram, and Facebook— that 
we are the benefi ciaries. Th ese may be our guardians of the expository 
society; the digital protects them. On the other side, there are those of 
us who always suspect we will be surveilled, vulnerable, exposed— and 
who question whether the system is there to protect us or detect us. 
Th ese would be the inmates, the patients, those of us who are stuck in 
the expository society.
Mortifi cation of the self, in our digital world, happens when subjects 
voluntarily cede their private attachments and their personal privacy, 
when they give up their protected personal space, cease monitoring 
their exposure on the Internet, let go of their personal data, and ex-
pose their intimate lives. Th e moral transformation happens when 
subjects no longer resist the virtual transparency of digital life. “I have 
nothing to hide.” “It is no big deal.” “Nothing to worry about.”39 Th at, 
paradoxically, may be the fi nal stage of the mortifi cation of the self.
Th e Mortifi cation of the Self  233

A striking feature of our digital age is the utter contrast be-
tween the ethic of play and desire at the heart of our expository society 
and the crushing nature of our punitive practices. Th e surprising resil-
ience of analog forms of punishment—of the iron bars and cinder- 
block cells—is entirely puzzling when juxtaposed with the virtual 
transparency that characterizes so much of our digital lives. In many 
respects, the contrast could not be greater. At one end, there is this 
new, capacious form of digital exposure that thrives on our willing 
embrace and deepest passions, on love and desire, and on anxiety 
too—on the time we spend on Xbox, on what we share on Facebook, 
on how we surf so freely with Explorer, Firefox, and Chrome. Th is is 
the space of open frontiers, of experimentation, of liberty, of expres-
sion, and of curiosity. At the other end, there is confi nement and 
 sequestration, shackles and chains, isolation cells and cages, with 
growing solitary confi nement at one extreme and overcrowding and 
warehousing at the other. Th is is the space of bolted iron doors and 
heavy locks, of watchtowers and armed guards, of chain gangs and ar-
mored vans. Open, free surfi ng at one end; strapped down on the 
gurney used for lethal injection at the other end.
N I N E
The Steel Mesh

Th e Steel Mesh  235
We hardly need to be reminded, but our liberal democracy in the 
United States still leads the world in imprisonment. Of all countries, 
our expository society, with all its virtual transparence, incarcerates 
the greatest number and percentage of its citizens.1 About one in a 
hundred adults in America is behind bars, a total of more than 2.2 mil-
lion people, and the number of people under correctional supervision 
is growing.2 Th e prison and jail population in the United States is 
about the size of half the population of Denmark. Th e statistics are 
even worse when we disaggregate by demographics. In 2008, one out 
of nine young adult black men between the ages of twenty and thirty- 
four—or approximately 11 percent of that population— was incarcer-
ated in prison or jail in the United States.3 As of 2011, more than 2 million 
African American men  were either behind bars or under correctional 
supervision (that is, had been arrested and pro cessed by the criminal 
justice system and  were on probation, on parole, or behind bars). Th at 
too represents about 11  percent of the total population of black 
men— one out of nine.4 Not only that, but our prisons have reverted to 
the prerevolutionary function of extraction.5 No longer to reeducate 
or to correct the inmate, no longer to improve or provide skills, no 
longer to honestly deter others, the prison has become dedicated to, or 
rather reverted to, the task of bare extraction. Th e prison has folded 
back on itself, returned to a procrustean age—to the dark age before 
the eighteenth- century reformers created the penitentiary. Our new 
digital existence is accompanied today by a vertiginous form of analog 
control: massive, archaic, and racialized overincarceration.6
It is surprising that our new digital transparence could coexist so 
seamlessly with such a massive, physical, brute, archaic regime of pun-
ishment. Th e forms of power are so staggeringly diff erent. Th e freedom 
to surf the web, to stroll through any city in the world via Google Street 
View, to videochat with loved ones on the other side of the planet—it is 
hard to imagine a more radical contrast to the unplugged, unwired, 
locked- down, and isolated life in jails and prisons today. It is like the stark 
contrast between a brilliantly colorful, stimulating, and lustful digital 
life and the drab, gray, blunt, oppressive world of the fi ctional Oceania— 
nothing could be further apart. And yet the two extremes thrive.

236  The Perils of Digital Exposure
As a fi rst cut, we might imagine that we feel so free today in our 
liberal democracies—so liberated in our digital transparence— 
precisely because we have built our mirrored glass  house without ever 
dismantling the iron cage of security at its inner core, the prison with 
its cinder blocks and iron bars. We allow ourselves the plea sure of dig-
ital surfi ng because we know, as we watch and are watched ourselves, 
that some of us will be extracted. Extracted from our digital life in 
common and returned to the “analog”: to the prison, the iron bars, the 
cell block, the unplugged, the unwired. Returned to the closed chamber 
that is still there, at the heart of Philip Johnson’s glass  house.
Max Weber’s notion of the iron cage—or rather, Talcott Parsons’s 
somewhat idiosyncratic translation of Weber’s expression stahlhartes 
Gehäuse as “iron cage”— captures well the analog condition of the iron 
bars and cinder blocks, of the archaic prison, still so dominant today 
despite the liquidity of our digital age.7 Th e brute physicality of the 
penitentiary, the brick- and- mortar rationality of the eigh teenth and 
nineteenth centuries— these are still present today throughout every 
facet of our massive overincarceration. Th e “analog” still survives 
deep inside the glass pavilion— and in such stark contrast to the fl uid 
and ethereal digital age. For many of us, sadly, it may be the iron cage 
that comforts us, and serves as the condition of possibility for our dig-
ital wanderings.
But there is more to it than that. An odd convergence is taking 
place today. At one end, our lived experience is gravitating dramati-
cally from the analog to the digital. Th e digital self, the second body of 
today’s liberal demo cratic citizen, is overtaking his analog physical exis-
tence and becoming far more permanent, durable, tangible, and demon-
strable. But at the other end, the analog prison is gently sliding toward 
forms of digital correctional supervision— with more and more ankle 
bracelets and GPS tracking. As a result of the Great Recession of 2008, 
states and counties are doing everything they can to replace physical 
incarceration with digitized probation and supervision: with elec-
tronic bracelets and home monitoring, CCTV, biometric supervision, 

Th e Steel Mesh  237
and all sorts of other digital technologies. Cost- cutting and effi  ciency 
mea sures are driving punitive practices into the virtual world.
Th e result is a paradoxical and surprising convergence of the radical 
freedom of digital life and the supervised existence of the parolee: the 
virtual transparence of digital exposure is beginning to mimic and rep-
licate the new punitive form. Ordinary daily transparence has begun 
to map onto penal monitoring. Everyday life resembles the electronic 
bracelet and CCTV surveillance. Th e Apple Watch begins to function 
like the ankle bracelet. All is seen, all can be seen, all can be monitored— 
inside or out, wherever we are, free or supervised, we are permanently 
surveilled.
It is even possible to imagine a time in the not too distant future when 
there will be no need to incarcerate because we will all be watched so 
closely. We won’t need to confi ne anymore, because we will be able to see 
everywhere— perhaps even control behavior from a distance. Th ere exist 
already technologies to sedate and control. Psychotropic drugs serve this 
function, as do chemical castration and other forms of inhibitors. Would 
it be possible to imagine remote administration of such technologies 
once we can digitally see, track, watch, and follow everyone’s most minor 
movements? Could it be an added feature of a smart watch? Not only will 
it take our pulse, it will, on remote orders, administer sedatives and 
chemical blockers . . .  But that is merely science fi ction. Perhaps.
At one extreme, then, punishment is increasingly moving to-
ward electronic monitoring and GPS- tracking. Th e growth of digital 
monitoring in the criminal justice system, especially of GPS devices, 
is striking. Th e Journal of Off ender Monitoring— a journal dedicated to 
this burgeoning fi eld— conducted a study charting the growth of 
electronic monitoring in the United States from 1999 to 2009.8 Ac-
cording to that study, the number of people under GPS surveillance 
grew exponentially, up from 230 in 1999 to 91,329 in 2009. Th e annual 
rate of increase reached 95.6 percent in 2006 and 86.1 percent in 2007, 
growing practically eightfold from 2005 to 2009.9 Th e other form of 
electronic monitoring, radio- frequency (RF) devices used to monitor 

238  The Perils of Digital Exposure
home confi nement orders, also continued to increase over the period, 
meaning that overall, the number of people on some form of electronic 
monitoring grew by a factor of more than 2.5 between 1999 and 2009, 
from approximately 75,000 to approximately 200,000.10
Th e same trends can be seen across the country. A study conducted 
in Florida tracks the use of electronic monitoring in that state from 
1993–1994 through 2008–2009 and shows its use roughly doubling 
during that period, from 1,555 people in 1993–1994 to 3,177 in 2008–
2009. Interestingly, the trends refl ect a sharp decline in the number of 
people subject to RF monitoring, coinciding with the rise of the much 
more intrusive active GPS monitors. In 1993–1994, all of the 1,555 
people subject to monitoring  were monitored by RF (the only tech-
nology available then). GPS fi rst came into use in 1997–1998, and 
within two years it had already eclipsed the number of people on RF 
devices (677 vs. 343). Finally, beginning in 2004–2005, the number of 
people on GPS devices increased dramatically, from 1,104 that year to 
2,933 in 2008–2009, while the number of people on RF devices con-
tinued to fall over that same period, from 634 to 244.11
In North Carolina, the number of people under electronic moni-
toring (either satellite- based location monitoring or electronic home 
confi nement) has increased dramatically from 875 in 2011 to 2,789 as of 
June 2014.12 Th e Immigrations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) fi eld 
offi  ce in New York dramatically increased the number of women mon-
itored by GPS- enabled ankle bracelets, up roughly 4,000 percent in 
2014 alone, from 18 to 719.13 Even Vermont is turning to the use of elec-
tronic monitoring as a cost- eff ective alternative to pretrial detention 
in the state.14
One of the attractions of GPS monitoring for most counties and 
states—in addition to the reduced fi nancial and human resources ex-
pended on incarceration and supervision of low- risk inmates—is the 
cost- saving factor of inmates being forced to pay part or all of the costs 
of the electronic monitoring devices themselves.15 A recent study by 
National Public Radio and the Brennan Center shows that, with the 
exception of Hawaii and the District of Columbia, every state requires 
off enders to pay at least some portion of the cost associated with GPS 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Steel Mesh  239
monitoring.16 Th is is part of a larger trend of requiring those on proba-
tion to pay for an increasing share of the cost of their supervision.
Looking ahead, there is compelling evidence of an even greater rise 
in electronic monitoring. Th e company with the single largest market 
share, BI, is set to have a banner year, at least in part due to its recent 
contract with ICE, which is predicted to be worth somewhere be-
tween $200 million and $300 million. Th e press releases on the com-
pany’s website highlight the array of new contracts that the fi rm has 
entered into with county and municipal governments.17 Meanwhile, 
SuperCom, an Israeli manufacturer of electronic monitoring devices, 
announced its expansion into the U.S. market in July 2014.
We are witnessing a sharp increase in the number of people subject 
to electronic monitoring in one form or another— from one end of the 
country to the other. Miami- Dade County in August 2014 introduced 
a program to use electronic monitoring as an alternative to pretrial de-
tention, hoping to reduce the jail population by 10–20 percent; in No-
vember 2014, the Maine State Board of Corrections solicited proposals 
from counties to implement a pi lot program of electronic monitoring for 
domestic abusers.18 Th e second- largest county in Idaho, Canyon 
County, in July 2014 sent out a request for proposals for an electronic 
monitoring system as part of an alternative sentencing program.19 More 
and more, local governments are seeking to implement such programs.
At the other extreme, our free- world digital technologies 
more and more resemble correctional supervision. Th ey in fact repli-
cate the intrusiveness of digital carceral monitoring and share the 
same form of power: omnipresent, all- seeing. It is not an exaggeration 
to say that the reach of the new digital technologies into our ordinary 
lives is at least as powerful and intrusive as the capabilities of digital 
correctional monitoring, if not more so.
PRISM and UPSTREAM—as well as all the “people- based mar-
keting” and “onboarding”— off er the signals and corporate intelligence 
ser vices practically complete access to us. But even more than that, 
the NSA has found multiple other means of accessing devices and 
www.Ebook777.com

240  The Perils of Digital Exposure
getting hold of the very functioning of those devices without a user’s 
notice. In terms of our personal lives, we can be tracked in unparal-
leled ways—at least as much as correctional monitoring.
Two new ways of doing this seem to have emerged: physically in-
serting foreign devices into target computers that transmit data, 
and infi ltrating computers through malware. It is almost as if we are 
 implanting radio- frequency identifi cation (RFID) devices into pa-
rolees. First, the NSA can gain access to computers using “radio path-
ways” even when the devices are not connected to the Internet. Radio 
pathway devices can be “physically inserted by a spy, a manufacturer 
or an unwitting user” into computers, emitting a radio frequency de-
tectable by mobile NSA relay stations up to eight miles away. In addi-
tion to transmitting data from target computers to NSA stations, these 
devices also allow the NSA to plant malware in the target computers, 
as was the case in the 2010 U.S. cyberattack on Iran’s nuclear enrich-
ment facilities. Th e extent of operations abroad is staggering. A recent 
New York Times report notes that according to a “se nior offi  cial, who 
spoke on the condition of anonymity,” close to 100,000 such implants 
have been placed by the United States worldwide.20 Much of this ac-
tivity has ostensibly been used to track malware, a defensive move that 
one se nior offi  cial interviewed compared to the activity of submarines 
that silently track one another. Such tracking has been used frequently 
on Chinese military targets, who have also been accused of using sim-
ilar mea sures in U.S. government and industry devices.21
Second, malware now appears to be a very serious part of the U.S. in-
telligence toolkit. Th e NSA regularly uses malware to transmit data 
from users’ devices to NSA databases without the user being aware of it. 
When the NSA is able to introduce the malware into another computer, 
the agency can, in its own words, “own” the machine; as Greenwald ex-
plains, it can “view every keystroke entered and every screen viewed.”22
•  •  •
In November 2013 Der Spiegel broke a story, based on documents 
leaked by Edward Snowden, that concerned the NSA’s Offi  ce of Tai-

Th e Steel Mesh  241
lored Access Operations (TAO), as well as its QUANTUMINSERT 
program.23 TAO is “the NSA’s top operative unit— something like a 
squad of plumbers that can be called in when normal access to a target 
is blocked.” Th eir activity “ranges from counterterrorism to cyber at-
tacks to traditional espionage.” Th ey have the ability to infi ltrate, ac-
cording to the information leaked to Der Spiegel, “servers, workstations, 
fi rewalls, routers, handsets, phone switches, SCADA systems,  etc.” Th e 
last of these, SCADAs, “are industrial control systems used in factories, 
as well as in power plants.” In addition, TAO has developed the ability to 
infi ltrate users of “virtually every pop u lar Internet ser vice provider,” in-
cluding “Facebook, Yahoo, Twitter and YouTube.” While TAO has had 
diffi  culty infi ltrating Google users, they have been able to see this in-
formation through their sources in GCHQ.24
Der Spiegel describes a “pop u lar tool” of TAO called QUANTUMIN-
SERT, which appears to be a way of gaining access to devices by 
covertly inserting malware into them. For instance, “GCHQ workers 
used this method to attack the computers of employees at partly 
government- held Belgian telecommunications company Belgacom, 
in order to use their computers to penetrate even further into the com-
pany’s networks. Th e NSA, meanwhile, used the same technology to 
target high- ranking members of the Or ga ni za tion of the Petroleum Ex-
porting Countries (OPEC) at the or ga ni za tion’s Vienna headquarters.” 
Perhaps most signifi cantly, the NSA used the QUANTUMINSERT 
tool in order to infi ltrate the SEA- ME- WE-4 underwater cable bundle, 
which connects “Eu rope with North Africa and the Gulf states and 
then continues on through Pakistan and India, all the way to Malaysia 
and Th ailand.”25
When these tactics fail, the TAO uses another NSA division, called 
ANT. Der Spiegel reports that the acronym is unclear but “presumably 
stands for Advanced or Access Network Technology.” Th is division em-
ploys a  whole cata logue of technologies that appear to follow roughly 
the same strategy as QUANTUMINSERT. Th e German newspaper 
adds, “In cases where [the TAO’s] usual hacking and data- skimming 
methods don’t suffi  ce, ANT workers step in with their special tools, 
penetrating networking equipment, monitoring mobile phones and 

242  The Perils of Digital Exposure
computers and diverting or even modifying data.” ANT has “bur-
rowed its way into nearly all the security architecture made by the 
major players in the industry— including American global market 
leader Cisco and its Chinese competitor Huawei, but also producers of 
mass- market goods, such as US computer- maker Dell.”26
A major goal of these surveillance techniques is what ANT devel-
opers refer to as “per sis tence”: the ability to insert into devices mal-
ware that continues to collect information even when changes have 
been made to those devices. “Per sis tent” malware continues to per-
form its function without any indication to the user of improper func-
tion. Targeted devices include not only computers but also routers 
and “the fi rmware in hard drives manufactured by Western Digital, 
Seagate, Maxtor and Samsung.”27 According to NSA documents 
leaked by Snowden, the practice is widespread: the NSA has, for in-
stance, been able to infect well over 50,000 computers with one type 
of malware called Quantum Insertion, with the New York Times re-
porting that the number reached about 100,000.28
In some important respects, what TAO and ANT do holds diff erent 
consequences for privacy than other activities revealed by earlier 
Snowden revelations. Th e NSA is not simply accessing bulk informa-
tion available by means of a user’s Internet activity in an anonymous 
or anonymizable way. Th e NSA’s radio pathway surveillance is meant 
specifi cally to target activities that do not occur in the sphere of 
Internet- derived, bulk data. Devices must be covertly inserted into 
computers and phones on the factory fl oor, or later through a USB de-
vice. Th e creation of fake LinkedIn profi les, for instance, has been 
used by the GCHQ to infi ltrate Belgacom “in order to tap their cus-
tomers’ telephone and data traffi  c.”29 Th ese practices are diff erent 
from the kinds of data skimming that might be performed by com-
panies interested in consumer information. Rather, they target indi-
vidual devices to listen to specifi c people.
Digital surveillance capabilities have reached new 
heights in ordinary digital existence and have begun to converge on 

Th e Steel Mesh  243
carceral monitoring. It is diffi  cult, in fact, to tell the two apart— and it 
is not even clear whether we should characterize these new digital sur-
veillance techniques as “free- world” or “carceral.” Th e Apple Watch 
and the ankle bracelet, the malware and the GPS tracking, begin to 
blend into one indistinguishable mass of digital monitoring as our 
lives begin to resemble that of a supervised parolee.
And as the technologies converge, they begin to feed increasingly 
into each other. Th ey work together. Virtual transparence creates the 
possibility of seeing through populations, the way an X- ray or CAT 
scan does, to visualize pockets of resistance— and then it allows us to 
pluck them out of the system. Th e two diff erent forms of power work 
together, as positive and negative— virtual transparence and massive 
incarceration, the wired and the unplugged—to fuel even more incar-
ceration. Th e digital becomes a form of radiation.
Th ere is growing evidence that this may be the direction we are 
headed. Th e New York Times revealed in September 2013 that the New 
York Police Department (NYPD) has begun to use social media to 
identify, arrest, and prosecute suspected members of crews, or youth 
gangs.30 Th e program is called Operation Crew Cut, and it has a very 
simple strategy. According to the Times, “Th e strategy seeks to exploit 
the online postings of suspected members and their digital connections 
to build criminal conspiracy cases against  whole groups that might oth-
erwise take years of painstaking undercover work to penetrate. Face-
book, offi  cers like to say now, is the most reliable informer.”31
At the center of the strategy is the NYPD’s new “social media unit,” 
which seeks to identify suspect youths and track them based on their 
online presence— their Facebook posts, their Twitter tweets, and the 
photos and videos that they upload. Th e strategy is very simple: “Offi  -
cers follow crew members on Twitter and Instagram, or friend them 
on Facebook, pretending to be young women to get around privacy 
settings that limit what can be seen. Th ey listen to the lyrical taunts of 
local rap artists, some affi  liated with crews, and watch YouTube for 
clues to past trouble and future confl icts.”32
By following what they say and whom they talk to, by tracing the 
network connections and watching the social interactions, NYPD 

244  The Perils of Digital Exposure
offi  cers can identify whom they want to go aft er and build cases against 
the youths. Th e social media unit complements the street intelligence 
both in the investigation and in the prosecution of criminal charges. 
“Th ough social media postings have emerged only recently as an ele-
ment of prosecutions, those in the legal arena are fast learning that 
Facebook, MySpace and Twitter can help to pin down the where-
abouts of suspects and shed light on motives.”33 Apparently this 
strategy is particularly eff ective despite the fact that it is widely publi-
cized, because, as the NYPD offi  cials explain, “an online persona is a 
necessary component of social life for the young crew members.”34 
Earlier the Times reported that “as Twitter, Facebook and other forms 
of public electronic communication embed themselves in people’s 
lives, the postings, rants and messages that appear online are emerging 
as a new trove for the police and prosecutors to sift  through aft er 
crimes. Such sites are oft en the fi rst place they go.”35
While Ray Kelly, a former NYPD commissioner, was still heading 
the department, he made a joke at a news conference to the eff ect that 
he wanted to be “Facebook friends with all the city’s criminal crews.”36 
Th at may well be the direction we are headed. In at least one case, a 
federal agent with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration stole a 
suspect’s identity, set up a fraudulent Facebook page in her name (un-
beknownst to her), and posted suggestive photos that she had taken 
of herself (as well as photos of her infant son and niece) with her cell 
phone.37 Th e Facebook page was a complete fabrication, intended simply 
to further investigation and identify other suspects. Th e woman in ques-
tion, Sondra Arquiett, had agreed to plead guilty on a minor drug vio-
lation and was awaiting trial. Th e federal agent obtained her personal 
photos from a seizure and search of her mobile phone and then used 
those images to populate and give credibility to the Facebook page he 
created. Th e goal was to communicate with, identify, and locate other 
suspects. Th e United States government has fi led legal briefs de-
fending the actions of the federal agent, claiming that it was all legiti-
mate investigation and legal. According to a news report, “Th e Justice 
Department is claiming, in a little- noticed court fi ling, that a federal 
agent had the right to impersonate a young woman online by creating 

Th e Steel Mesh  245
a Facebook page in her name without her knowledge. Government 
lawyers also are defending the agent’s right to scour the woman’s 
seized cell phone and to post photographs— including racy pictures of 
her and even one of her young son and niece—to the phony social 
media account, which the agent was using to communicate with sus-
pected criminals.”38
Other local law enforcement agencies are also collecting digital 
data, creating data banks, and engaging in data mining for purposes of 
surveillance and investigation. Five municipalities in Virginia, for in-
stance, have collaborated on building just such a data archive from 
subpoenaed records— note that no search warrant nor even probable 
cause is required for a subpoena— and fruits of investigations.39 Th e 
fi ve cities— Norfolk, Newport News, Hampton, Chesapeake, and 
Suff olk— have been building and sharing since 2012 what they call the 
Hampton Roads Telephone Analysis Sharing Network. It is made up 
of phone rec ords subpoenaed by the local police agencies from tele-
communication companies as well as information gleaned from mo-
bile phones taken from suspects. Th e data is maintained in a “tele-
phone analysis room” in Hampton and used by all of the agencies.40
According to Wired magazine, “Th e unusual and secretive database 
contains telecom customer subscriber information; rec ords about in-
dividual phone calls, such as the numbers dialed, the time the calls 
 were made and their duration; as well as the contents of seized mobile 
devices.” 41 Th is data trove would supplement, of course, the ordinary 
means of law enforcement access to digital information: the directed 
subpoena to the telecom companies. Th is alone is considerable. Most 
telecoms are turning over troves of data in response to ordinary sub-
poena requests. As Wired recounts, AT&T received between January 
and June 2014 almost “80,000 criminal subpoenas for customer rec-
ords from federal, state and local law enforcement agencies,” and Ver-
izon received “over 72,000 subpoenas from law enforcement during 
the same period.” 42
Kenneth Neil Cukier and Viktor Mayer- Schoenberger describe in 
their book Big Data the diff erent ways in which datafi cation feeds into 
predictive policing: computer programs that data- mine criminal justice 

246  The Perils of Digital Exposure
statistics in order to predict where crime will occur or who will commit 
it, Homeland Security research programs that analyze physiological 
patterns in order to identify potential terrorists. “If social workers 
could tell with 95 percent accuracy which teenage girls would get preg-
nant or which high school boys would drop out of school,” Cukier and 
Mayer ask, “ wouldn’t they be remiss if they did not step in to help?” 43 
And how easy it is to do just that, to predict delinquent outcomes 
based on texts, IMs, web searches, Internet gaming activities, et ce-
tera. We know that in some cases Target can identify a young woman’s 
pregnancy more eff ectively than her parent can. It is so frightfully easy 
to do with big data.
Th e trouble is that the allusions to crime and terrorism most oft en 
are overdetermined. Th ey fail to specify the uncertainties and ambi-
guities; and, as a result, they have a way of silencing our questions, 
of neutralizing our doubts, and too easily justifying, for many, the 
surveillance of our phones and Internet activities. Th e possibility, or 
rather the probability, of overreaching should not be dismissed so 
quickly.
•  •  •
In September 2014, forty- three former members of Israel’s elite mili-
tary signals intelligence unit, Unit 8200, issued a public letter con-
demning the unit’s exploitation of signals intelligence for po liti cal pur-
poses.44 Some of that intelligence may have been turned over to the unit 
by the NSA under an NSA agreement that has been in place since 2009 
and that covers, by its own terms, practically all types of communica-
tion, including “unevaluated and unminimized transcripts, gists, fac-
similes, telex, voice and Digital Network Intelligence metadata and 
content.” 45 As James Bamford notes, the offi  cial NSA memorandum in-
dicates that “the agency ‘routinely sends’ unminimized data.” 46
Th e forty- three signatories included former offi  cers, current reserv-
ists, and former instructors of what is basically Israel’s “equivalent of 
America’s NSA or Britain’s GCHQ.” 47 In their open letter, they con-

Th e Steel Mesh  247
tend that signals intelligence is being used against innocent people for 
purely po liti cal motives: “Th e Palestinian population under military 
rule is completely exposed to espionage and surveillance by Israeli in-
telligence. It is used for po liti cal persecution and to create divisions 
within Palestinian society by recruiting collaborators and driving 
parts of Palestinian society against itself.” 48 According to testimonials 
of the signatories, they  were directed to focus on human weaknesses, 
on sexual aff airs and fi nancial problems, and on sexual preferences. 
As James Bamford explained in the New York Times, “In testimonies 
and interviews given to the media, they specifi ed that data  were gath-
ered on Palestinians’ sexual orientations, infi delities, money prob-
lems, family medical conditions and other private matters that could 
be used to coerce Palestinians into becoming collaborators or create 
divisions in their society.” 49
It seems that we in the United States are not immune to this be-
havior either. Th e Huffi  ngton Post published an NSA document dated 
October 3, 2012, leaked by Edward Snowden, that reveals that the NSA 
“has been gathering rec ords of online sexual activity and evidence of 
visits to pornographic websites as part of a proposed plan to harm the 
reputations of those whom the agency believes are radicalizing others 
through incendiary speeches.” 50 Th e NSA keyed in on any Internet ac-
tivity that might harm a target’s reputation, such as “viewing sexually 
explicit material online” and “using sexually explicit persuasive lan-
guage when communicating with inexperienced young girls.” 51 Th e 
targets included a “respected academic,” a “well- known media celeb-
rity,” and a “U.S. person,” all living abroad, probably in the Middle 
East.52 As Bamford explains, “Th e document, from Gen. Keith B. 
Alexander, then the director of the N.S.A., notes that the agency had 
been compiling rec ords of visits to pornographic websites and pro-
poses using that information to damage the reputations of people 
whom the agency considers ‘radicalizers’— not necessarily terrorists, 
but those attempting, through the use of incendiary speech, to radicalize 
others.” 53 And with an estimated 1.2 million individuals populating 
the United States government’s watch list and targeted for surveillance 

248  The Perils of Digital Exposure
as potential threats or suspects, the potential for further abuse is 
high.54
As ordinary digital life and new forms of correctional surveil-
lance begin to converge—as the Apple Watch, the ankle bracelet, and 
GPS tracking merge into each other—we face a new, generalized car-
ceral condition marked by astounding levels of monitoring. Th is new 
condition has an uncanny relationship to earlier regimes of punish-
ment. It is not just that there is an iron cage at the very heart of the 
digital age— though there is one for sure, comprised of massive over-
incarceration, drone strikes, “black sites,” and the Guantánamo Bay 
detention camp, among other things. But there is, eerily, something 
more. It is almost as if our iron cage today has been turned inside out 
and blankets us all.
Th e meta phor of the “iron cage” traces back to the Puritans and ref-
erences the form of confi nement that they invented: the penitentiary, 
that carceral gesture to penance imagined by the Quakers. Th e term 
“iron cage” was used in the seventeenth- century writings of the En-
glish Puritan preacher John Bunyan in his book Th e Pilgrim’s Progress, 
written in 1678. Th e book was the fruit of Bunyan’s own imprisonment 
and confi nement from 1660 to 1672.55 In the book, there is a man in 
despair, in the depths of dejection for having turned away from God 
and God from him. He is confi ned in “an iron cage,” Bunyan wrote, 
and the misery he suff ers there is a meta phor for the eternity of hell.56
Th e Harvard sociologist Talcott Parsons would read the meta phor 
into Max Weber’s book Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism 
in preparing his 1930 En glish translation from the original German. 
As Peter Baehr notes, “Few concepts in the social sciences are more 
instantly recognizable than the ‘iron cage.’ Seemingly integral to the 
powerful denouement of Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism, the meta phor sums up, graphically and dramatically, the predic-
ament of modern human beings trapped in a socioeconomic structure 
of their own making.” 57 Th e term captures well Weber’s genealogy of 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Th e Steel Mesh  249
the rational, bureaucratic, and materialist world of modern capitalist 
production of the early twentieth century. In other respects, Parsons 
would underplay the Nietz sche in Weber.58 But with the “iron cage,” 
Parsons really got, in a truly Nietz schean way, the genealogy of morals 
at the heart of both German writers.
Talcott Parsons’s reference to the Puritan preacher makes sense, 
even though it was a loaded translation of the German term stahlhartes 
Gehäuse, an expression that would translate more directly as “shell 
as hard as steel.” 59 Most of the Anglo- Saxon interpretations would be 
guided by Parsons’s adaptation— and many French and other read-
ings as well, since many translators drew on Parsons’s usage. To be 
sure, not all translators and commentators used the term “iron cage,” 
some preferring “housing hard as steel” or “casing as hard as steel.” 60 
But the term, as Baehr comments, has taken on a life of its own.
Surprisingly, then, the meta phor of the iron cage was somewhat 
foisted onto Max Weber. But for our purposes  here, it is perhaps a god-
send. It allows us to see more clearly the cage in the mirrored glass 
pavilion— the punitive practices, the massive overincarceration, the 
omnipresent prison, the harsh punishment within the otherwise vir-
tually transparent structure of the new digital age. It reminds us of the 
brick structure at the core of Philip Johnson’s modern design. It puts 
the iron bars and cinder blocks back into the sequence— a sequence 
that has now reached a new stage in the Internet age.
Th e metaphor—in its more literal translation— allows us to recu-
perate, appropriate, and actualize Weber’s original notion of a “shell as 
hard as steel” to better understand how the mirrored glass and digits 
work together: more of a tangled mesh, a webbed cloak, than iron 
bars. Steel is an alloy, a more modern material made by combining 
age- old iron with carbon or some other physical element. And there is 
something about a casing or a shell or a cloak that might be more ap-
propriate than the prison cell or cage to describe our digital age. To be 
sure, the iron cage lives on, at the very heart of our mirrored glass 
 house. But digital exposure takes on a diff erent shape, a diff erent form 
in this expository society. Virtual transparence and correctional 
www.Ebook777.com

250  The Perils of Digital Exposure
monitoring work together more like a straitjacket, a casing, a shell 
made of some modern fabric, something like Tefl on or woven Kevlar. 
We have graduated from the suit of armor, from the breastplate and 
gorget, from the pauldron and plackart, from the chain mail and iron 
plate of the analog age to the Kevlar jacket of digital times. Our ex-
pository society, it turns out, is a shell as hard as steel.

P A R T  F O U R
Digital Disobedience


Today, digits have become our pulse and our bloodstream. Th e 
cell phone in our pocket, the smart watch on our wrist, the MetroCard 
we swipe, the Kindle we read, the SMS texts—in short, every action 
we take in our daily routines, from the minute we wake up, is  etched 
into the cloud to constitute a virtual self. Over the past ten to fi ft een 
years, our digital self— the subject’s second body— has taken on a life 
of its own and become more tangible than our analog self. We have 
built ourselves a mirrored glass pavilion: we expose ourselves to 
the gaze of others and embrace the virtual transparency with exhibi-
tionist plea sure. We look in the glass as though we are looking in a 
mirror. We can see and be seen— and are seen, especially by a voy eur-
is tic amalgam of NSA and FBI agents and subcontractors, social media, 
Silicon Valley fi rms, telecom companies, private consulting groups, 
hackers, advertisers, politicians, and ourselves. We watch and are 
watched, we knowingly strap surveillance devices on our bodies— and 
then some of us are arrested, some of us are disconnected, some of us 
are extracted.
How could this happen in a liberal demo cratic society? How is it 
possible that a demo cratic regime— a government of the people— could 
T E N
virtual democracy

254  Digital Disobedience
possibly engage in such massive and pervasive data collection, data 
mining, surveillance, and control of its own citizens, of the people them-
selves? Eben Moglen justifi ably asks us whether “any form of demo-
cratic self- government, anywhere, is consistent with the kind of mas-
sive, pervasive surveillance into which the United States government 
has led not only its people but the world.”1 Could any self- respecting 
demo cratic polity knowingly allow the pervasive surveillance that we 
live in today? Th e answer, one would think, has to be no. In a state like 
the former German Demo cratic Republic, perhaps. Under the Stasi re-
gime, certainly. In the fi lm Th e Lives of Others, yes.2 But in an advanced 
capitalist liberal democracy, in what we tout as a genuine democracy, 
is it even possible? On this question, the historian Quentin Skinner is 
surely right: “Th e current situation seems to me untenable in a demo-
cratic society.”3
Demo cratic theorists, for the most part, remain silent. Few have 
rolled up their sleeves to help understand our new digital condition.4 
Paradoxically, though, it may be precisely because we live in a liberal 
democracy— those of us in the United States, at least— that there is 
so little re sis tance. It may be that demo cratic practices themselves 
 facilitate our complacency.
Democracies may produce their own forms of apathy. Alexis de 
Tocqueville warned us about this in Democracy in America, particu-
larly in the later volume from 1840, where he developed a theory about 
what he called “demo cratic despotism.” Tocqueville’s theory may have 
some bearing on our digital condition today. Demo cratic despotism, 
on Tocqueville’s view, must be understood in contrast to the despo-
tism of the Roman imperial leaders—an entirely diff erent form of 
despotism, a tyranny of great leadership. In ancient Rome, despotic 
power expressed itself through a concentration of control in the hands 
of a few supreme arbiters, who possessed “an im mense and unchecked 
power,” Tocqueville wrote, “which allowed them to gratify all their 
whimsical tastes and to employ for that purpose the  whole strength 
of the state.” 5 Th eir despotism was spectacular and frequent, but it tar-
geted mostly the few: “Th ey frequently abused that power arbitrarily 

Virtual Democracy  255
to deprive their subjects of property or of life; their tyranny was ex-
tremely onerous to the few, but it did not reach the many,” Tocqueville 
suggested. “It was confi ned to some few main objects and neglected 
the rest; it was violent, but its range was limited.” 6
Tocqueville contrasted the notion of ancient despotism to the 
potential of despotism in a democracy, speculating that despotism 
would take an entirely diff erent form in democracy. He warned that it 
might be “more extensive and more mild”; that it might “degrade men 
without tormenting them.”7 Th is, he suggested, would be a new condi-
tion, one that in a certain sense would require a new and diff erent lan-
guage regarding despotism and tyranny, for demo cratic power acts 
upon us diff erently than despotic leadership does. Th ere’s a stunning 
passage where Tocqueville described the way in which demo cratic 
power might act on the people: “It seeks, on the contrary, to keep [us] 
in perpetual childhood: it is well content that the people should re-
joice, provided they think of nothing but rejoicing. For their happiness 
such a government willingly labors, but it chooses to be the sole agent 
and the only arbiter of that happiness; it provides for their security, 
foresees and supplies their necessities, facilitates their pleasures. . . .  
[W]hat remains, but to spare them all the care of thinking, and all the 
trouble of living?”8
Th is is a diff erent form of despotism, one that might take hold only 
in a democracy: one in which people lose the will to resist and sur-
render with broken spirit. In striking language, Tocqueville suggested 
that this can compress, enervate, extinguish, and stupefy a people, 
“till each nation is reduced to nothing better than a fl ock of timid and 
industrious animals, of which the government is the shepherd.”9
One need look no further than voting practices in the United States. 
David Graeber and others are undoubtedly right that democracy “is 
not necessarily defi ned by majority voting” and that it is better under-
stood as “the pro cess of collective deliberation on the principle of full 
and equal participation”; nevertheless, voting patterns are telling.10 
And in the United States, they are damning. Even in the most impor-
tant national elections—in the United States, those are presidential 
elections— voter turnout since the Great Depression has fl uctuated 
between 51 percent and 64 percent.11 Turnout for midterm elections 

256  Digital Disobedience
has consistently been below 50 percent since the 1930s, fl uctuating be-
tween 34 percent and 49 percent, as illustrated in Figure 10.1. Th e No-
vember 2014 midterm election— just a few months aft er the Snowden 
leaks and in the heat of the NSA scandal— was “the lowest turnout 
election since 1942,” with 35.9 percent of eligible voters and only 33.2 
percent of the voting- age population going to the polls.12 Th e Snowden 
revelations, it seems, fueled neither partisan divisions nor electoral 
turnout. Th ere was a time, earlier in the republic, when voter turnout 
in the United States was consistently higher, but that time has passed.13 
Today, it seems, only about half the electorate—if even that— fi nds 
the time to vote in national elections. Walter Dean Burnham refers to 
this as “the disintegration of the American po liti cal order,” a disinte-
gration marked by the disillusionment of many Americans with ordi-
nary party politics; “huge numbers of Americans are now wary of both 
major po liti cal parties and increasingly upset about prospects in the 
long term,” Burnham and Th omas Ferguson note.14 Th is may be true 
for 2014; but the low turnout has been a relative constant over the past 
eight de cades.
Our democracy in the United States, it turns out, is not so much a 
democracy of voters as one of potential voters. It is not an actual de-
mocracy so much as a virtual democracy— not in the sense commonly 
used by Internet enthusiasts or by what Evgeny Morozov calls “cyber- 
utopians,” who believe that blogs and the web have reinvigorated 
democracy, but in the sense that our democracy is a fi gment of our 
imagination.15 Virtual democracy has a potentiality, a capacity toward 
demo cratic rule, but one that is not actualized. It is through demo-
cratic potentiality that the benefi ts of democracy are achieved. But it is 
also precisely what undermines real or timely re sis tance. Re sis tance, 
today, operates by catastrophe only.
What virtual democracy does is to provide a check on elected rep-
resentatives, a check that essentially functions by the threat of demo-
cratic vote: if our elected representatives exceed certain limits (and 
clearly those limits have a very high threshold), they may be voted out 
of offi  ce. Th ere is no need for democratic action during ordinary times, 
no need even for that much demo cratic participation: even if the ma-

Virtual Democracy  257
jority does not vote in free elections, it can, and it is that potentiality 
that guarantees, in our imagination, the check on illegitimate exer-
cises of authority.
Now, this may be entirely rational. Joseph Schumpeter, for instance, 
believed that it was entirely sensible to pay attention to po liti cal mat-
ters only when serious events arise. And many liberal thinkers have 
praised the way in which modern liberalism frees individuals to focus 
on their private lives and interests, and to avoid the public sphere. 
Whether it is justifi ed or not, it has produced a form of politics that can 
best be described as “virtual democracy.” Th ere is a term in legal 
thought called “negotiating in the shadow of the law”—by which it is 
meant that legal actors in settlement negotiations always take into ac-
count how a judge might rule if the matter went to court. By analogy, we 
operate in the United States in the shadow of democracy—in the shadow 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1930 1934 1938 1942 1946 1950 1954 1958 1962 1966 1970 1974 1978 1982 1986 1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014
Percent Turnout Among Eligible Voters
Year
United States National Eligible Voter Turnout 1930–2014
Presidential Elections
Midterm Elections
figure 10.1 Voter turnout in federal elections in the United States (1930–2014). Graph by Bernard E. 
Harcourt. Data source: Michael P. McDonald, “National General Election VEP Turnout Rates, 
1789– Present,” United States Elections Project, http:// www . electproject . org / national - 1789 - present.

258  Digital Disobedience
of a demo cratic vote. We rest on 50 percent turnout, but that is suffi  -
cient to keep alive the appearance and the threat of demo cratic rule.
Democratic despotism is deeply linked to the apathy and 
to the resulting complacency that facilitates and makes tolerable our 
pervasive commercial and governmental surveillance today. In fact, 
the problem of demo cratic despotism is, if anything, magnifi ed in the 
context of surveillance, policing, and punishment: in democracies, 
these specifi c matters— surveillance, policing, and punishment— are 
oft en viewed with distaste and oft en ignored as a result. Th ey are con-
sidered necessities, but unpleasant ones. Democracies, for instance, 
rarely if ever recognize that they might have po liti cal prisoners. Th ey 
tend to view all of their incarcerated as common- law detainees. Crime, 
in a democracy, is not thought of as a po liti cal phenomenon.
Th is refl ects and perpetuates a blindness that has plagued demo-
cratic theory for a long time. Th roughout the history of demo cratic 
theory there has been what Albert Dzur refers to as an “invisibility of 
the problem of punishment,” a “collective non- seeing or dis- engagement.”16 
Th is has been especially true during the recent period of massive over-
incarceration since the early 1970s, though it was equally true during the 
earlier twentieth- century institutionalization in asylums and mental 
hospitals— a phenomenon, in fact, that went virtually unnoticed in its 
scale.17 Th is blindness is not unique to the digital age; to the contrary, it 
may have been born in tandem with demo cratic theory itself.
Returning to Tocqueville for a moment, we know well that Democ-
racy in America set forth, for generations to come, the central prob-
lematics of demo cratic theory— the problem of majoritarianism, the 
danger of a tyranny of the majority, the question of countermajoritarian 
mea sures, and the matter of civic associations and town meetings, to 
name only a few. Yet although the book itself was the direct result of 
the birth of the penitentiary in the United States, there is one issue it 
would ignore: punishment and the prison. Surprisingly— this is oft en 
discounted— Tocqueville had come to the United States to visit the 
new American penitentiary. Like his travel companion and coauthor, 

Virtual Democracy  259
Gustave de Beaumont, also a former public prosecutor, Tocqueville 
journeyed to the United States to study American prisons and report 
back on the demo cratic potential of those new institutions.18 Th eir re-
port, Th e Penitentiary System in the United States and Its Application to 
France (1833), as well as Tocqueville’s continued writings and speeches 
on the topic during the 1840s, represented some of the very fi rst theo-
rizing of the prison and punishment by demo cratic po liti cal thinkers.19
But Tocqueville’s orientation to the prison was marked by a staunch 
view of the criminal as a social enemy, and as a result, his po liti cal 
intervention regarding the penitentiary was strictly focused on ad-
ministering prison populations, not demo cratizing prisoners as citi-
zens. Tocqueville tellingly wrote in a parliamentary report of 1843: “It 
is necessary to recognize at this moment that there exists among us an 
or ga nized society of criminals. All of the members of that society 
know one another; they support one another; they associate every day 
to disturb the public peace. Th ey form a small nation in the midst of 
the large one. It is that society which should be scattered . . .  and 
 reduced, if possible, to a single being against all of the upright men 
united in defense of order.”20
Tocqueville sought “to enlist prison reform in the antirevolutionary 
cause.”21 His reforms, which he gleaned from the experience of the 
United States,  were, in his own words, “an ideal combination of ‘re-
form’ and ‘repression.’ ”22 Th ey embraced a form of “despotism”: Toc-
queville admired the fact that the American prisons had produced 
“such complete obedience and useful work.”23 He wrote approvingly: 
“Although American society provides the example of the most ex-
tended liberty, the prisons of that same country off er the spectacle of 
the most complete despotism.”24 Tocqueville concluded: “Whence 
comes our near absolute repugnance toward using corporal punish-
ment against prisoners? It is because one wants to treat men who are 
in prison as though they  were still in society. Society and the prison 
are not, however, composed of the same elements. In general one 
could say that all of the inclinations of free men are toward the good, 
while all of the passions of the condemned criminals drive them vio-
lently toward evil. . . .  ‘Th e Rights of Man’ . . .  are not valid in prison.”25

260  Digital Disobedience
Civil rights had no place in prison, according to Tocqueville. Des-
potism was what was needed instead. Now, on Sheldon Wolin’s reading, 
the question of the or ga ni za tion of prisons would become “one road” 
by which Tocqueville and other liberal thinkers would “fi nd their way 
back to the state.”26 Th e prison was one way for these liberal thinkers, 
cautious of sovereign power, to turn to questions of administration, 
governmental planning, and public policy. It was, as Wolin suggests, 
“liberalism’s way of reconciliation with the Old Regime by adopting 
and adapting its structure of power and its ideology of paternalism 
and benevolence.”27 But by the time that Tocqueville got back to the 
state and demo cratic theory, he had left  behind any concern with 
punishment and the prison: Tocqueville was entirely silent about the 
prison in Democracy in America.
It turns out, then, that demo cratic theory and the problems of 
surveillance and punishment may have been born together, but they 
 were separated at birth. In fact, it is almost as if there was complete 
acoustic separation: by contrast to his writing in Democracy in America, 
Tocqueville did not tackle the questions of democracy and citizenship 
in Th e Penitentiary System. Th e criminal was viewed as an enemy, not 
as a potential citizen. And, by contrast to his writing in Th e Peniten-
tiary System, Tocqueville would not tackle the question of punishment 
and prisons in Democracy in America. Demo cratic theory did not need 
to address punitive practices. Th e result is a distancing, a void: demo-
cratic theory did not give us useful tools to deal with these surveil-
lance issues. If anything, it rendered those problems more tolerable 
because it placed surveillance, criminality, and punishment in the 
nonpo liti cal realm: the realm of the criminal as social enemy.28
Today there is beginning to be more awareness of excessive punish-
ment and control in demo cratic discourse. Michelle Alexander’s book 
Th e New Jim Crow has been on the New York Times best- seller list for 
over a year and a half and has contributed in part to this general aware-
ness. Amy Lerman and Vesla Weaver have begun to document some 
of the more mea sur able eff ects of incarceration on citizenship and 

Virtual Democracy  261
have shown how contact with the correctional system reduces partici-
pation in demo cratic politics, carry ing with it a “substantial civic pen-
alty”: it produces a large, negative eff ect on “turning out to vote, in-
volvement in civic groups, and trusting the government,” even taking 
into account the possibility of selection bias.29
Despite all of this remarkable work, though, and some general aware-
ness, it remains the case that the digital transparency and punishment 
issues are largely invisible to demo cratic theory and practice. Th ey are 
not major topics of debate, they are not woven into theories of democ-
racy, and they are not part of the po liti cal discourse. Th is is refl ected, 
for instance, in the fact that President Obama’s administration has 
never bothered to address the problem of overincarceration— and has 
been hesitant to challenge its security advisers on the question of NSA 
surveillance. Only on August 12, 2013, fi ve years into the Obama ad-
ministration, did Attorney General Eric Holder address the issue of 
overincarceration in a speech before the American Bar Association—
but Holder focused predominantly on federal prison policy, which is 
tangential to the national problem.30 President Obama himself only 
began to address the question of prisons in an interview in Time maga-
zine in December 2012, but he has never made this a public issue.31 His 
comments have been at best noncommittal, perhaps even unen-
gaged.32 Th is is equally true on the question of digital surveillance and 
the infamous NSA programs.
Paradoxically, then, the fact that we live in a democracy has facili-
tated, rather than hindered, our expository society. In our virtual de-
mocracy, the threat of demo cratic action has not slowed our digital 
exposure in any way. As a result, we will need to look elsewhere to lo-
cate digital re sis tance.

In his “Postscript on the Societies of Control,” published twenty 
years aft er Anti- Oedipus, Gilles Deleuze would return to the notion of 
the desire- producing machine, but this time as a meta phor for rela-
tions of power in society. Diff erent forms of power at diff erent histor-
ical periods are associated, Deleuze would argue, with diff erent types 
of machines. Th ere is a “match,” Deleuze reports. A concordance. It is 
not that the type of machine determines the type of power, but rather 
that machines “express those social forms capable of generating them 
and using them.”1 So, Deleuze wrote, “the old societies of sovereignty 
made use of simple machines— levers, pulleys, clocks; but the recent 
disciplinary societies equipped themselves with machines involving 
energy, with the passive danger of entropy and the active danger of 
sabotage; the societies of control operate with machines of a third 
type, computers, whose passive danger is jamming and whose active 
one is piracy or the introduction of viruses.”2 Th ese new machines, 
these computers, would match our times— our “societies of control.”
Deleuze was insistent, though: do not fear these new machines, do 
not see only the dark side. “Th ere is no need to ask which is the toughest 
or most tolerable regime, for it’s within each of them that liberating 
E L E V E N
digital re sis tance

Digital Re sis tance  263
and enslaving forces confront one another. . . .  Th ere is no need to fear 
or hope, but only to look for new weapons.”3
“To look for new weapons”: where shall we fi nd them?
•  •  •
Jennifer Lyn Morone has incorporated herself. She is now a registered 
corporation with the state of Delaware: Jennifer Lyn Morone, Inc.4 Es-
tablishing herself as a corporation allows Morone to “reclaim,” in her 
words, “the  whole pro cess of resources, production, and own ership.” 5
Her logic goes something like this: while the corporate form was 
created in order “to provide a public benefi t, such as building bridges 
and highways,” today it primarily benefi ts the “own ers,” whose sin-
gular aim is profi t. Corporations are now treated as individuals but 
have far more advantages than individuals in the fl esh. For instance, 
they have certain tax advantages that individuals do not share, and can 
take advantage of certain loopholes that are unique to their corporate 
status. Plus, the individuals running the corporations—or should we 
say the corporations running the individuals— are barely liable even 
“if the company goes bankrupt or is accused of wrong- doing.” At the 
same time, many companies sustain themselves on the basis of prop-
erty they do not own: personal information, private data. Morone re-
fers to this as “data slavery.” 6
Morone contends that her corporate self has “even more rights and 
benefi ts” than she does as an individual.7 Incorporation transforms 
Morone’s personal data into her property and allows her to profi t from 
and control its use. As a corporation, Morone Inc. intends to derive 
revenue from three sources. First are Morone’s “past experiences and 
present capabilities.”8 Th ese are off ered as biological, physical, and 
mental ser vices such as genes, labor, creativity, blood, sweat, and tears. 
“Present capabilities” or ser vices are, for now, mostly targeted toward 
people Morone knows personally, but they will also be marketed on 
her website, where customers will be able to fi ll out a calendar for her 
time and even check her status on the tasks concerned. Th e Economist 
notes that

264  Digital Disobedience
in addition to data, she will off er a range of biological ser vices, 
from blood plasma at £30 ($50) and bone marrow donations 
($5,100) to eggs at $170,000 apiece. Why so much? “Even though 
I’m older, which makes the eggs less valuable, they are more valu-
able to me as there is a limited supply and once this resource is 
gone, it’s gone.” And then there are mental ser vices such as 
problem- solving (discounted if JLM gains something in return, 
such as knowledge); physical labour (she is a green- fi ngered gar-
dener); and assets for which no pricing model yet exists: Ms 
Morone is still fi guring out how to price “ser vices” she currently 
gives away for free, such as compassion.9
Her website will include ads for par tic u lar goods and ser vices Mo-
rone off ers (these include everything from gardening to compassion; 
the latter can be traded to those friends who give her compassion in 
return, while more self- centered friends will receive an “invoice”), as 
well as advertising for goods and ser vices of other people she knows.10 
Her website will also generate revenue, she notes, through “endorse-
ments to promote events I might attend, clothes I might wear, restau-
rants I might eat at and products I might use.”11 Morone adds that 
another avenue is “the profi table but time consuming endeavor of pur-
suing intellectual property infringements,” a course of action that in 
large part depends on whether her lawyer would be willing to work for 
“a percentage from cases won.”12
A second source of revenue will be “selling future potential in the 
form of shares”; a third is “the accumulation, categorization, and eval-
uation of data that is generated as a result of Jennifer Lyn Morone’s 
life.”13 Eventually those data will be generated through “a multi- sensor 
device that she will wear almost all the time” and a soft ware program 
called Database of Me, or DOME, “which will store and manage all 
the data she generates.”14 As the Economist explains, “JLM’s eventual 
goal is to create a soft ware ‘platform’ for personal- data management; 
companies and other entities would be able to purchase data from 
DOME via the platform, but how they could use it would be limited by 
encryption or data- tagging. Th e soft ware, then, would act as an auto-

Digital Re sis tance  265
mated data broker on behalf of the individual.”15 Morone’s corporate 
status means that, in her words, “any data that I create that is linked to 
my name, IP address and appearance is copyrighted or trademarked 
and therefore subject to litigation if used without my permission. . . .  
So any photo I take, any email I write, any call, text, web search, cctv 
footage of me that is stored on someone  else’s, company’s or govern-
ment’s server does not have the right to be there or to be used, sold, 
leased or traded.”16
Morone describes the entire pro cess as, at times, “schizophrenic”; 
the cluster of roles she must play do not all fi t her self- image. She high-
lights this in her project’s introductory video, in which she describes 
the project while wearing an ill- fi tting suit and tie, adjusted in the back 
with visible clips.17 On the other hand, as the clips suggest, she has 
embodied this role on her own terms: they “indicate that I am making 
this role fi t me and not the other way around.”18
When Morone is not working on the JLM Inc. project, she may be 
working on another one titled “Mouse Trap,” a “hardly perceptible” 
mouse trap that operates all on its own and leaves the mouse physi-
cally unharmed but trapped in a clear cube— completely visible.19 
Now that’s a frightening image of digital exposure.
•  •  •
Chelsea Manning and Edward Snowden could not live with their 
 secrets—or, rather, with our secrets.20 Th e loss of innocent civilian 
lives, hidden from public view by false claims of national security, was 
too much for Manning to keep to herself. Th e scope, depth, and intru-
siveness of NSA surveillance  were too much for Snowden.
On April 5, 2010, a decrypted video of a United States military 
Apache he li cop ter attack on unarmed civilians in Iraq, including two 
Reuters news staff , was made public on a WikiLeaks website and went 
viral.21 Th e video, titled “Collateral Murder,” was awful and heart- 
wrenching. Shot from the gunsight of the Apache he li cop ter in 2007, 
it showed the copter circling and taking aim, shooting and killing un-
armed civilians in a public square in eastern Baghdad. As the copter 

266  Digital Disobedience
circles around, a father taking his children to school is seen trying to 
pull the injured men into his van, seemingly to get them medical as-
sistance. Th e copter then fi res mercilessly at the van, fl ipping it over 
with rounds of 30 mm ammunition, killing the father and severely in-
juring the children. “It’s their fault for bringing their kids into a battle,” 
the U.S. he li cop ter pi lot is heard saying.22 A battle of innocents it 
was, though. All told, twelve unarmed civilians  were left  dead. Th e 
offi  cial U.S. military position regarding the incident was that only in-
surgents  were killed. Th e U.S. military claimed not to know how the 
Reuters news staff  had died. Th e release of the “Collateral Murder” video 
was utterly shocking to many of us, especially to the uninitiated.
A few months later, in July 2010, the Guardian, the New York Times, 
and Der Spiegel began publishing a trove of U.S. military documents, 
including hundreds of thousands of war logs detailing U.S. incidents 
in Iraq and Af ghan i stan, and several months later, hundreds of thou-
sands of confi dential U.S. diplomatic cables. It was the largest cache 
of U.S. military and diplomatic documents leaked in history— and it 
had been made possible by the anonymous whistle- blower website set 
up by Julian Assange, WikiLeaks. Manning had been drawn to dis-
closing military secrets because of her feelings of revulsion at the con-
duct of the war in Iraq, but also, importantly, because of the condition 
of possibility that WikiLeaks created. According to reports, Manning 
read over the WikiLeaks list of the most sought- aft er pieces of secret 
government information, and identifi ed and later leaked those docu-
ments that  were in highest demand.23
Julian Assange had begun to develop WikiLeaks several years ear-
lier, in 2006, to create a secure location where individual whistle- 
blowers could anonymously and securely upload secret documents 
that they felt the public should see. Assange referred to the site as “a 
web- based ‘dead- letterbox’ for would-be leakers.”24 WikiLeaks gained 
notoriety with its fi rst major leak in July 2009, which concerned in-
ternal corporate documents proving bank fraud by the Icelandic bank 
Kaupthing, which was implicated in the Icelandic economic crisis.25
Assange, for many years, had been pursuing a radical approach of 
digital transparence, what some refer to as “a philosophy of transpar-

Digital Re sis tance  267
ence.”26 It represents a radical view that seeks to expose the truth no 
matter the consequence: a po liti cally engaged practice of rendering 
public all governmental and commercial secrets that aff ect the public 
interest. As W. J. T. Mitchell suggests, Assange’s project is to “turn the 
panopticon inside out.”27 Th e intention is to allow citizens to become 
the surveillers of the state and see directly into every crevasse and 
closet of the central watchtower, while rendering the public opaque 
and anonymous; to invert the line of sight so that it is we, the inmates, 
who cannot be seen; to place us behind the blinds in the central tower 
of the panoptic prison, so that our governments can anonymously be 
watched like the mice trapped in Jennifer Morone’s clear cube.28
Assange’s anonymous platform WikiLeaks represents an eff ort to 
institutionalize that inverted transparence. Th e idea is to allow any of 
us to anonymously and securely post documents to the WikiLeaks 
website in order for them to be accessible to everyone— a form of 
crowd- sourced transparence. “People determined to be in a democracy, 
to be their own government, must have the power that knowledge will 
bring— because knowledge will always rule ignorance,” Assange as-
serts. “You can either be informed and your own rulers, or you can be 
ignorant and have someone  else, who is not ignorant, rule over you.”29
Daniel Ellsberg, who had leaked the Pentagon Papers in personal 
opposition to the Vietnam War in 1971, was a role model for Assange: 
someone who took personal responsibility and risked everything he 
had in life to expose the gruesome reality of war in order to foster 
public debate and demo cratic accountability. At a very early stage—
it was on December 9, 2006, when WikiLeaks was just getting off  the 
ground— Assange emailed Ellsberg, inviting him to get involved and 
lend his name to WikiLeaks. Assange wrote to Ellsberg that “fo-
menting a worldwide movement of mass leaking is the most eff ective 
po liti cal intervention.”30
Th e idea of a “worldwide movement of mass leaking” captures well 
Assange’s radical po liti cal vision. Assange views the world through a 
siege mentality: a po liti cal combat over secrecy and exposure that 
must be fought in the immediacy of the news cycle, under dire time 
constraints and with limited resources. Protecting the sources of leaks 

268  Digital Disobedience
and ensuring that their information is immediately available— given 
that the whistle- blowers are oft en putting their liberty at stake— are of 
the highest concern to Assange.31 Th is would lead to diffi  cult choices 
about redacting leaked documents to protect named or identifi able in-
dividuals, given the overwhelming number of documents leaked, the 
limited resources of an essentially rogue outfi t, and the U.S. govern-
ment’s refusal to do the work of redaction. In this context, Assange 
would stake out a clear po liti cal position. He would not remain neu-
tral. He had views about the public interest that led him to privilege 
immediate exposure of secret information over the risk of harm to 
those exposed. He did so, in large part, because of an acute awareness 
of how secrecy shapes us as contemporary subjects. “Surveillance,” 
Assange argues, “is another form of censorship. When people are 
frightened that what they are saying may be overheard by a power that 
has the ability to lock people up, then they adjust what they’re saying. 
Th ey start to self- censor.”32
Th e U.S. government tried to shut down WikiLeaks by requesting 
that credit card companies stop pro cessing donations from supporters. 
PayPal, MasterCard, Visa, Amazon, and the Swiss bank PostFinance 
all agreed to stop pro cessing donations to WikiLeaks, leading the 
hacker collaborative Anonymous to initiate a series of DDoS (distrib-
uted denial of ser vice) attacks against some of those companies in De-
cember 2010.33 Meanwhile, Manning would be arrested in June 2010 
and charged with violating the Espionage Act in a twenty- two- count 
indictment.34 In February 2013, Manning pled guilty to ten of those 
twenty- two charges and faced a potential life sentence on the re-
maining counts at a highly publicized court- martial that was to begin 
on June 3, 2013.35 Manning would ultimately be convicted on a total of 
seventeen counts, including espionage, and sentenced to thirty- fi ve 
years in prison for leaking military secrets—in part, to deter others 
from doing the same.36
Two days later, on June 5, 2013, the Guardian published the fi rst of 
several news articles on the top- secret NSA surveillance programs.37 
A few days aft er that, on June 9, 2013, the man who had leaked hun-
dreds of thousands of classifi ed top- secret NSA documents would 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Digital Re sis tance  269
reveal himself to the world: “My name is Ed Snowden. I’m twenty- 
nine years old. I worked for Booz Allen Hamilton as an infrastructure 
analyst for NSA in Hawaii.”38 Snowden, fully cognizant that he too 
could be sentenced to life imprisonment, would carefully turn over a 
colossal cache of secret NSA fi les to Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, 
and Ewen MacAskill of the Guardian. In a calm and deliberate manner, 
Snowden explained why:
When you’re in positions of privileged access, like a systems 
 administrator for the sort of intelligence community agencies, 
you’re exposed to a lot more information on a broader scale then 
the average employee, and because of that, you see things that 
may be disturbing but, over the course of a normal person’s ca-
reer, you’d only see one or two of these instances. When you see 
everything, you see them on a more frequent basis, and you rec-
ognize that some of these things are actually abuses. And when 
you talk to people about them in a place like this, where this is 
the normal state of business, people tend not to take them very 
seriously and move on from them.
But over time that awareness of wrongdoing sort of builds up 
and you feel compelled to talk about it. And the more you talk 
about it, the more you’re ignored, the more you’re told it’s not a 
problem, until eventually you realize that these things need to be 
determined by the public and not by somebody who was simply 
hired by the government.39
Th e Snowden revelations received a lot of global media attention. 
In a survey in October and November 2014 of 23,376 Internet users in 
twenty- four countries— ranging from the “Five Eyes” to China, India, 
Indonesia, Egypt, Brazil, and Kenya—60 percent of those responding 
had heard of the Snowden aff air.40 Th is aggregated number, naturally, 
masks an internal diff erentiation, with 94 percent of respondents in 
Germany having heard about Snowden, 85 percent in China, and 76 
percent in the United States.41 Of those aware of the Snowden matter, 
39 percent “have taken steps to protect their online privacy and security 
www.Ebook777.com

270  Digital Disobedience
as a result of his revelations.” 42 In the United States the fi gure was 
36 percent, in the Eu ro pean countries surveyed it was 29 percent, and 
in the BRIC region it was 58 percent.43 Th e largest eff ect has been in 
India (69 percent), Mexico (64 percent), China (62 percent), and Indo-
nesia (61 percent).44
There is today a range of new weapons that we are using to chal-
lenge our virtual transparence and its pockets of obscurity. Some of us 
seek to diminish our own visibility. We fog up that plastic cube in which 
we are trapped. Some of us, like Manning and Snowden, create more 
transparence by leaking secrets. And some of us, like Assange, build 
platforms to throw sunlight on covert government and corporate opera-
tions. Th e interventions push in many diff erent directions.
Along one dimension, there are ongoing eff orts to securitize our 
personal information through self- help, education and awareness 
campaigns, and research leading to the development of more secure 
devices. Th e thrust  here is to encrypt better, to create our own per-
sonal information management systems, to assemble our own secure 
servers, to retain our own information, to prevent exposing our data 
on the cloud. Th ere are websites that share information about how to 
become more anonymous and avoid surveillance, and others that pro-
vide more secure technologies. Th e Electronic Frontier Foundation, 
for instance, has its own website, called I Fight Surveillance, that 
provides all kinds of information about encryption and security- 
audited free soft ware, strengthening anonymity online, and other 
ways to resist virtual transparence.45 Security in- a- Box, another or ga-
ni za tion, specifi cally targets the “digital security and privacy needs of 
advocates and human rights defenders.” 46 (As you can imagine, the 
security needs among human rights activists around the world are 
acute.47) Th ere are other freelance sites by activists and free soft ware 
militants, such as Jason Self, a self- described “free soft ware and free 
culture activist in Seattle, Washington,” and Greycoder, who “test[s] 
privacy- friendly ser vices, and explain[s] how to be private online.” 48 
Th ese freelancers provide tips and ser vices on how to protect personal 

Digital Re sis tance  271
data. Th e hacker collaborative Anonymous also posts advice and links 
to guides for protecting one’s privacy and anonymity on the web.49
Apple has developed new iPhones and Google new Android devices 
that are more resistant to third- party data collection. Th ese newer de-
vices are equipped with more sophisticated encryption soft ware, such 
that police and law enforcement offi  cials are not able to access the data 
stored on the phone, even when they have a search warrant. Th ese 
phones encrypt internal data, including emails, contacts, and photos, 
based on “a complex mathematical algorithm that uses a code created 
by, and unique to, the phone’s user— and that Apple says it will not 
possess.” 50 As a result, Apple itself cannot decrypt the data for the po-
lice, even if served with a warrant. According to Apple, it would take 
“more than 5 1/2 years to try all combinations of a six- character alpha-
numeric passcode with lowercase letters and numbers.” 51 (Given the 
NSA’s computing power, it’s not entirely clear that this estimate is 
right.) In any event, Google is doing the same with its Android.52
Another company, a tech start-up by the name of Silent Circle, has 
developed a mobile device that is apparently even more secure. Th e 
device, called Blackphone, developed with a Madrid- based tech com-
pany called Geeksphone, apparently “allows users to make encrypted 
calls and send encrypted texts using Silent Circle soft ware, and blocks 
third- party apps from accessing user data.” 53 Others are working on de-
veloping integrated hardware and soft ware that is more secure, through 
projects like the nonprofi t FreedomBox foundation.54 Start- ups are 
developing new Internet chat programs that are fully  encrypted and 
anonymous, such as John Brooks’s Ricochet.55 Other anonymity and 
messaging systems include Tor, Pidgin, and Prosody.56 Tor, for in-
stance, is a gratis, open- source anonymity platform, originally funded 
by the United States Navy, that sends Internet traffi  c through a laby-
rinthine maze of encrypted networks in order to make it practically 
impossible for anyone to trace the communications back to their 
source. Tor has become extremely pop u lar for those aggressively 
seeking anonymity, and it has been used extensively by human rights 
workers and whistle- blowers as well as those seeking to avoid law 
enforcement.57

272  Digital Disobedience
Eben Moglen, who is involved in many of these projects and in-
spired an alternative to Facebook called Diaspora, is confi dent that 
there are ways to better secure personal communications.58 He off ers 
some quick tips:
Th e fi rst thing that you could do is to place your Facebook profi le 
on a Web site where all the logs aren’t in Mr. Zuckerberg’s hands. 
You could do that by running a Diaspora pod or putting up an 
old- fashioned Web site.
Th e second thing you could do is to have a mail server of your 
own, or a mail server with a few friends. Th e third thing you 
could do is to use the Firefox Web browser and to make sure that 
you’re using the no-ad and no- script add- ons. If you do that, 
you’re then 60 percent better.
If you want to go 100 percent better, you can have a shell ac-
count somewhere— for example, on a server at Th e Washington 
Post— and you use a proxy to browse online so your browsing 
stream is mixed with the browsing stream of a thousand other 
people. You have ceased to be trackable in any meaningful way.59
Th ese are relatively easy steps, and yet they can shelter personal 
data from the more immediate intrusive eyes of social media and data 
brokers. As Moglen suggests, “We did very little meaningful to your 
way of life, but we changed your privacy phenomenally.” 60
Naturally, none of this protects personal data from cable- splicing 
intelligence ser vices. A lot of these eff orts involve fending off  the fi rst 
or second layer of surveillance— the voy eur is tic neighbor, the greedy 
advertisers, the amateur hacker— but not necessarily the NSA, the 
FBI, or large multinationals. As the Australian security journalist 
Patrick Gray suggests, “If the NSA is already targeting you, you’re 
screwed. . . .  But this is about stopping the  wholesale violation of pri-
vacy and making it harder for people who shouldn’t have access to this 
information from having access to it.” 61 For this reason, some argue 
that the tech developments need to keep ramping up.62 But it is not al-
ways possible to outfox the deep- pocketed signals intelligence agen-

Digital Re sis tance  273
cies, especially when they have turned to undersea cable interception. 
Even the more sophisticated and wealthy Internet browser companies 
can fi nd it hard at times to provide secure web encryption.63
It may be especially dangerous if we believe that we are secure when 
in fact we are not. Wired magazine recently revealed, for instance, 
that the FBI used an open- source code called Metasploit, available to 
any one and used mostly by hackers, to infi ltrate the Tor platform, which 
is supposed to ensure anonymity.64 Wired describes the Metasploit app 
as “the most important tool in the hacking world,” and one of the most 
well known, “an open- source Swiss Army knife of hacks that puts the 
latest exploits in the hands of anyone who’s interested, from random 
criminals to the thousands of security professionals who rely on the 
app to scour client networks for holes.” 65 Th e FBI, in what it called 
Operation Torpedo, apparently used Metasploit as the entryway to 
bypass Tor and reach genuine IP addresses. As Wired explains, “FBI 
agents relied on Flash code from an abandoned Metasploit side project 
called the ‘Decloaking Engine’ to stage its fi rst known eff ort to suc-
cessfully identify a multitude of suspects hiding behind the Tor ano-
nymity network.” 66 And, according to Wired, the FBI has only gotten 
better at it since then:
Since Operation Torpedo, there’s evidence the FBI’s anti- Tor ca-
pabilities have been rapidly advancing. Torpedo was in November 
2012. In late July 2013, computer security experts detected a sim-
ilar attack through Dark Net websites hosted by a shady ISP called 
Freedom Hosting— court rec ords have since confi rmed it was an-
other FBI operation. For this one, the bureau used custom attack 
code that exploited a relatively fresh Firefox vulnerability— the 
hacking equivalent of moving from a bow- and- arrow to a 9-mm 
pistol. In addition to the IP address, which identifi es a  house hold, 
this code collected the MAC address of the par tic u lar computer 
that [was] infected by the malware.67
Th ese kinds of capabilities make it diffi  cult for the less sophisticated 
and less wealthy digital users among us to imagine achieving real 

274  Digital Disobedience
anonymity. Even many sophisticated experts are unsure that an eff ec-
tive privacy infrastructure will be realized during the next de cade. In 
a Pew canvass of 2,511 Internet experts, builders, researchers, and in-
novators, a majority (55 percent) of the respondents said that they do 
not believe that there will be “a secure, popularly accepted, and trusted 
privacy- rights infrastructure by 2025 that allows for business innova-
tion and monetization while also off ering individuals choices for pro-
tecting their personal information in easy- to- use formats.” 68 In other 
words, a majority of the surveyed experts are not optimistic about the 
ability to keep our personal information private, at least for a number 
of years to come.
Th is is precisely what fuels the view at the other extreme: assume 
total transparency of personal data, but invert the po liti cal economy. 
Privatize the data— truly privatize it for the benefi t of individual 
users— and commercialize its exploitation. Th is would dramatically 
upend the fi nancial incentives that are pushing our digital economy 
along. Th e idea  here, in eff ect, is to truly marketize the personal data 
for the benefi t of those who are producing them, to give the genuine 
holders of personal data the ability to control their dissemination and 
cash in on their value—in the vein of Jennifer Morone’s incorporation 
project. Jaron Lanier takes this approach in his 2013 book Who Owns 
the Future?, where he sets forth a vision of a radically diff erent informa-
tion economy, one in which ordinary Internet users could be compen-
sated anytime their data are used by others.69
Th is approach bears a family resemblance to the recent French dig-
ital taxation proposal, developed by Nicolas Colin and Pierre Collin, 
to tax corporations that use personal data—or more specifi cally, to tax 
certain data collection practices that generate revenue.70 As Nicolas 
Colin writes, one of the biggest problems today is “our inability to add 
data as a primary economic category, just like goods and ser vices . . .  
Th e reality may be that much of the value generated by the digital 
economy is not captured by offi  cial statistics.”71 If, however, we can get to 
the point where we tax the data practices, we should easily be able to real-
locate the value extracted from those practices. Or alternatively, rather 
than turn to the fi scal system, as Colin and Collin do, it may be possible 

Digital Re sis tance  275
to redesign and reassign property rights to personal data; in eff ect, to use 
the property regime, rather than the tax regime, to privatize data.
Along another dimension, many of us are striving to render the in-
ternal operations of government, corporations, and the security appa-
ratus itself more visible. Th is too comes in diff erent variations. One 
approach is to turn the surveillance camera around: to aim the optic at 
those who are watching us. Frank Pasquale has long been an advocate 
of this kind of approach, which counters surveillance with even more 
surveillance.72 William Simon also takes this approach in a provoca-
tive article titled “Rethinking Privacy” in the Boston Review. “Th e pan-
opticon can be developed in ways Foucault never imagined,” Simon 
argues, “to discipline the watchers as well as the watched.”73
Th ere are a number of creative projects along this dimension. Artist 
James Bridle started a project in 2013 called “Watching the Watchers,” 
which collects “aerial photographs of military surveillance drones, 
found via online maps” such as Google Earth.74 A collaborative called 
the Institute for Applied Autonomy has a web- based application called 
iSee that identifi es and locates all of the CCTV cameras in urban envi-
ronments and provides users with walking directions to avoid surveil-
lance cameras.75 Th e geographer, artist, and author Trevor Paglen docu-
ments the hidden world of governmental surveillance with photographs 
of secret sites, testing grounds, drone bases, and “black sites”— what he 
calls the “Blank Spots on the Map”—of the United States military and 
Department of Defense.76 Th e fi lmmaker Laura Poitras has been docu-
menting the construction of a massive surveillance data storage facility 
in the Utah desert, the NSA Utah Data Center, also called the Intelli-
gence Community Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative 
Data Center.77 Th e art historian Ed Shanken teaches an entire course 
on the arts of countersurveillance, titled “Surveillance Culture: Pri-
vacy, Publicity, Art, Technology,” which examines “how artists are 
responding by using surveillance technologies to look over ‘big broth-
er’s’ shoulder.”78
Many of us, at po liti cal protests and ordinary police- civilian encoun-
ters, record undercover police offi  cers who are engaging in surveillance 
or infi ltrating protests, document the police fi lming of protests, or 

276  Digital Disobedience
simply monitor the police—an increasingly common practice that has 
documented sometimes appalling, sometimes devastatingly upsetting 
uses of physical and lethal force by law enforcement.79 Th e pupils dis-
cussed in the U.K. study also do a lot of this themselves:
One pupil “set up a camera” to record her mum’s “password on 
the laptop” . . .  while some of the pupils at Girls Comprehensive 
said that they use “three- way telephone calls” which allows them 
to surreptitiously listen in to telephone conversations. Th is 
could be used as a con ve nient way for three people to arrange “to 
meet up” . . .  or to listen in to telephone conversations when they 
had asked friends to “dump” a boyfriend: “X used to do it all the 
time and I would fi nish her boyfriend for her. She used to be on 
the other line.” . . .  Meanwhile some of the “techno- boys” . . .  
used their knowledge of [information and communication tech-
nologies] to monitor their peers and teachers.”80
Another variant of this is the Open Data movement, which tries 
to render public information accessible on the web— a movement that 
got off  the ground in spurts in the United States and in the United 
Kingdom in the mid-2000s. For instance, in Chicago, an early hacker 
site called Chicago Crimes published police crime data in 2005.81 Th e 
Open Data movement has extended abroad to other liberal democra-
cies. In 2011, in the wake of these developments, a French interminis-
terial initiative started Étatlab, dedicated to the mission of open 
government data.82
Naturally, there are many other projects that favor a better regula-
tion of personal and governmental data and that are located between 
some of the diff erent extremes, or that mix and match strategies. Some 
take a more regulatory view overall, arguing for greater attention to 
the “architecture” of the Internet, in terms of code, law, and norms—
in the vein of Larry Lessig’s proposals in his updated Code: And Other 
Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0; others such as Jack Balkin argue for 
more robust congressional, executive, judicial, and technological over-
sight; and still others advocate structural compartmentalization of 

Digital Re sis tance  277
the data and privacy advocates along the lines enacted in the USA 
FREEDOM Act.83 Daniel Solove urges us to lay a proper legal founda-
tion for new technologies before they arrive.84 Margo Schlanger rec-
ommends that we legally “infi ltrate the NSA”: that we insert and em-
power civil liberties ombudsmen within the institutional framework 
of intelligence ser vices. “We need to add civil libertarians inside the 
surveillance state to nurture its civil liberties ecol ogy,” Schlanger 
writes.85 Eben Moglen argues that intelligence should be placed under 
a rule- of- law regime and properly regulated. In his words, we must not 
only get our governments to protect us from the surveillance of for-
eign governments, but also force our own government to “subject its 
domestic listening to the rule of law.”86
Th ere is also a range of peaceful protest movements today challenging 
our loss of privacy and autonomy. Some link up with the Occupy move-
ment or Occupy Central in Hong Kong— adding the problematics of 
surveillance to the call for renewed demo cratic mobilization. Others 
aim to awaken the sensibilities of the “average citizen,” the person on the 
street— not the militant or the protester, but just the middle- class, suit- 
and- tie- wearing person who wants a private realm of his own. Th ere are 
groups of “average data protesters” in Germany— such as the group Ak-
kurater Widerstand (Accurate Resistance)— protesting the NSA’s 
surveillance programs.87 You can join them on Facebook  here (how 
paradoxical): www.facebook . com/akkuraterwiderstand.
And then there are entirely diff erent approaches that are more rad-
ical. Th ere are online bazaars that operate on the Tor network (what 
people refer to as “a hidden part of the Internet,” where it is far easier to 
remain anonymous), use a virtual currency called Bitcoin that is consid-
ered as anonymous as cash, and employ pseudonyms to protect people’s 
identities.88 Th ere are orchestrated denial- of- service attacks intended to 
punish or deter— like those that the Anonymous collective conducted 
against MasterCard aft er it decided to stop servicing WikiLeaks.
Th e more radical forms of re sis tance can range from the very 
minor— lying about your personal information on websites—to more 
major forms of combat. Many of the teens danah boyd interviewed 
took the fi rst route: they lied about their personal information on 

278  Digital Disobedience
websites and “fabricated answers like name, location, age, and income 
to profi le questions.”89 Th ey playfully check “It’s Complicated” as their 
relationship status on Facebook, and report their best friend as the 
person with whom they are “In a Relationship.”90 We can see a range 
of re sis tance at the British schools studied earlier, too. Th ere are minor 
forms of re sis tance: some of the children use “ ‘blocking’ tactics, like 
putting ‘chewy and stuff  over cameras’ on the school buses” or “put-
ting ‘up your hood’ to avoid being recorded by the school’s CCTV 
cameras ‘because you don’t want them to see your face when you’re 
twagging’ (playing truant from school or a lesson).” Some of the par-
ents resist as well, refusing, for instance, to give the school their cell 
phone numbers so that they don’t receive “the ‘automated text mes-
sages’ sent out concerning pupil ‘absence’ and ‘behaviour.’ ” Th ere 
are some elaborate re sis tance strategies as well, with some pupils 
trying to stay one step ahead of the surveillance, to fi nd a website be-
fore it is blocked, to use a computer that might not be controlled, to 
use proxy websites or a friend’s account.91 Some of the pupils engage in 
“avoidance tactics”: “buying alcohol outside of the view of CCTV 
cameras,” or “wearing hoodies up when ‘twagging’ school.” And then 
there are more aggressive forms of re sis tance: “Council Estate pupils, 
on the other hand, returned the ‘stare’ at CCTV operators; ‘threw 
stones’ at the cameras; and ‘swore at the cameras.’ ”92 From avoidance 
techniques to throwing stones at the digital monitor or leaking troves 
of military and intelligence secrets: there are indeed a range of disrup-
tive strategies, a lot of new weapons.
With Daniel Ellsberg and now Chelsea Manning and Edward 
Snowden, the term “whistle- blower” has become part of our lexicon 
today. Th e idea of the whistle- blower oft en goes hand in hand with no-
tions of truth- telling and speaking truth to power. Recall that Daniel 
Ellsberg himself had titled a chapter of his memoirs “Th e Power of 
Truth.”93 Judith Ehrlich, the documentary fi lmmaker who codirected 
Th e Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the Pentagon 
Papers, draws on these themes in her work. Ellsberg’s re sis tance, in her 

Digital Re sis tance  279
words, was precisely about “speaking truth to power”: “Th at one person, 
armed with a willingness to spend the rest of his life in prison and 7,000 
pages of top secret documents in his safe, can make a huge diff erence 
is something that’s shown by the fi lm. . . .  It’s really a fi lm about the 
power of truth- telling.”94 A recent (virtual) joint appearance of 
Snowden and Ellsberg has revived these themes and ideas. Th e head-
lines refl ect it well. “Edward Snowden and Daniel Ellsberg speak truth 
to power at HOPE X,” reads the caption at the Daily Dot, aft er the 
tenth “Hackers on Planet Earth” conference in New York City in July 
2014, where they both appeared.95
Increasingly, many of us imagine these daunting acts— some of 
us might even say these treasonous acts— through a new lens: the 
courage of truth.96 As forms of disobedience, these actions call for a 
level of self- awareness and self- sacrifi ce that is truly formidable. Th is is 
especially true today, in light of the more punitive reactions and in-
creased criminalization. Th e Obama administration has aggressively 
pursued government offi  cials who provide information to journalists on 
security issues without the approval of the administration, in what has 
been referred to as “an unpre ce dented crackdown.”97 Whereas all of the 
prior presidential administrations combined had prosecuted only three 
individuals for sharing secret information with journalists, the Obama 
administration has pursued eight criminal cases in six years— including 
in situations where there is no direct evidence of a leak.98
Th e cost of truth- telling has gone up, as has the amount of courage 
required.
On June 9, 2013, Edward Snowden presented himself to us all. He 
looked straight into the digital stream, his back fully exposed in the 
mirrored glass. Cognizant of the penalty he might have to pay—in 
de cades, in a lifetime, or even perhaps with his bare life—he calmly 
told us: “If you realize that that’s the world you helped create, and it’s 
going to get worse with the next generation and the next generation, 
who extend the capabilities of this sort of architecture of oppression, 
you realize that you might be willing to accept any risk. And it  doesn’t 
matter what the outcome is, so long as the public gets to make their 
own decisions.”99

Here is a list of strong security questions, recommended to web-
sites to prompt and verify us in order to render more secure our user 
IDs and passwords:
What was your childhood nickname?
In what city did you meet your spouse/signifi cant other?
What is the name of your favorite childhood friend?
What street did you live on in third grade?
What school did you attend for sixth grade?
What was your childhood phone number including area code?
What was the name of your fi rst stuff ed animal?
In what city or town did your mother and father meet?
Where  were you when you had your fi rst kiss?
What was the last name of your third grade teacher?
In what city or town was your fi rst job?
What is the name of the place your wedding reception was held?
What is the name of a college you applied to but didn’t attend?
Where  were you when you fi rst heard about 9/11?
What is the fi rst name of the boy or girl that you fi rst kissed?1
T W E L V E
Po liti cal Disobedience

Po liti cal Disobedience  281
If you know my answers to these questions, I suspect, you know 
more of my secrets than my own companion of twenty- six years. You 
know my stories, my journey, my clues, my fondest memories. Perhaps 
you even know me better than what I can remember about myself— 
about my self, that self full of desire and disobedience . . .  desire and 
disobedience that is intercepted, recorded, mined, and then carved 
into the cold rock of the digital cloud of commercial and intelligence 
ser vices.
What, then, is to be done— that is, beyond carefully analyzing, 
better understanding, and critically rethinking this new form of dig-
ital power that circulates today? Th e answer, I am afraid, is not simple 
or easy. It calls for courage and for ethical choice— for innovation and 
experimentation. In the end, it falls on each and every one of us—as 
desiring digital subjects, as parents and children, as teachers and stu-
dents, as conscientious ethical selves—to do everything we can to re-
sist the excesses of our expository society. Each one of us has a unique 
ability to intervene in our own way. And, as Eben Moglen reminds us, 
as he urges us: “Snowden’s courage is exemplary. But he ended his 
eff ort because we needed to know now. We have to inherit his under-
standing of that fi erce urgency.”2
Re sis tance must come from within each and every one of us— and 
if it does, it will amount to a new form of leadership positioned against 
both Tocqueville’s ancient forms of leaderful despotism and modern 
forms of demo cratic apathy. It would be, I believe, a form of leadership 
that could only properly be described as leaderless. Leaderless, but 
strenuously resistant. Something that might be imagined under the 
rubric of “po liti cal disobedience.” It is a situated form of disobedience, 
one that is particularly appropriate as a type of re sis tance to demo-
cratic despotism, even though it may not necessarily be adequate to 
leaderful authoritarianism.3
What does such po liti cal disobedience off er? Most importantly, 
what it avoids is the recrystallization of oppressive structures or the 
return to repressive relations of power. For anyone sensitive to these 

282  Digital Disobedience
issues, this alone should count in its favor. You may recall O’Brien in 
Orwell’s 1984, Winston’s tormenter and eventually, I would argue, ex-
ecutioner. He had a few things to say about re sis tance, many of which 
I think  were eerily prescient. “One does not establish a dictatorship in 
order to safeguard a revolution,” he said. “One makes the revolution 
in order to establish the dictatorship.” 4 What O’Brien is getting at, of 
course, is the intricate and tense relationship between leadership and 
despotism. But the coin that can be slotted between those two is pre-
cisely leaderlessness, which, equally importantly, produces knowledge 
diff erently and produces diff erent knowledge.
Th e social movement initiated by Daniel Defert, Deleuze, Foucault, 
and others in 1970, the Prisons Information Group (GIP), was a delib-
erate attempt to create such a leaderless movement.5 “Th ere was no 
central or ga niz ing committee or symbolic fi gure, no charter, no stat-
utes, no members, just activists.” 6 Th e GIP was started specifi cally to 
allow voices to be heard that  were not and could not be heard through 
traditional forms of leadership. Th e group embraced a leaderless model 
explicitly as an alternative to other forms of resistance— popular tri-
bunals, accusatory methods, vanguard politics.7 Th e idea was to pro-
duce a space, an opening, where people, voices, and discourses could 
be heard that  were otherwise silenced. “Th e group demanded no ideo-
logical unity and provided no po liti cal guidance. Instead, it strove to 
‘break down the barriers required by power,’ the so- called ‘game of 
social hierarchies,’ bringing together participants from various social 
strata: prisoners, lawyers, judges, family members, academics,  etc.”8 
Th e same was true with the Occupy Wall Street movement, which 
sought to create a space for innovative thought and genuine po liti cal 
re sis tance, rather than impose dogma. Th e idea, again, was to use gath-
erings and general assemblies to allow new ideas to emerge, new voices 
to be heard, new practices to originate. It was a movement, in David 
Graeber’s words, “that resolutely refused to take the traditional path, 
that rejected the existing po liti cal order entirely as inherently corrupt, 
that called for the complete reinvention of American democracy.”9
It is in this same sense that leaderless re sis tance, as a central element 
of po liti cal disobedience, can overcome modern- day demo cratic ap-

Po liti cal Disobedience  283
athy, while avoiding leaderful despotism. But it requires each and 
every one of us to act bravely, with courage and conviction. It requires 
an ethic of the self.
Friendly critics of such leaderless movements, such as Jodi Dean 
and Doug Henwood, point to the family resemblance between leader-
lessness and neoliberal individualism— suggesting that recent protest 
movements have more in common with the entrepreneurial ethic as-
sociated with neoliberalism than one might fi rst think.10 Th e ethical 
self, though, is by no means a recent by- product of neoliberalism. It far 
predates it. Seen from this angle, the emphasis on what we must do as 
ethical selves, each and every one of us—us digital subjects, with our 
desires and our disobedience— may be precisely what is necessary for 
us to begin to think of ourselves as we. Yes, as that we that has been 
haunting this book since page one.
“Revolutionaries often forget, or do not like to recognize, 
that one wants and makes revolution out of desire, not duty,” Deleuze 
and Guattari remind us in Anti- Oedipus.11 What a cruel reminder, 
given that it is precisely our desires and passions that have enslaved us, 
exposed us, and ensnared us in this digital shell as hard as steel. What 
a painful paradox. What a daunting prospect. Th at, I take it, is our 
greatest challenge today.


the expository society
1. Amir Efrati, “ ‘Like’ Button Follows Web Users,” Wall Street Journal, May 18, 
2011; Asher Moses, “Facebook’s Privacy Lie: Aussie Exposes ‘Tracking’ as New 
Patent Uncovered,” Sydney Morning Herald, October 4, 2011.
2. Efrati, “ ‘Like’ Button Follows Web Users.”
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5. Byron Acohido, “Facebook Tracking Is under Scrutiny,” USA Today, updated 
November 16, 2011.
6. Ibid.
7. Sara M. Watson, “What Happens When Online and Offl  ine Boundaries Blur?,” 
Al Jazeera America, October 7, 2014; see also Vindu Goel, “With New Ad Platform, 
Facebook Opens Gates to Its Vault of User Data,” New York Times, September 28, 2014.
8. Erik Johnson, “Meet the New Atlas,” September 29, 2014, http:// atlassolutions 
. com / 2014 / 09 / 29 / meet - the - new - atlas.
9. Ibid.
10. Goel, “With New Ad Platform.”
11. Johnson, “Meet the New Atlas.”
12. Goel, “With New Ad Platform.”
13. Watson, “What Happens When Online and Offl  ine Boundaries Blur?”
14. Johnson, “Meet the New Atlas.”
15. Yasha Levine, “Th e Psychological Dark Side of Gmail: Google Is Using Its 
Pop u lar Gmail Ser vice to Build Profi les on the Hundreds of Millions of People 
Who Use It,” AlterNet, December 31, 2013.
Notes

286  Notes to Pages 8–13
16. Desmond Butler, Jack Gillum, and Alberto Arce, “US Secretly Created 
‘Cuban Twitter’ to Stir Unrest,” Associated Press, April 4, 2014.
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.
19. Ibid.
20. Desmond Butler and Alberto Arce, “US Contractors Profi led ‘Cuban 
Twitter’ Responses,” Associated Press, April 30, 2014.
21. Ibid.
22. Butler, Gillum, and Arce, “US Secretly Created ‘Cuban Twitter’ to Stir 
Unrest.”
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid.
26. Ibid.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Ibid.
30. Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, “NSA Prism Program Taps In to 
User Data of Apple, Google and Others,” Guardian, June 6, 2013.
31. Ibid.; see also Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, 
and the U.S. Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 153–157.
32. Glenn Greenwald, “XKeyscore: NSA Tool Collects ‘Nearly Everything a 
User Does on the Internet,’ ” Guardian, July 31, 2013.
33. Glenn Greenwald, “Glenn Greenwald on Secret NSA Program to Crack On-
line Encryption,” Democracy Now! interview with Amy Goodman and Juan Gon-
zalez, September 9, 2013, http:// truth - out . org / news / item / 18693 - the - end - of - internet 
- privacy - glenn - greenwald - on - secret - nsa - program - to - crack - online - encryption.
34. Quoted in Greenwald, “XKeyscore.”
35. Greenwald and MacAskill, “NSA Prism Program.”
36. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 109 (quoting Bart Gellman).
37. Greenwald and MacAskill, “NSA Prism Program.”
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid.
41. Mark Zuckerberg post on Facebook, November 27, 2014, 5:28 p.m., www 
. facebook . com/zuck/posts/10101761674047881?pnref=story.
42. See, e.g., Anita Allen, Unpop u lar Privacy: What Must We Hide? (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2011).

Notes to Pages 14–19  287
43. Julia Angwin, “Why Online Tracking Is Getting Creepier: Th e Merger of On-
line and Offl  ine Data Is Bringing More Intrusive Tracking,” ProPublica, June 12, 2014.
44. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 92.
45. Andy Müller- Maguhn, Laura Poitras, Marcel Rosenbach, Michael Son-
theimer, and Christian Grothoff , “Trea sure Map: Th e NSA Breach of Telekom and 
Other German Firms,” Der Spiegel, September 14, 2014.
46. Ibid.
47. Frances Ferguson, “Now It’s Personal: D. A. Miller and Too- Close Reading,” 
Critical Inquiry 41, no. 3 (2015): 521–540.
48. See Siva Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should 
Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011), 9, 26.
49. Jodi Dean, Th e Communist Horizon (New York: Verso, 2012).
50. None of this is to deny the ongoing ubiquitous forms of state repression that 
continue to saturate countries and regions around the world. I must emphasize that 
my analysis of our expository society does not displace analyses of state repression 
in liberal democracies, especially in the policing and prison context, nor of state repres-
sion in authoritarian regimes. None of this is to deny the continuing states of exception 
in both demo cratic and nondemo cratic states. See generally Zygmunt Bauman, Glo-
balization: Th e Human Consequences (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998) (discussing bare 
life in California’s Pelican Bay Prison); Didier Bigo, “Security, Exception, Ban and Sur-
veillance,” in David Lyon, ed., Th eorizing Surveillance: Th e Panopticon and Beyond, 
46–68 (Devon: Willan Publishing, 2006) (discussing surveillance as state of excep-
tion and the “ban- opticon”); Giorgio Agamben, Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and 
Bare Life (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1998); and Hannah Arendt, Th e 
Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1951).
51. Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson, “Th e Surveillant Assemblage,” 
British Journal of Sociology 51, no. 4 (2000): 611. Th ere are other proper names for us 
digital subjects that I could use: “digital persons” (see Daniel J. Solove, Th e Digital 
Person: Technology and Privacy in the Information Age [New York: New York Univer-
sity Press, 2006]) and “digital selves” (see Shanyang Zhao, “Th e Digital Self: Th rough 
the Looking Glass of Telecopresent Others,” Symbolic Interaction 28, no. 3 [2005], 
387–405).
52. danah boyd, It’s Complicated: Th e Social Lives of Networked Teens (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014), 5.
53. Ibid., 20.
54. Guy Debord, La société du spectacle (Paris: Buchet/Chastel, 1967).
55. Michel Foucault, La société punitive: Cours au Collège de France (1972–1973), 
ed. Bernard E. Harcourt (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2013).

288  Notes to Pages 19–23
56. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Vintage, 1979), 217.
57. Gilles Deleuze, “Postscript on the Societies of Control,” October 59 (Winter 
1992): 6.
58. Th is is a rhetorical question posed by Google’s CEO Eric Schmidt. Quoted in 
Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 45.
59. I am referring  here, naturally, to the titles of the seminal books by Glenn 
Greenwald and Daniel Solove. See Greenwald, No Place to Hide; Daniel Solove, 
Nothing to Hide (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011).
60. Pierrette Poncela, “Chronique de l’exécution des peines: Les peines exten-
sibles de la loi du 15 août 2014,” Revue de science criminelle 3 (2014): 611–621.
61. See Alex Hern, “Samsung Rejects Concern over ‘Orwellian’ Privacy Policy,” 
Guardian, February 9, 2015.
62. Th e quotation is from Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 82.
63. Kenneth Neil Cukier and Viktor Mayer- Schoenberger, Big Data: A Revolu-
tion Th at Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Th ink (New York: Houghton Mif-
fl in Harcourt, 2013), 1–3.
64. A recent study has found that the use of body- worn video cameras by police 
offi  cers may reduce the likelihood of force being used in police encounters. See Barak 
Ariel, William A. Farrar, and Alex Sutherland, “Th e Eff ect of Police Body- Worn Cam-
eras on Use of Force and Citizens’ Complaints against the Police: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial,” Journal of Quantitative Criminology, November 2014.
65. Amy L. Gonzales and Jeff rey T. Hancock, “Mirror, Mirror on My Facebook 
Wall: Eff ects of Exposure to Facebook on Self- Esteem,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking 14, nos. 1–2 (2011): 79–83.
66. Th e mouches and mouchards of ancien régime France— the in for mants of the 
king’s lieutenant de police— immediately became the eyes and ears of the revolu-
tionary committees that would govern republican France, with their strict and 
unbending Comité de Sécurité. Th e very same was true in the early years of the 
American Republic with the Committee for Detecting and Defeating Conspiracies 
in the State of New York, of which John Jay was such a vital force. See generally 
George Pellew, John Jay (Boston: Houghton Miffl  in, 1898), 60–63. Special thanks to 
Leo Ruyter- Harcourt and Henry Utset for excellent research on these questions.
67. Alexander Nazaryan, “Th e NSA’s Chief Chronicler,” New Yorker, June 10, 2013.
68. Today, for instance, practically all youths in the United States are glued to 
YouTube, posting on Facebook, or otherwise using digital media in suffi  cient 
amounts to be watched and surveilled around the clock. “By 2011, 95 percent of 
American teenagers had some form of access to the internet, whether at home or at 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
Notes to Pages 24–27  289
school,” as danah boyd notes (It’s Complicated, 193); 80 percent of high school stu-
dents had cell phones (ibid., 3).
69. Megan Wollerton, “Website Spies on Th ousands of People to Shed Light on 
Security Flaw,” CNET Magazine, November 10, 2014.
70. “XKeyscore Pre sen ta tion from 2008,” Guardian, July 31, 2013.
71. Greenwald, “XKeyscore.”
72. David Cole, “Can the NSA Be Controlled?,” New York Review of Books, 
June 19, 2014, 17.
73. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 98; see also Cole, “Can the NSA Be Con-
trolled?,” 17.
74. Quoted in Cole, “Can the NSA Be Controlled?,” 16. As David Cole reminds 
us, through the words of the NSA general counsel, “Metadata absolutely tells you 
everything about somebody’s life. If you have enough metadata, you don’t really 
need content.”
75. Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack: Th e NSA Files Revealed New Th reats 
to Democracy,” Guardian, May 27, 2014.
76. Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, xiv.
77. Anthony Vidler, Th e Architectural Uncanny: Essays in the Modern Unhomely 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 220, 219.
78. Frank Pasquale refers to this as “the fading divide between ‘state’ and 
‘market.’ ” Pasquale, Th e Black Box Society: Th e Secret Algorithms behind Money and 
Information (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015), 48.
79. See, e.g., Ian Crouch, “So Are We Living in 1984?,” New Yorker, June 11, 2013; 
see generally Chapter 1.
80. See, e.g., Solove, Nothing to Hide, 26; Pasquale, Th e “Black Box” Society.
81. On the surveillance state, see, e.g., Bill Keller, “Living with the Surveillance 
State,” New York Times, June 16, 2013; see also generally Chapter 2. On the panop-
ticon, see, e.g., Bruce Schneier, “Why the NSA’s Defense of Mass Data Collection 
Makes No Sense,” Atlantic, October 21, 2013; see also generally Chapter 3.
82. Glenn Greenwald, for instance, draws on Orwell, Bentham, and Foucault, 
and refers throughout and in the subtitle to “the U.S. surveillance state.” See Gre-
enwald, No Place to Hide, 174–176 and title page.
83. See “Th e President on Mass Surveillance” (editorial), New York Times, Jan-
uary 17, 2014; see also Barack Obama, “Speech on N.S.A. Phone Surveillance,” New 
York Times, January 17, 2014.
84. See Chapter 2. While this book was already in page proofs, Congress passed 
the USA FREEDOM Act. See H.R.2048 -  USA FREEDOM Act of 2015, Public 
Law No. 114-23, 114th Congress (2015–2016), passed on June 2, 2015, available at 
www.Ebook777.com

290  Notes to Pages 27–32
https:// www . congress . gov / bill / 114th - congress / house - bill / 2048 / text. As a result, 
the Act can and will be treated only very briefl y in this book.
85. President’s Review Group on Intelligence and Communications Technolo-
gies, Liberty and Security in a Changing World, December 12, 2013, www . whitehouse 
. gov / sites / default / fi les / docs / 2013 - 12 - 12 _ rg _ fi nal _ report . pdf.
86. James Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory: Th e Ultra- Secret NSA from 9/11 to the 
Eavesdropping on America (New York: Doubleday, 2008), 199. In this regard, it is 
interesting to scrutinize what President Obama’s advisers actually wrote in their 
report. Notice their language (my emphasis): “it would be in the interests of the pro-
viders and the government to agree on a voluntary system that meets the needs of 
both.” President’s Review Group, Liberty and Security in a Changing World. Th ey 
added that if such a mutually agreeable deal could not be worked out, “the govern-
ment should reimburse the providers for the cost of retaining the data.” Ibid. Th is 
would surely be a win- win solution for the surveillance- industrial complex.
Chapter One: george orwell’s big brother
1. Jenny Hendrix, “NSA Surveillance Puts George Orwell’s ‘1984’ on Bestseller 
Lists,” Los Angeles Times, June 11, 2013.
2. Charles Riley, “Sales of Orwell’s ‘1984’ Spike aft er NSA leak,” CNN Money, 
June 12, 2013.
3. Dominic Rushe, “NSA Surveillance Goes beyond Orwell’s Imagination— 
Alan Rusbridger,” Guardian, September 23, 2013; “Orwell’s Fears Refracted through 
the NSA’s Prism,” Guardian, June 9, 2013.
4. Nicholas Kristof, June 6, 2013, fh ttps:// twitter . com / NickKristof / status 
/ 342769970251448320.
5. Konrad Krawczyk, “NSA PRISM: 3 Ways Orwell’s ‘1984’ Saw Th is Coming,” 
International Business Times, June 10, 2013.
6. Hendrix, “NSA Surveillance Puts George Orwell’s ‘1984’ on Bestseller Lists.”
7. Griff  Witte, “Snowden Says Spying Worse Th an Orwellian,” Washington Post, 
December 25, 2013. A video of Snowden’s comments, aired Christmas Day on Brit-
ain’s Channel 4, can be found at www . channel4 . com / programmes / alternative 
- christmas - message / 4od.
8. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. 
Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 174.
9. Klayman v. Obama, 957 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2013), http:// legaltimes . typepad 
. com / fi les / obamansa . pdf.
10. Richard Jinman, “NSA Spy Scandal Boosts Sales of Orwell’s ‘1984’— Here’s 
Why,” Th e Week, June 12, 2013.
11. Ian Crouch, “So Are We Living in 1984?,” New Yorker, June 11, 2013.

Notes to Pages 33–39  291
12. Ibid.
13. Regarding the third point, Crouch references Amy Davidson, “Th e N.S.A.- 
Verizon Scandal,” New Yorker, June 6, 2013.
14. Crouch, “So Are We Living in 1984?”
15. Ibid.
16. Robert Colls, “Orwell and Ed: Snowden Saga Shows the One Th ing ‘1984’ 
Missed,” Salon, December 17, 2013. Regarding the corporate interests, Colls links to 
Dan Roberts and Jemima Kiss, “Twitter, Facebook and More Demand Sweeping 
Changes to US Surveillance,” Guardian, December 9, 2013.
17. Apple, “iPhone 5C,” www . apple . com / iphone - 5c / design.
18. George Orwell, 1984 (New York: Signet Classics, 1950), 140.
19. All references to George Orwell’s 1984 are to the Signet Classics edition with 
an aft erword by Eric Fromm. All references will be placed in parentheses aft er the 
quote or passage, without further identifi cation.
20. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Vintage, 1979), 19. On the actuarial in criminal justice, see generally Bernard 
E.  Harcourt, “A Reader’s Companion to ‘Against Prediction’: A Reply to Ariela 
Gross, Yoram Margalioth, and Yoav Sapir on Economic Modeling, Selective Inca-
pacitation, Governmentality, and Race,” Law and Social Inquiry 33 (2008): 273–277; 
Bernard E. Harcourt, Against Prediction: Profi ling, Policing, and Punishing in an Ac-
tuarial Age (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
21. See, e.g., William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of En gland, vol. 4, 
chap. 1 (University of Chicago Press, 1979); Model Penal Code Sec. 1.13(2) (defi ning 
an “act” as a “bodily movement”).
22. Crouch, “So Are We Living in 1984?”
23. See, e.g., “FBI Entrapped Suspects in Almost All High- Profi le Terrorism 
Cases in US,” RT, July 21, 2014, http:// rt . com / usa / 174484 - hrw - fb i - sting - entrapment.
24. See, e.g., Th omas Szasz, Th e Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Th eory 
of  Personal Conduct (New York: Hoeber- Harper, 1961); Michel Foucault, David 
Cooper, Jean- Pierre Faye, Marie- Odile Faye, and Marine Zecca, “Confi nement, Psy-
chiatry, Prison,” in Michel Foucault, Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other 
Writings, 1977–1984, ed. Lawrence D. Kritzman, 178–210 (New York: Routledge, 1990).
25. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 201.
26. On Admiral Poindexter’s program, see James Bamford, Th e Shadow 
 Factory: Th e Ultra- Secret NSA from 9/11 to the Eavesdropping on America (New York: 
Doubleday, 2008), 99–104. See generally Glenn Greenwald, “NSA Top Secret Pro-
gram,” Guardian, July 31, 2013; David E. Sanger and Th om Shankerjan, “N.S.A. Devises 
Radio Pathway into Computers,” New York Times, January 14, 2014.
27. For a good discussion, see Marion Lewenstein, “Smokey Bear as Big Brother,” in 
Peter Stansky, ed., On Nineteen Eighty- Four (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1983), 140ff .

292  Notes to Pages 40–45
28. Martha Nussbaum, “Th e Death of Pity: Orwell and American Po liti cal Life,” 
in Abbott Gleason, Jack Goldsmith, and Martha Nussbaum, eds., On Nineteen Eighty- 
Four: Orwell and Our Future (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2005), 281.
29. Cass Sunstein refers to this as the “po liti cal orthodoxy thesis”: “Po liti cal ortho-
doxy is a consequence of sexual frustration, which governments can channel into 
marching and fl ag- waving and the Two Minutes Hate.” Cass Sunstein, “Sexual and Po-
liti cal Freedom,” in Gleason, Goldsmith, and Nussbaum, On Nineteen Eighty- Four, 237.
30. See, e.g., Joseph Goldstein and J. David Goodman, “Frisking Tactic Yields to 
Tighter Focus on Youth Gangs,” New York Times, September 19, 2013.
31. Adam  D.  I. Kramer, Jamie  E. Guillory, and Jeff rey  T. Hancock, “Experi-
mental Evidence of Massive- Scale Emotional Contagion through Social Networks,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 24 (2014): 8788–8790, epub 
ahead of print June 2, 2014, doi:10.1073/pnas.1320040111; see also Vindu Goel, 
“Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions in News Feed Experiment, Stirring 
Outcry,” New York Times, June 29, 2014; Michael Roppolo, “Researcher Apologizes 
for Facebook Study in Emotional Manipulation,” CBS News, June 30, 2014.
32. Adam D. I. Kramer’s Facebook post explaining the study, dated June 29, 
2014, https://www.facebook . com/akramer/posts/10152987150867796.
33. Kramer, Guillory, and Hancock, “Experimental Evidence of Massive- Scale 
Emotional Contagion.”
34. Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions.”
35. Kramer, Guillory, and Hancock, “Experimental Evidence of Massive- Scale 
Emotional Contagion.”
36. Ibid.
37. Ibid.
38. Ibid.
39. Ibid.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.
43. Ibid.
44. Ibid.
45. Varun Kacholia and Minwen Ji, “News Feed FYI: Helping You Find More 
News to Talk About,” Facebook Newsroom, December 2, 2013, https:// newsroom 
. fb  . com / news / 2013 / 12 / news - feed - fyi - helping - you - fi nd - more - news - to - talk - about; 
Roppolo, “Researcher Apologizes for Facebook Study in Emotional Manipula-
tion”; Khalid El- Arini and Joyce Tang, “News Feed FYI: Click- Baiting,” Facebook, 
August 25, 2014, http:// newsroom . fb  . com / news / 2014 / 08 / news - feed - fyi - click - baiting.
46. Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions.”

Notes to Pages 45–49  293
47. Kramer, Guillory, and Hancock, “Experimental Evidence of Massive- Scale 
Emotional Contagion.”
48. Goel, “Facebook Tinkers with Users’ Emotions.”
49. Ibid. And as Vindu Goel of the New York Times notes: “Facebook is hardly 
the only Internet company that manipulates and analyzes consumer data. Google 
and Yahoo also watch how users interact with search results or news articles to ad-
just what is shown; they say this improves the user experience.” Ibid.
50. Adam  D.  I. Kramer’s Facebook post explaining the study, June  29, 2014, 
https://www.facebook . com/akramer/posts/10152987150867796.
51. See Albert Hirschman, Th e Passions and the Interests: Po liti cal Arguments for 
Capitalism before Its Triumph (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 1977); 
Bernard E. Harcourt, Th e Illusion of Free Markets (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2011), 49–50.
52. Siva Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should 
Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011), 3.
53. Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello, Th e New Spirit of Capitalism (New York: 
Verso, 2007).
54. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti- Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizo phre nia 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 293.
55. Ibid., 296. Kevin Haggerty and Richard Ericson have done excellent work ex-
ploring the contributions of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari in the context of surveil-
lance, developing the notion of “surveillant assemblages” that abstract and separate 
human bodies into data fl ows. See Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson, “Th e 
Surveillant Assemblage,” British Journal of Sociology 51, no. 4 (2000): 605–622.
56. Gilles Deleuze, “D for Desire,” in Deleuze, L’Abécédaire de Gilles Deleuze. Th is is 
a TV series that was produced in France; see http:// www . imdb . com / title / tt0408472 / . 
It is available on YouTube and elsewhere. A transcript of the “D for Desire” episode is 
available at http:// www . arpla . fr / canal2 / archeo / cours _ 2005 / desirDeleuze . pdf.
57. Ibid.
58. Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, 293.
59. Ibid., 29.
60. Ibid., 293.
61. Ibid.
62. Ibid.
63. Ibid., 104–105.
64. Ibid.
65. See also ibid., 104 (“It is not a question of ideology. . . .  It is not an ideological 
problem, a problem of failing to recognize, or of being subject to, an illusion. It is a 
problem of desire, and desire is part of the infrastructure. Preconscious investments 

294  Notes to Pages 49–54
are made, or should be made, according to the interests of the opposing classes. But 
unconscious investments are made according to positions of desire and uses of syn-
thesis, very diff erent from the interests of the subject, individual or collective, who 
desires”), 118–119, 344 (“the concept of ideology is an execrable concept that hides 
the real problems, which are always of an or gan i za tional nature”).
66. Gilles Deleuze quoted in “Les intellectuels et le pouvoir” (discussion be-
tween Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze, March 4, 1972, L’Arc no. 49), in Michel 
Foucault, Dits et écrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 2:306–315 (“Quarto” edition [Paris: 
Gallimard, 2001], 1:1182).
67. Haggerty and Ericson, “Th e Surveillant Assemblage.”
68. Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, 26.
69. See, generally, Jaak Panksepp, Aff ective Neuroscience: Th e Foundations of 
Human and Animal Emotions (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004). For a more 
accessible introduction to the psychological literature, see Emily Yoff e, “Seeking: 
How the Brain Hard- Wires Us to Love Google, Twitter, and Texting. And Why Th at’s 
Dangerous,” Slate, August 12, 2009.
70. Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, 54.
71. Ibid., 26.
72. Michel Foucault, “Preface,” xi– xiv, in Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, xiii.
73. Ibid.
74. Ibid.
75. Ibid.
76. Ibid., xiv.
77. Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, 34.
78. Ibid., 139.
79. Ibid., 109.
80. Ibid., 380.
Chapter Two: the surveillance state
1. Jack M. Balkin, “Th e Constitution in the National Surveillance State,” Minne-
sota Law Review, Vol. 93, 1–25 (1980), 3–4; see, e.g., Bruce Schneier, “Th e Internet Is 
a Surveillance State,” CNN, March 16, 2013.
2. Bill Keller, “Living with the Surveillance State,” New York Times.
3. Julian Sanchez, “Dismantling the Surveillance State,” Daily Beast, De-
cember 21, 2013.
4. “Time to Rein in the Surveillance State,” ACLU, www . aclu . org / time - rein 
- surveillance - state - 0.
5. Keller, “Living with the Surveillance State”; Th omas L. Friedman, “Blowing a 
Whistle,” New York Times, June 11, 2013.

Notes to Pages 54–58  295
6. Conor Friedersdorf, “Th e Surveillance State Puts U.S. Elections at Risk of 
Manipulation,” Atlantic, November 7, 2013.
7. See American Civil Liberties Union v. Clapper, 959 F. Supp. 2d 724 (S.D.N.Y. 
2013), reversed Slip Opinion in Case 14-42 (2d Circuit, May 7, 2015); Klayman v. Obama, 
957 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2013); the President’s Review Group on Intelligence 
and Communications Technologies, Liberty and Security in a Changing World, De-
cember 12, 2013.
8. Clapper, 959 F. Supp. 2d at 729. While this book was in page proofs, on May 7, 
2015, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit entered an opinion reversing 
Judge Pauley’s decision. In an opinion written by Judge Gerald E. Lynch, the three- 
judge panel declared the telephone metadata program illegal and unauthorized 
under Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act. Slip Opinion in Case 14-42, 74. Th e court, 
however, declined to grant a preliminary injunction to halt the metadata program, 
in light of Congress’s immanent decision whether to reauthorize the program on 
June 1, 2015. Ibid., 95.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid., 748.
13. Ibid., 757.
14. Ibid., 729, 733, 754.
15. Ibid., 754.
16. Ibid., 757.
17. Klayman, 957 F. Supp. 2d at 33.
18. Ibid., 29.
19. Ibid., 18.
20. Ibid., 19.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid., 27.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid., 33 n. 36.
25. Clapper, 959 F. Supp. 2d at 732–733.
26. Ibid., 757.
27. Ibid., 751 (emphasis added).
28. President’s Review Group, Liberty and Security in a Changing World, 15.
29. Ibid., 16.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid., 42.
33. Ibid., 56.

296  Notes to Pages 58–62
34. Ibid., 194.
35. Ibid., 194–195.
36. Ibid., 195.
37. Ibid., 204.
38. Ibid., 219.
39. Ibid., 18.
40. Ibid., 21.
41. Ibid., 28.
42. Barack Obama, “Remarks by the President on Review of Signals Intelligence,” 
Department of Justice, January  17, 2014, www . whitehouse . gov / the - press - offi  ce 
/ 2014 / 01 / 17 / remarks - president - review - signals - intelligence.
43. Ibid., para. 1.
44. Ibid., para. 17.
45. Ibid., para. 38.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid., para. 9.
48. Ibid., para. 15.
49. Ibid., para. 22.
50. Ibid., para. 33.
51. Ibid., paras. 53–54.
52. Ibid.
53. Ibid., 40.
54. As noted earlier, while this book was in page proofs, on May 7, 2015, the U.S 
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reversed Judge Pauley’s decision and held 
the NSA program illegal, but nevertheless declined to issue a preliminary injunc-
tion. See Slip Opinion in 14-42. Judge Gerald E. Lynch, writing for the three- judge 
panel, reasoned that Congress had to decide whether to reauthorize the NSA pro-
gram on June 1, 2015, only a few weeks away, and that it was therefore more equi-
table to allow the program to remain in place in the meantime. “In light of the as-
serted national security interests at stake, we deem it prudent to pause to allow an 
opportunity for debate in Congress that may (or may not) profoundly alter the legal 
landscape,” Judge Lynch wrote. Ibid., 95. In addition, on June 2, 2015, Congress 
passed the USA FREEDOM Act, which calls only for a restructuring of the Sec-
tion 215 program— not for its termination.
55. President’s Review Group, Liberty and Security in a Changing World, 14, 
209, 212.
56. See Mémoire sur la réformation de la police de France, soumis au roi en 1749 
par M. Guillauté, illustré de 28 dessins de Gabriel de Saint- Aubin, ed. Jean Seznec 
(Paris: Hermann, 1974), 22. I discussed this remarkable episode in Bernard E. Har-
court, Th e Illusion of Free Markets (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 

Notes to Pages 62–66  297
2011), 152–153. I was fi rst made aware of this memoir by Eric Heilmann at a confer-
ence in Louvain in 2009. See Eric Heilmann, “Comment surveiller la population à 
distance? La machine de Guillauté et la naissance de la police moderne,” paper pre-
sented at the LISEC conference “Distance,” http:// hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / docs 
/ 00 / 12 / 55 / 74 / HTML. Grégoire Chamayou posted about this marvelous invention 
as well in his webtext “Every Move Will Be Recorded,” Max Planck Institute for the 
History of Science, www . mpiwg - berlin . mpg . de / en / news / features / feature14.
57. Mémoire sur la réformation de la police de France, 64.
58. “XKeyscore Pre sen ta tion from 2008,” Guardian, July 31, 2013; Glenn Green-
wald, “XKeyscore: NSA Tool Collects ‘Nearly Everything a User Does on the In-
ternet,’ ” Guardian, July 31, 2013.
59. See, generally, Harcourt, Illusion of Free Markets; Gary Becker, François 
Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt, “American Neoliberalism: Michel Foucault’s Birth 
of Biopolitics Lectures,” seminar at the University of Chicago, May 9, 2012, http:// 
vimeo . com / 43984248.
60. Pierre Bourdieu, Sur l’État, cours au Collège de France (1989–1992) (Paris: Le 
Seuil, 2012).
61. James Bamford, “Th ey Know Much More than You Th ink,” New York Review 
of Books, August 15, 2013; Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, “NSA Prism 
Program Taps in to User Data of Apple, Google and Others,” Guardian, June 6, 
2013; Jacques Follorou, “Surveillance: la DGSE a transmis des données à la NSA 
américaine,” Le Monde, October 30, 2013.
62. Glenn Greenwald, Ewen MacAskill, Laura Poitras, Spencer Ackerman, and 
Dominic Rushe, “Microsoft  Handed the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages,” 
Guardian, July 11, 2013; Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the 
NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 112–115, 134–135; 
George Ellard, “Letter to Sen. Charles E. Grassley,” September 11, 2013, www . nsa 
. gov / public _ info / press _ room / 2013 / grassley _ letter . pdf; Marie- Louise Gumuchian 
and David Goldman, “Security Firm Traces Target Malware to Rus sia,” CNN, Jan-
uary 21, 2014; Elizabeth A. Harris, Nicole Perlroth, Nathaniel Popper, and Hilary 
Stout, “A Sneaky Path into Target Customers’ Wallets,” New York Times, January 17, 
2014; Kim Zetter, “Neiman Marcus: 1.1 Million Credit Cards Exposed in Th ree- 
Month Hack,” Wired, January 24, 2014; Peter Maass and Laura Poitras, “Core Se-
crets: NSA Saboteurs in China and Germany,” Intercept, October 10, 2014, https:// 
fi rstlook . org / theintercept / 2014 / 10 / 10 / core - secrets.
63. Dwight D. Eisenhower, “Eisenhower’s Farewell Address,” January 17, 1961, 
http:// avalon . law . yale . edu / 20th _ century / eisenhower001 . asp.
64. James Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory: Th e Ultra- Secret NSA from 9/11 to the 
Eavesdropping on America (New York: Doubleday, 2008), 199.
65. Greenwald and MacAskill, “NSA Prism Program Taps in to User Data.”

298  Notes to Pages 66–69
66. Greenwald, MacAskill, Poitras, Ackerman and Rushe, “Microsoft  Handed 
the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages.”
67. Ibid.
68. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 115.
69. Greenwald, MacAskill, Poitras, Ackerman and Rushe, “Microsoft  Handed 
the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages.”
70. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 113; see also Greenwald, MacAskill, Poitras, Ack-
erman and Rushe, “Microsoft  Handed the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages.”
71. See Greenwald, MacAskill, Poitras, Ackerman and Rushe, “Microsoft  
Handed the NSA Access to Encrypted Messages.”
72. Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory, 163–65.
73. Ibid., 163–64.
74. Ibid., 164–65.
75. With the end of military censorship in 1945, the intelligence agencies needed to 
enter into informal agreements with the telecommunications companies (ITT, RCA, 
Western Union) to get access to foreign government communications. Bamford, Th e 
Shadow Factory, 166–168. Th ey did so under what was called Operation Shamrock, 
which the NSA would take over upon the agency’s formation in 1952. Eventually, 
paper tele grams  were replaced by computer discs, and the NSA was able to copy 
those as well under these informal agreements. Th is was disclosed in the early 
1970s, resulting in the Church Commission investigation and report, and the pas-
sage of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act in 1978. Bamford, Th e Shadow Fac-
tory, 168.
76. Th e scale in the United Kingdom was much smaller. “Th e general average of 
Warrants issued during the present century, does not much exceed 8 a- year,” the 
investigation from 1844 revealed. “Th is number would comprehend, on an average, 
the Letters of about 16 persons annually.” Jill Lepore, “Th e Prism: Privacy in an Age 
of Publicity,” New Yorker, June 24, 2013.
77. Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory, 192.
78. Ibid., 197.
79. Ibid., 200.
80. Ibid.
81. Fulbright Association, “Admiral William O. Studeman, USN (Ret.),” http:// 
fulbrightevents . org / speaker / william - studeman.
82. Paracel, “William O. Studeman to Represent TRW on Paracel’s Board of Di-
rectors,” March 24, 1998, http:// brandprosgroup . com / pages / fi rst / websites / paracel 
/ data / pr / 032498 . html.
83. Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory, 200.

Notes to Pages 70–75  299
84. Ibid., 200–201.
85. Ibid., 196.
86. Ibid., 199.
87. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 101.
88. Ibid. (quoting Tim Shorrock).
89. Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory, 177–181.
90. Ibid., 181.
91. Bamford, “Th ey Know Much More than You Th ink,” 7.
92. Ibid., 10.
93. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 105.
94. Ibid., 106.
95. Ibid., 105.
96. See Zygmunt Bauman, Liquid Times: Living in an Age of Uncertainty (Cam-
bridge: Polity Press, 2007); Zygmunt Bauman, Liquid Modernity (Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 2000).
97. Hartmut Rosa raises these challenges in a provocative way in his work. See 
Hartmut Rosa, Beschleunigung und Entfremdung: Entwurf einer kritischen Th eorie 
spätmoderner Zeitlichkeit (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2013); Sophia Grigull, 
Hartmut Rosa und im Vergleich Zygmunt Bauman: Zur Konzeptualisierung von Au-
tonomy spätmoderner Subjekte (Berlin: Lit Verlag, 2014).
98. Eric Lichtblausept, “Spy Agencies Urge Caution on Phone Deal,” New York 
Times, September 28, 2014.
99. Ibid.
100. Ibid.
101. Ibid.
102. Ibid.
103. Ibid.
104. Ibid.
105. Ibid.; see also Eric Lichtblausept, “Swedish- Owned Firm Defends Bid for 
Sensitive U.S. Phone Contract,” New York Times, September 30, 2014.
106. Lichtblausept, “Swedish- Owned Firm Defends Bid.”
107. David Pozen, “Th e Leaky Leviathan: Why the Government Condemns and 
Condones Unlawful Disclosures of Information,” Harvard Law Review 127, no. 2 
(2013): 512–635. On the larger question of leaks and state secrets, see Rahul Sagar, 
Secrets and Leaks: Th e Dilemma of State Secrecy (Prince ton: Prince ton University 
Press, 2013).
108. Greenwald, “Xkeyscore.” Greenwald defi nes metadata as “the ‘envelope’ of 
a phone call or internet communication. For a phone call this could include the 

300  Notes to Pages 75–81
duration of a phone call, the numbers it was between, and when it happened. For an 
email it would include the sender and recipient, time, but not the subject or con-
tent. In both cases it could include location information.”
109. Jonathan Stray, “FAQ: What You Need to Know about the NSA’s Surveil-
lance Programs,” ProPublica, August 5, 2013.
110. Greenwald, “XKeyscore.”
111. Ibid.; see also Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 99.
112. Bamford, “Th ey Know Much More than You Th ink,” 9.
113. Ibid.
114. Ibid., 7.
115. Lindsay Goldwert, “How Do You Fix an Undersea Cable? Electrical Repairs 
on the Ocean Floor,” Slate, February 5, 2008; Neil Jr., “Spy Agency Taps into Un-
dersea Cable,” ZDNet, May 23, 2001.
116. Neil Jr., “Spy Agency Taps into Undersea Cable.”
117. Bamford, “Th ey Know Much More than You Th ink,” 6.
118. David Cole, “Can the NSA Be Controlled?,” New York Review of Books, 
June 19, 2014, 17.
119. Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory, 13.
120. Ibid.
121. Ibid., 125.
122. Ibid., 127.
123. John Gilliom and Torin Monahan, SuperVision: An Introduction to the Sur-
veillance Society (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).
124. Max Weber, “Politics as a Vocation,” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology, 
ed. H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills (New York: Oxford University Press, 1946).
Chapter Th ree: jeremy bentham’s panopticon
1. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. 
Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 175–177.
2. Ibid., 176.
3. William H. Simon, “Rethinking Privacy,” Boston Review, September/October 
2014, 60.
4. See generally Fabienne Brion and Bernard E. Harcourt, “Th e Louvain Lec-
tures in Context,” in Michel Foucault, Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling: Th e Function of 
Avowal in Justice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), 274–283; Bernard E. 
Harcourt, “Situation du cours,” in Michel Foucault, La société punitive: Cours au 
Collège de France, 1972–1973 (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2013), 273–280.

Notes to Pages 81–84  301
5. See Michel Foucault, Th éories et institutions pénales: Cours au Collège de France, 
1971–1972, ed. Bernard E. Harcourt (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2015), and Fou-
cault, La société punitive.
6. Foucault, Th éories et institutions pénales (“Pas d’introduction. La raison d’être 
de ce cours? Il suffi  t d’ouvrir les yeux. Ceux qui y répugneraient se trouveront dans 
ce que j’ai dit”).
7. See Harcourt, “Situation du cours,” 281–290.
8. Th e year before, in his 1972 lecture series Penal Th eories and Institutions, Fou-
cault had directly examined the question of state repression, focusing his lectures 
on the militarized response to the nu- pieds movement in Normandy in 1639. See 
Michel Foucault, “Penal Th eories and Institutions,” in Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
(New York: New Press, 1998), 7–12. Th e turn, in 1973, was to look at repression in 
society more generally— thus, the turn to panoptic power throughout society.
9. As a physician, Julius “worked on the staff  of poor houses and in the military.” 
Norman Johnston, Forms of Constraint: A History of Prison Architecture (Urbana: 
University of Illinois Press, 2000), 180 n. 47. Julius was also a noted prison reformer. 
See Isidore Singer and Cyrus Adler, Th e Jewish Encyclopedia: A Descriptive Record of 
the History, Religion, Literature, and Customs of the Jewish People from the Earliest 
Times to the Present Day (New York: Funk and Wagnalls, 1916), 7:392.
10. Michel Foucault, “La vérité et les formes juridiques,” in Foucault, Dits et écrits 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 2:607 (“Quarto” edition [Paris: Gallimard, 2001], 1:1476).
11. N.  H. Julius, Vorlesungen über die Gefängniskunde- Kunde, 2 vols. (Berlin: 
Stuhr, 1828); N. H. Julius, Leçons sur les prisons, présentées en forme de cours au public 
de Berlin, en l’année 1827, trans. H. Lagarmitte (Paris: F. G. Levrault, 1831), 384–385; 
discussed in Foucault, La société punitive, 24–25. Julius lectured in Berlin in 1827 
“under the auspices of the newly formed Verein für die Besserung der Stafgefangen, a 
prisoners’ aid society.” Th ese lectures  were attended by Crown Prince Frederick 
William, who “became interested in prison reform” thereaft er. See Johnston, Forms 
of Constraint, 180 n. 47.
12. Julius, Leçons sur les prisons, 385; discussed in Foucault, La société punitive, 25.
13. Foucault, La société punitive, 25.
14. Ibid.
15. Michel Foucault, Surveiller et punir: La naissance de la prison (Paris: Galli-
mard, 1975), 218.
16. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Vintage, 1979), 216.
17. N. H. Julius, Nord- amerikas sittliche Zustände, nach eigenen Anschauungen in 
den Jahren 1834, 1835 und 1836 (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1839); N. H. Julius, Du 

302  Notes to Pages 84–85
système pénitentiaire américain en 1836, trans. Victor Foucher (Paris: Joubert, 1837), 6 
(underlined in the text).
18. Gustave de Beaumont et Alexis de Tocqueville, Du système pénitentiaire aux 
États- Unis et de son application en France, suivi d’un appendice sur les colonies pénales 
et de notes statistiques (Paris: H. Fournier Jeune, 1833); Alexis de Tocqueville, Sys-
tème pénitentiaire aux États- Unis et de son application en France, 3rd ed. (Paris: Librairie 
de Charles Gosselin, 1845). See also Albert Krebs, “Julius, Nikolaus Heinrich,” in 
Neue Deutsche Biographie (Berlin: Duncker and Humblot, 1974), 10:656–658.
19. His eff orts in this regard  were apparently “unmatched”: “he founded and ed-
ited two of the central German- language journals of Gefängniskunde, and wrote 
textbooks and travel reports which became standard works on the subject.” Th omas 
Nutz, “Global Networks and Local Prison Reforms: Monarchs, Bureaucrats and 
Penological Experts in Early Nineteenth- Century Prus sia,” German History 23, no. 
4 (2005): 446; see also Bert Vanhulle, “Dreaming about the Prison: Édouard Duc-
pétiaux and Prison Reform in Belgium (1830–1848),” Crime, History, and Societies 
14, no. 2 (2010): 111.
20. Nutz, “Global Networks and Local Prison Reforms,” 454. Aft er a self- fi nanced 
1825 trip to study British prison systems, Julius was hired by “the Prus sian King 
Frederick William III . . .  as an external inspector and adviser.” Ibid., 448. Julius 
was subsequently hired by Frederick William IV aft er another largely self- fi nanced 
1834 trip to the United States to study innovations in American penitentiaries, a 
trip that produced the report Nordamerikas sittliche Zustände. Ibid., 448, 440.
21. Ibid., 454. Interestingly, however, those plans  were never fully realized. Th is 
was due in part to the revolution of 1848 (aft er which Julius was stripped of his bu-
reaucratic functions). Mostly, however, it was because of an “explosive increase” in 
prison population “aft er the new Prus sian penal code, the Strafgesetzbuch für die 
Preußischen Staaten, came into force in 1851”— making implementation of solitary 
confi nement for all prisoners impracticable. Nutz, “Global Networks and Local 
Prison Reforms,” 455.
22. See Alessandro Stanziani, “Th e Traveling Panopticon: Labor Institutions 
and Labor Practices in Rus sia and Britain in the Eigh teenth and Nineteenth Centu-
ries,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 51, no. 4 (October 2009): 715–741.
23. See Jeremy Bentham, Th e Panopticon Writings, ed. Miran Božovič (London: 
Verso, 1995); Jeremy Bentham, “Panopticon, or the Inspection- House,” in Th e Works 
of Jeremy Bentham, ed. John Bowring (Edinburgh: William Tait, 1791), 4:37–173.
24. See Michel Foucault, “L’oeil du pouvoir,” interview by  J.- P. Barou and 
M. Perrot, in Le panoptique, ed. J.- P. Barou (Paris: Pierre Belfond, 1977), reproduced 
in Foucault, Dits et écrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 3:190–207 (“Quarto” ed., 2:190–
207); Michel Foucault, Le pouvoir psychiatrique: Cours au Collège de France, 1973–1974, 

Notes to Pages 85–90  303
ed. Jacques Lagrange (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2003), 352; Foucault, La Société 
punitive, 40 n. 3; Les machines à guérir: Aux origines de l’hôpital modern, ed. François 
Béguin, Blandine Barret- Kriegel, Bruno Fortier, Michel Foucault, and Anne 
Th alamy (Brussels: Pierre Mardaga, 1979).
25. See Béguin et al., Les machines à guérir, 48; on Bentham and the panopticon, 
see also Foucault, La société punitive, 78–79 n. 16.
26. Foucault, “L’oeil du pouvoir,” 191.
27. See Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 6–7, 170–173, 183–192, and Foucault, La 
société punitive, 207–208 and 225 n. 1.
28. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 187.
29. Foucault, La société punitive, 222–223.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid., 198.
32. See Foucault, Surveiller et punir, 222–223.
33. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 201.
34. See the “Notice” in the new La Pléiade complete works edition of Michel 
Foucault’s Surveiller et punir (Paris: Gallimard, 2015).
35. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 205.
36. Ibid., 200, 201, 204.
37. Ibid., 217.
38. Guy Debord, La société du spectacle (Paris: Buchet/Chastel, 1967).
39. Guy Debord, Th e Society of the Spectacle (New York: Zone Books, 1994), 
para. 3.
40. Ibid., para. 4.
41. Ibid., para. 215.
42. W. J. T. Mitchell, “Th e Spectacle Today: A Response to RETORT,” Public 
Culture 20, no. 3 (Fall 2008): 573–582, revised version to appear in Image Science 
(forthcoming); see also W. J. T. Mitchell, Picture Th eory: Essays on Verbal and Visual 
Repre sen ta tion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994 ), 326–328.
43. Mitchell, Picture Th eory, 327; see also Jonathan Crary, Techniques of the Ob-
server: On Vision and Modernity in the Nineteenth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1990), 18 (cited as well in Mitchell, Picture Th eory, 327 n. 7).
44. Walking into the well of the last panopticon at Stateville Prison is an eerie 
experience today because the space has been turned on itself. With dirty, opaque 
Plexiglas covering the cell bars, it is diffi  cult to see into the cells, but hard to ig-
nore the calls and clamors from the prisoners. It feels almost as if surveillance has 
turned back into spectacle—in the most unfortunate and harrowing of spaces.
45. François Ewald, “Omnes et singulatim: Aft er Risk,” in Carceral Notebooks 
7 (2011): 82.

304  Notes to Pages 90–95
46. Joseph Goldstein and  J. David Goodman, “Seeking Clues to Gangs and 
Crime, Detectives Monitor Internet Rap Videos,” New York Times, January 7, 2014.
47. See, e.g., G. W. Schulz, “Virginia Police Have Been Secretively Stockpiling 
Private Phone Rec ords,” Wired, October 20, 2014.
48. Nadia Prupis, “Big Brother 3.0: FBI Launches Facial Recognition Program,” 
Mint Press News, September  17, 2014, www . mintpressnews . com / big - brother - 3 - 0 
- fb i - launches - facial - recognition - program / 196657.
49. Georges Didi- Huberman, Peuples exposés, peuples fi gurants. L’oeil de 
l’histoire, vol. 4 (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, 2012), 11.
50. Ibid., 15 (“sur- exposés dans la lumière de leurs mise en spectacle”).
51. Siva Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should 
Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011), 112.
52. Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 112.
53. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, 187.
54. Ibid., 201.
55. Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 112.
56. G. W. F. Hegel, “Preface,” in Philosophy of Right (1820).
57. Foucault, La société punitive, 265.
58. Michel Foucault, Histoire de la sexualité. 1, La volonté de savoir (Paris: Galli-
mard, 1976).
59. Michel Foucault, Sécurité, territoire, population: Cours au Collège de France 
(1977–1978), ed. Michel Senellart (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2004), 46.
60. Ibid., 7.
61. Ibid., 11–12.
62. Ibid., 15–19.
63. Jean Baudrillard, “Th e Precession of Simulacra,” chap. 1 in Simulacra and 
Simulations, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
1994). Th is discussion of the prison resonates entirely with Foucault’s argument in 
Th e Punitive Society and Discipline and Punish: it is society as a  whole that is pan-
optic, and the prison is just the meta phor.
64. Umberto Eco, Travels in Hyperreality (London: Pan, 1986); Louis Marin, 
Utopics: Spatial Play, trans. Robert A. Vollrath (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humani-
ties, 1984), 239.
65. See, generally, Michael Sorkin, ed., Variations on a Th eme Park: Th e New 
American City and the End of Public Space (New York: Hill and Wang, 1992); also Ed-
ward W. Soja, “Inside Exopolis: Scenes from Orange County,” in Sorkin, ed., Varia-
tions on a Th eme Park, 94–122.
66. George Ritzer, Th e McDonaldization of Society: An Investigation into the 
Changing Character of Contemporary Social Life (Newbury Park, CA: Pine Forge 

Notes to Pages 95–97  305
Press, 1993); Alan Bryman, “Th eme Parks and McDonaldization,” in Barry Smart, 
ed., Resisting McDonaldization (London: Sage, 1999).
67. Steven Miles, Spaces for Consumption: Plea sure and Placelessness in the Post- 
Industrial City (Los Angeles: Sage, 2010), 142.
68. Ibid.
69. Ibid., 155. It is also a place of ritual and pilgrimage. See Alexander Moore, 
“Walt Disney World: Bounded Ritual Space and the Playful Pilgrimage Center,” 
Anthropological Quarterly 53, no. 4 (1980): 207–218.
70. Keally McBride, Collective Dreams: Po liti cal Imagination and Community 
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2005), 86ff .
71. Miles, Spaces for Consumption, 147.
72. Colin Campbell, Th e Romantic Ethic and the Spirit of Modern Consumerism 
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987), 78 (quoted in McBride, Collective Dreams, 114).
73. Gary S. Cross and John K. Walton, Th e Playful Crowd: Plea sure Places in the 
Twentieth Century (London: Sage, 2004), 167.
74. Ibid.
75. Miles, Spaces for Consumption, 154.
76. See McBride, Collective Dreams, 90; see also “Now Snowing—2013,” avail-
able at http:// celebrationtowncenter . com / events / now - snowing - 2013.
77. McBride, Collective Dreams, 89.
78. Ibid., 116.
79. Ibid., 90.
80. Ibid.
81. Ibid., 93.
82. Ibid.
83. I am borrowing the title  here, of course, of an excellent collection of essays 
on themed spaces in the United States edited by Michael Sorkin. See Sorkin, Varia-
tions on a Th eme Park.
84. Special thanks to both W. J. T. Mitchell and Keally McBride, who encour-
aged me to explore further the shopping mall as a schema of neoliberalism. Tom 
Mitchell has also drawn my attention to the new show windows in Potsdamer Platz 
in Berlin that have mannequins with televisual eyes that move and follow you as 
you pass . . .  an intriguing intersection of surveillance, spectacle, and exhibition in 
these themed spaces of consumption.
85. Angela Haggerty, “We Don’t Do Clickbait, Insists BuzzFeed,” Th e Drum, 
November 7, 2014, http:// www . thedrum . com / news / 2014 / 11 / 07 / we - don - t - do - click 
bait - insists - buzzfeed.
86. Earlier, I thought this was the right way to understand our digital condition 
in this neoliberal security age. See Bernard E. Harcourt, “Digital Security in the 

306  Notes to Pages 98–103
Expository Society: Spectacle, Surveillance, and Exhibition in the Neoliberal Age 
of Big Data,” paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Po liti cal Science 
Association, August 8, 2014, http:// ssrn . com / abstract = 2455223. I am no longer con-
vinced that this is right.
87. Quoted in Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 80.
88. Tim Shorrock quoted in ibid., 101.
89. I discuss this in Th e Illusion of Free Markets (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 2011); see also David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005); Wendy Brown, Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s 
Stealth Revolution (New York: Zone Books, 2015).
90. Phillip Mirowski, Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste (New York: Verso, 
2013), 112. Alexander de la Paz, a PhD student in the po liti cal science department at 
Columbia University, off ers a useful distinction, in his working paper “We ‘Ev-
eryday Neoliberals’?” (2014), between ge ne tic and analogical claims of neoliberal 
kinship. Copy in the author’s possession.
91. See generally Michel Foucault, Naissance de la biopolitique: Cours au Collège 
de France, 1978–1979, ed. Michel Senellart (Paris: Gallimard/Le Seuil, 2004), spe-
cifi cally lectures of March 14, 21, and 28, 1979; Andrew Dilts, “From ‘Entrepreneur 
of the Self’ to ‘Care of the Self’: Neoliberal Governmentality and Foucault’s Ethics,” 
Foucault Studies 12 (October 2011): 130–146.
92. Mirowski, Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste, 112–113.
93. One might productively study Facebook practices in relation to the practices 
of avowal of the self that Foucault explored in Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling.
94. James Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory: Th e Ultra- Secret NSA from 9/11 to the 
Eavesdropping on America (New York: Doubleday, 2008), 102; Daniel Solove, 
Nothing to Hide (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 183–185.
95. Yasha Levine, “Th e Psychological Dark Side of Gmail,” AlterNet, December 31, 
2013, www . alternet . org / media / google - using - gmail - build - psychological - profi les 
- hundreds - millions - people.
96. Ibid.
97. Ibid.
98. Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 16.
99. Farhad Manjoo, “Google Unveils Inbox, a New Take on Email. And Possibly 
a Replacement for Gmail,” New York Times, October 22, 2014.
100. Levine, “Th e Psychological Dark Side of Gmail.”
101. Th e reference, naturally, is to Foucault, History of Sexuality, 1:138; see also 
Michel Foucault, “Il faut défendre la société”: Cours au Collège de France, 1975–1976, 
ed. Mauro Bertani and Alessandro Fontana (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 1997).

Notes to Pages 107–112  307
Chapter Four: our mirrored glass pavilion
1. See “Th e Roof Garden Commission: Dan Graham with Günther Vogt,” video, 
Metropolitan Museum of Art, http:// youtu . be / faR1Expe - O4. All quotations are 
from this video.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid.
4. Karen Rosenberg, “Artists Hold up a Glass to a City’s Changing Face: ‘Hedge 
Two- Way Mirror Walkabout,’ at the Met Museum,” New York Times, April 29, 2014. 
Special thanks to Mia Ruyter for encouraging me to explore Dan Graham’s artwork.
5. Other examples of Graham’s work includes “Double Exposure” (1995), a mirror- 
glass structure- pavilion in Porto, Portugal, located in Serralves Park; his “Rooft op 
Urban Park Project,” built on the rooft op of the Dia Art Foundation in the Chelsea 
neighborhood of New York, where it stood from 1991 to 2004; and his “Two- Way 
Mirror Pergola Bridge” (1990) in Clisson, France.
6. Tony Bennett, “Th e Exhibitionary Complex,” New Formation 4 (Spring 1988). 
Special thanks to Irus Braverman.
7. Ibid., 87.
8. Ibid., 76.
9. Kim Kardashian published a book of selfi es, titled Selfi sh. See Olivia  B. 
Waxman, “Here’s the Cover of Kim Kardashian’s New Book of Selfi es, Selfi sh,” 
Time, January 20, 2015. For more on selfi es, see Alicia Eler, “Keeping up with the 
Selfi es / Hyperallergic,” April 28, 2014, http:// aliciaeler . com / 2014 / 04 / 28 / keeping 
- selfi es - hyperallergic.
10. See generally Emily Yoff e, “Seeking: How the Brain Hard- wires Us to Love 
Google, Twitter, and Texting. And Why Th at’s Dangerous,” Slate, August 12, 2009.
11. Spencer Ackerman and James Ball, “Optic Nerve: Millions of Yahoo Web cam 
Images Intercepted by GCHQ ,” Guardian, February 27, 2014; Associated Press, 
“British Spies Intercept Webcam Pictures, Report Says,” New York Times, Feb-
ruary 27, 2014.
12. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
13. Associated Press, “British Spies Intercept Webcam Pictures.”
14. Ibid.; see also Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
15. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
16. Ibid.; see also Associated Press, “British Spies Intercept Webcam Pictures.”
17. Associated Press, “British Spies Intercept Webcam Pictures.”
18. Julia Fioretti, “British Spy Agency Collected Images of Yahoo Webcam 
Chats: Guardian,” Reuters, February 27, 2014.

308  Notes to Pages 113–117
19. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
20. Ibid.
21. Ibid.
22. Nick Hopkins, “GCHQ’s Cover for Optic Nerve Provided by Legislation 
 Introduced in 2000,” Guardian, February 27, 2014.
23. Ibid.
24. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
25. Amy Davidson, “Are the NSA and GCHQ Trading Webcam Pictures?,” New 
Yorker, February 28, 2014.
26. Ibid.
27. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
28. Spencer Ackerman, “Senators to Investigate NSA role in GCHQ ‘Optic 
Nerve’ Webcam Spying,” Guardian, February 28, 2014.
29. Fioretti, “British Spy Agency Collected Images of Yahoo Webcam Chats.”
30. Hopkins, “GCHQ’s Cover for Optic Nerve.”
31. Ackerman and Ball, “Optic Nerve.”
32. You can see their selfi e  here: http:// instagram . com / p / m3z66SlwW4.
33. Quoted in David Cole, “Can the NSA Be Controlled?,” New York Review of 
Books, June 19, 2014, 16.
34. Michel Foucault, Surveiller et punir: La naissance de la prison (Paris: Gallimard, 
1975), 203 n. 2; see also Michel Foucault, “La vérité et les formes juridiques,” in Fou-
cault, Dits et écrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 2:607–609 (“Quarto” ed., 1:1475–1477).
35. Foucault, Surveiller et puni, 203 n. 2.
36. Ibid.
37. For a development of these themes, see Guillaume Tiff on, La mise au travail 
des clients (Paris: Economica, 2013), which explores this new form of surplus value 
that has come to dominate modern life. Elizabeth Emens has a marvelous book 
project on “admin” that explores this as well.
38. Karen Levy, “Data- Driven Dating: How Data Are Shaping Our Most Inti-
mate Personal Relationships,” Privacy Perspectives, December  17, 2013, www 
. privacyassociation . org / news / a / data - driven - dating - how - data - are - shaping - our 
- most - intimate - personal - relation.
39. Eben Moglen, quoted in Nancy Scola, “ ‘People Love Spying on One An-
other’: A Q&A with Facebook Critic Eben Moglen,” Th e Switch (blog), Washington 
Post, November 19, 2014.
40. In a promising editorial, Colin Koopman refers to the dawning of a new age 
of “infopolitics,” and he points usefully in the direction of other theorists who ex-
plore these new realms, such as Donna Haraway, who developed the notion of “the 

Notes to Pages 118–119  309
informatics of domination,” Grégoire Chamayou, who is working on “datapower,” 
and Davide Panagia. See Colin Koopman, “Th e Age of Infopolitics,” New York 
Times, January 26, 2014; Donna Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Tech-
nology, and Socialist- Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century,” in Simians, Cy-
borgs and Women: Th e Reinvention of Nature (New York; Routledge, 1991), 149–181.
41. For the conventional defi nition of literal transparence and the contrast with 
phenomenal transparence, see Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky, “Transparency: Lit-
eral and Phenomenal,” Perspecta 8 (1963): 45–54; and Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky, 
“Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal . . .  Part II,” Perspecta 13/14 (1971): 287–301. 
For a contextualization of these texts, see Detlef Mertins, “Transparency: Autonomy 
and Relationality,” AA Files 32 (Autumn 1996): 3–11; as Mertins suggests, for critiques 
of these texts, see Rosalind Krauss, “Death of a Hermeneutic Phantom,” Architec-
ture + Urbanism 112 (January 1980): 189–219; Robert Somol, “Oublier Rowe,” ANY 7/8 
(1994): 8–15. “Literal transparence” is defi ned by Rowe and Slutzky as “an inherent 
quality of substance, as in a glass curtain wall,” Rowe and Slutzky, “Transparency: 
Literal and Phenomenal,” 46; also as “the trompe l’oeil eff ect of a translucent object 
in a deep, naturalistic space,” ibid., 48. Special thanks to Jonah Rowen.
42. Rowe and Slutzky, “Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal,” 49.
43. Terence Riley, LightConstruction (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1995), 11.
44. Anthony Vidler, Th e Architectural Uncanny: Essays in the Modern Unhomely 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 217.
45. Ibid., 220 (omitting “(as Pei himself admitted)”).
46. See, generally, Rowe and Slutzky, “Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal,” 
48 (defi ning phenomenal space, based on certain cubist paintings, as “when a 
painter seeks the articulated pre sen ta tion of frontally displayed objects in a shallow, 
abstracted space”); Rowe and Slutzky, “Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal . . .  
Part II,” 288 (referring to phenomenal transparence as “the capacity of fi gures to 
interpenetrate without optical destruction of each other”).
47. Th at is, for those who do not simply debunk the idea of phenomenal trans-
parence as merely a hermeneutic phantom or as a ghost; see Krauss, “Death of a 
Hermeneutic Phantom.” See also Reinhold Martin, Utopia’s Ghost: Architecture 
and Postmodernism, Again (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010), 
55–57; Reinhold Martin, Th e Or gan i za tional Complex: Architecture, Media, and Cor-
porate Space (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003) (discussing the shallowness and 
thinness of the transparency meta phor).
48. Vidler, Th e Architectural Uncanny, 219.
49. Laura Kurgan, Close Up at a Distance: Mapping, Technology, and Politics 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013), 24.

310  Notes to Pages 119–125
50. See Marlborough Chelsea press release, “Broadway Morey Boogie,” Sep-
tember 23, 2014– February 2015, http:// www . broadwaymall . org / core / wp - content 
/ uploads / 2010 / 03 / Broadway - Morey - Boogie - Press - Release . pdf
51. Ibid.
52. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Vintage, 1979), 172.
53. Ibid., 207.
54. Ibid., 208 (emphasis added); see ibid., 249.
55. Ibid., 173.
56. Andy Müller- Maguhn, Laura Poitras, Marcel Rosenbach, Michael Son-
theimer, and Christian Grothoff , “Trea sure Map: Th e NSA Breach of Telekom and 
Other German Firms,” Der Spiegel, September 14, 2014.
57. Siva Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should 
Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011), 2.
58. Ibid., 7.
59. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. 
Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 97.
60. Ibid.
61. Ibid.
62. Ibid., 92.
63. James Bamford, Th e Shadow Factory: Th e Ultra- Secret NSA from 9/11 to the 
Eavesdropping on America (New York: Doubleday, 2008), 129.
64. Ibid., 149.
65. Ibid.
66. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 94.
67. Apple, “Introducing Apple Watch,” www . apple . com / watch / fi lms / #fi lm - design.
68. All of the quoted passages that follow are from this video advertisement by 
Apple.
69. Charles Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” New York Times, 
February 16, 2012.
70. Ibid.
71. Frank Pasquale, Th e Black Box Society: Th e Secret Algorithms behind Money 
and Information (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2015), 3–4, 156–160.
72. Ibid., 156.
73. Tim Wu, Th e Master Switch: Th e Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New 
York: Vintage, 2010).
74. See Andrew Norman Wilson, “Workers Leaving the Googleplex 2009–2011,” 
video, http:// www . andrewnormanwilson . com / WorkersGoogleplex . html; see 

Notes to Pages 126–129  311
also Kenneth Goldsmith, “Th e Artful Accidents of Google Books,” New Yorker, De-
cember 4, 2013. Th anks to Lucas Pinheiro for alerting me to this.
75. See Eve Kosofsky Sedwick, Epistemology of the Closet (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1990); Linda M. G. Zerilli, “ ‘Philosophy’s Gaudy Dress’: Rhet-
oric and Fantasy in the Lockean Social Contract,” Eu ro pean Journal of Po liti cal 
Th eory 4 (2005): 146–163.
76. Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 112.
77. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 148.
78. Ibid., 149.
79. See generally Joseph Masco, Th e Th eater of Operations: National Security Af-
fect from the Cold War to the War on Terror (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2014) (exploring what might be called “governing through terrorism” and tracing 
its genealogy back to the Cold War).
80. Apple, “Th e Health and Fitness Film,” available at http:// www . apple . com 
/ watch / fi lms / #fi lm - fi tness.
81. Ibid.
82. Ibid.
83. Shanyang Zhao, “Th e Digital Self: Th rough the Looking Glass of Telecopre-
sent Others,” Symbolic Interaction 28, no. 3 (2005): 397.
84. Th ese notions are developed further in Shanyang Zhao, Sherri Grasmuck, 
and Jason Martin, “Identity Construction on Facebook: Digital Empowerment 
in Anchored Relationships,” Computers in Human Behavior 24, no. 5 (September 
2008): 1816–1836.
85. John B. Th ompson, Th e Media and Modernity: A Social Th eory of the Media 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995), 210 (quoted in Zhao, “Th e Digital 
Self,” 397).
86. As a legal matter, the concept of the “mosaic” is particularly important and 
used to capture the danger, with our digital technology, of piecing together a com-
posite knowledge of the individual with tiny pieces that would otherwise be irrele-
vant and useless— the danger, that is, to the right to privacy. Judge Richard Leon 
relies on the mosaic theory in Klayman v. Obama, 957 F. Supp. 2d 1 (D.D.C. 2013). 
David Pozen has an excellent discussion of the mosaic theory in his article “Th e 
Mosaic Th eory, National Security, and the Freedom of Information Act, Yale Law 
Journal 115, no. 3 (December 2005): 628–679.
87. See, e.g., Mike Isaacs, “Nude Photos of Jennifer Lawrence Are Latest Front in 
Online Privacy Debate,” New York Times, September 2, 2014; TMZ, “ ‘Kramer’s’ Racist 
Tirade— Caught on Tape,” www . tmz . com / 2006 / 11 / 20 / kramers - racist - tirade - caught 
- on - tape.

312  Notes to Pages 130–132
88. See Foucault’s opening discussion of nineteenth- century psychiatric prac-
tices (in par tic u lar the infl iction of cold showers by Dr. Leuret on Patient A to make 
his patient avow that he was but is no longer mad) in the inaugural lecture of his 
1981 Louvain lecture series, Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling: Th e Function of Avowal in 
Justice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), 11–12.
89. Jay Caspian Kang, “Moving Pictures: What’s Really Radical about the Eric 
Garner Protests,” New York Times, December 12, 2014.
90. Ibid.
91. See, e.g., Zhao, Grasmuck, and Martin, “Identity Construction on Facebook.”
92. Ibid., 1829.
93. Ibid., 1830.
94. Hannah Seligson, “Facebook’s Last Taboo: Th e Unhappy Marriage,” New 
York Times, December 26, 2014.
95. Th e term is defi ned in diff erent ways. TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big 
Data Commission defi nes it as “a term that describes large volumes of high velocity, 
complex and variable data that require advanced techniques and technologies to 
enable the capture, storage, distribution, management, and analysis of the informa-
tion.” TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, “Demystifying Big 
Data” (2013), 10, http:// www . techamerica . org / Docs / fi leManager . cfm ? f = techamerica 
- bigdatareport - fi nal . pdf. McKinsey and Company defi nes big data as “datasets whose 
size is beyond the ability of typical database soft ware tools to capture, store, manage, 
and analyze.” See James Manyika, Michael Chui, Brad Brown, Jacques Bughin, 
Richard Dobbs, Charles Roxburgh, and Angela Hung Byers, “Big Data: Th e Next 
Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity,” McKinsey and Company, 
June 2011, 10, http:// www . mckinsey . com / insights / business _ technology / big _ data 
_ the _ next _ frontier _ for _ innovation. Another commentator defi nes it, broadly, as 
“an umbrella term. It encompasses everything from digital data to health data (in-
cluding your DNA and genome) to the data collected from years and years of pa-
perwork issued and fi led by the government”; Higinio Maycotte, “Th e Evolution of 
Big Data, and Where We’re Headed,” Wired, March 26, 2014.
96. TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, “Demystifying 
Big Data,” 9, 11; see also SAS, “Big Data: What It Is and Why It Matters,” http:// www 
. sas . com / en _ us / insights / big - data / what - is - big - data . html.
97. TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, “Demystifying 
Big Data,” 9, 11.
98. “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities,” EMC Infobrief with research and 
analysis by IDC, April 2014, http:// www . emc . com / collateral / analyst - reports / idc 
- digital - universe - 2014 . pdf; also see Vernon Turner, John F. Gantz, David Reinsel, 
and Stephen Minton, “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities: Rich Data and the 

Notes to Pages 132–139  313
Increasing Value of the Internet of Th ings,” IDC white paper, April 2014, http:// 
idcdocserv . com / 1678.
99. “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities,” slide 2.
100. Andrew McAfee and Erik Brynjolfsson, “Big Data: Th e Management Revo-
lution,” Harvard Business Review 62 (October 2012).
101. Martin Hilbert and Priscila López, “Th e World’s Technological Capacity to 
Store, Communicate, and Compute Information,” Science 332, no. 6025 (April 1, 
2011): 60–65.
102. Ibid., 60.
103. Ibid., 63.
104. Manyika et al., “Big Data,” 16–17.
105. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 159.
106. “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities,” slide 5.
107. “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities,” slide 8.
108. Manyika et al., “Big Data,” preface.
109. McAfee and Brynjolfsson, “Big Data.”
110. Daniel Soar, “It Knows,” London Review of Books, October 6, 2011, 3–6.
111. McAfee and Brynjolfsson, “Big Data.”
112. See Pew Research Center, “Th e Web at 25,” http:// www . pewinternet . org 
/ packages / the - web - at - 25.
113. Mark Zuckerberg post on Facebook, November 27, 2014, 5:28 p.m., https://
www.facebook . com/zuck/posts/10101761674047881.
114. “Th e Digital Universe of Opportunities,” slide 4.
115. Manyika et al., “Big Data,” 19, exhibit 7.
116. TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, “Demystifying 
Big Data,” 9.
117. Ibid.
118. See Manyika et al., “Big Data,” 19, exhibit 7.
119. Maycotte, “Th e Evolution of Big Data.”
120. Ibid.
121. Ibid.
122. Ibid.
123. Ibid.
124. Ibid.
125. “Big Data FAQs— A Primer,” Arcplan Business Intelligence Blog, March 23, 
2012, www . arcplan . com / en / blog / 2012 / 03 / big - data - faqs - a - primer.
126. Ibid.
127. Ibid.
128. Ibid.

314  Notes to Pages 139–142
129. World Economic Forum, “Big Data, Big Impact: New Possibilities for Inter-
national Development,” 2012, 2, http:// www3 . weforum . org / docs / WEF _ TC _ MFS 
_ BigDataBigImpact _ Briefi ng _ 2012 . pdf.
130. Ibid.
131. Ibid., infographic on 5.
132. “All Too Much,” Economist, February 25, 2010.
133. TechAmerica Foundation’s Federal Big Data Commission, “Demystifying 
Big Data,” 11.
134. Th omas H. Davenport, Paul Barth, and Randy Bean, “How ‘Big Data’ Is Dif-
ferent,” MITSloan Management Review 54, no. 1 (Fall 2012): 22.
135. I discovered this passage in Vidler, Th e Architectural Uncanny, 218, along 
with a marvelous passage from André Breton, who writes, “As for me, I continue to 
inhabit my glass  house.” Th e Benjamin passage comes from “Surrealism,” in Refl ec-
tions: Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings, ed. Peter Demetz (New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978), 180.
Chapter Five: a genealogy of the new doppelgänger logic
1. See Jean de Coras, Arrest mémorable du Parlement de Toloze, contenant une his-
toire prodigieuse de nostre temps, avec cent belles et doctes annotations, de monsieur 
maistre Jean de Coras (Lyon: A. Vincent, 1561); Jean de Coras, Arrest Memorable, 
trans. Jeannette K. Ringold and Janet Lewis, in Triquarterly 55 (Fall 1982): 86–103; 
Natalie Zemon Davis, Th e Return of Martin Guerre (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1985).
2. Davis, Th e Return of Martin Guerre, 34–35.
3. Ibid., 24. According to Davis, Martin Guerre left  for Spain and eventually be-
came a lackey in the  house hold of a cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church, Fran-
cisco de Mendoza y Bobadilla, in Burgos, Spain. Davis believes that Martin then 
served the cardinal’s brother, Pedro, and as part of his entourage, went into the 
Spanish army, losing his leg in battle against the French at Saint- Quentin on Saint 
Lawrence Day, August 10, 1557. Ibid., 26.
4. Coras, Arrest mémorable du Parlement de Toloze, 2.
5. Ibid.
6. Th e historian Robert Finlay took Davis to task— harshly, one might add— for 
her interpretation of the historical record, charging Davis with reinventing Ber-
trande: “No longer a dupe and victim, she has become a heroine, a sort of proto- 
feminist of peasant culture. Th is Bertrande de Rols,” Finlay argues, “seems to be far 
more a product of invention than of historical reconstruction.” Robert Finlay, “Th e 
Refashioning of Martin Guerre,” American Historical Review 93, no. 3 (June 1988): 

Notes to Pages 142–148  315
553–571. Davis responded in a forceful and persuasive essay, “On the Lame,” Amer-
ican Historical Review 93, no. 3 (June 1988): 572–603 (June 1988), drawing on Michel 
de Montaigne’s essay about the Guerre case, “Du démentir.” Michel de Montaigne, 
“Du démentir,” in Oeuvres completes, ed. A. Th ibaudet and M. Rat (Paris: Gallimard, 
1962), 649; Michel de Montaigne, Th e Complete Works of Montaigne, trans. Donald 
Frame (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1948), 505.
7. Coras, Arrest mémorable du Parlement de Toloze, 7.
8. Ibid., 3.
9. Ibid., 4.
10. Davis, Th e Return of Martin Guerre, 43.
11. Coras, Arrest mémorable du Parlement de Toloze, 6.
12. Ibid., 5.
13. Davis, Th e Return of Martin Guerre, 67; see also 55, 56, and 70.
14. Ibid., 70.
15. Coras, Arrest mémorable du Parlement de Toloze, 8.
16. See FBI, “Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identifi cation System,” www 
. fb i . gov / about - us / cjis / fi ngerprints _ biometrics / iafi s / iafi s.
17. It is, for instance, extremely costly and laborious for the FBI to give its in for-
mants new identities. See Pete Earley, Witsec: Inside the Federal Witness Protection 
Program (New York: Bantam, 2003).
18. Bernard  E. Harcourt, Against Prediction (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2007).
19. Ian Hacking, Th e Taming of Chance (New York: Cambridge University Press, 
1990), 1–8.
20. Nikolas Rose, “At Risk of Madness,” in Tom Baker and Jonathan Simon, eds., 
Embracing Risk: Th e Changing Culture of Insurance and Responsibility (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2002), 214.
21. Ibid., 214.
22. Naturally, the probabilistic turn was not uniformly deployed toward that 
aim. Th e cultural context matters, and as historian of science Deborah Coen dem-
onstrates in her research on nineteenth- century imperial Austria, the probabilistic 
turn there promoted liberalism and tolerance, as opposed to the control of the 
Catholic Church. See Deborah Rachel Coen, A Scientifi c Dynasty: Probability, Lib-
eralism, and the Exner Family in Imperial Austria (Ann Arbor, MI: UMI Disserta-
tion Ser vices, 2004).
23. Hacking, Th e Taming of Chance, 1.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid.; see also Michel Foucault, Abnormal: Lectures at the Collège de France, 
1974–1975, ed. Valerio Marchetti and Antonella Salomoni, trans. Graham Burchell 

316  Notes to Pages 148–153
(London: Verso, 2004); Foucault, “Sixth Lecture: May 20, 1981,” in Michel Foucault, 
Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling: Th e Function of Avowal in Justice (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2014); Michel Foucault, “About the Concept of the ‘Dangerous 
Individual’ in 19th- Century Legal Psychiatry,” International Journal of Law and Psy-
chiatry 1 (1978): 1–18.
26. Hacking, Th e Taming of Chance, 105.
27. Ibid.
28. George B. Vold, Prediction Methods and Parole: A Study of the Factors Involved 
in the Violation or Non- violation of Parole in a Group of Minnesota Adult Males (Ha-
nover, NH: So cio log i cal Press, 1931), 103.
29. Andrew A. Bruce, Ernest W. Burgess, and Albert M. Harno, “A Study of the 
Indeterminate Sentence and Parole in the State of Illinois,” Journal of the American 
Institute of Criminal Law and Criminology 19, no. 1, pt. 2 (May 1928): 284.
30. Ibid., 271.
31. See Ferris F. Laune, Predicting Criminality: Forecasting Behavior on Parole, 
Northwestern University Studies in the Social Sciences, no. 1 (Evanston, IL: North-
western University Press, 1936), cover page.
32. Hacking, Th e Taming of Chance, 2.
33. Ernest Burgess, “Is Prediction Feasible in Social Work? An Inquiry Based 
upon a So cio log i cal Study of Parole Rec ords,” Social Forces 7 (1928): 533–545.
34. Laune, Predicting Criminality, 2.
35. See Harcourt, Against Prediction, 181–182.
36. Vold, Prediction Methods and Parole, 70.
37. Daniel Glaser, “A Reformulation and Testing of Parole Prediction Factors” 
(PhD diss., Department of Sociology, University of Chicago, 1954), 268.
38. François Ewald, L’État providence (Paris: Bernard Grasset, 1986). Th ere  were 
also infl ections of this in Foucault’s “Sixth Lecture: May 20, 1981,” in Wrong- Doing, 
Truth- Telling, and in Foucault, “About the Concept of the ‘Dangerous Individual.’ ”
39. See also Robert Castel, La gestion des risques—de l’anti- psychiatrie à l’après- 
psychanalyse (Paris: Éditions de Minuit, 1981); Michel Foucault, Th e Birth of Bio-
politics: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1978–79, trans. Graham Burchell (New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).
40. Glaser, “A Reformulation and Testing of Parole Prediction Factors,” 285.
41. See Handbook for New Parole Board Members, “Chapter 4: Parole Decision-
making,” 35, www . apaintl . org / documents / CEPPParoleHandbook . pdf.
42. Walter Webster Argow, “A Criminal Liability- Index for Predicting Possi-
bility of Rehabilitation,” Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 26 (1935): 562. 
See also how Courtlandt Churchill Van Vetchen would open his study in 1935 with 
a bow to the insurance industry: “Th ere is nothing new about the idea of evaluating 

Notes to Pages 153–158  317
the probability of a future happening on the basis of past experience. Insurance, 
which depends upon actuarial ratings worked out with more or less precision, 
dates back at least to Roman times.” Courtlandt Churchill Van Vechten Jr., “A 
Study of Success and Failure of One Th ousand Delinquents Committed to a Boy’s 
Republic” (PhD diss., Department of Sociology, University of Chicago; private ed., 
distributed by the University of Chicago Libraries, 1935), 19.
43. Th is is, with apologies, a play on words of Philip Mirowski’s Machine 
Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001).
44. See generally Bernard E. Harcourt, “Th e Systems Fallacy,” work in progress 
presented at Columbia Law School, December 6, 2013.
45. For a history of operations research, see Maurice W. Kirby, Operational Re-
search in War and Peace: Th e British Experience from the 1930s to 1970 (London: Im-
perial College Press, 2003); S. M. Amadae, Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy: Th e 
Cold War Origins of Rational Choice Liberalism (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2003).
46. Jennifer S. Light, From Warfare to Welfare: Defense Intellectuals and Urban 
Problems in Cold War America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003), 
67. For an excellent history of the emergence of these techniques and rationalities, 
see Amadae, Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy.
47. James R. Schlesinger, “Quantitative Analysis and National Security,” World 
Politics 15, no. 2 (1963): 314.
48. By contrast to the endlessly divisible “dividual” that, in Deleuze’s “Postscript 
on the Societies of Control,” October 59 (Winter 1992): 3–7, becomes endlessly re-
ducible to data repre sen ta tions by means of digital technologies of control. See 
also Robert W. Williams, “Politics and Self in the Age of Digital Re(pro)ducibility,” 
Fast Capitalism 1, no. 1 (2005).
49. Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson, “Th e Surveillant Assemblage,” 
British Journal of Sociology 51, no. 4 (2000): 611.
50. Tom Vanderbilt, “Th e Science behind the Netfl ix Algorithms Th at Decide 
What You’ll Watch Next,” Wired, August 7, 2013.
51. Ibid.
52. Ibid.
53. “Recommender Systems: A Computer Science Comprehensive Exercise at 
Carleton College, Northfi eld, MN,” http:// www . cs . carleton . edu / cs _ comps / 0607 
/ recommend / recommender / memorybased . html, referring to  J.  S. Breese,  D. 
Heckerman, and C. Kadie, “Empirical Analysis of Predictive Algorithms for Col-
laborative Filtering,” in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Conference on Uncertainty in 
Artifi cial Intelligence (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998).

318  Notes to Pages 158–165
54. Xavier Amatriain and Justin Basilico, “Netfl ix Recommendations: Beyond 
the 5 Stars (Part 1),” Netfl ix Tech Blog, April 6, 2012, http:// techblog . netfl ix . com 
/ 2012 / 04 / netfl ix - recommendations - beyond - 5 - stars . html.
55. Derrick Harris, “Twitter Open Sourced a Recommendation Algorithm for 
Massive Datasets,” Gigaom, September 24, 2014, https:// gigaom . com / 2014 / 09 / 24 
/ twitter - open - sourced - a - recommendation - algorithm - for - massive - datasets.
56. Vanderbilt, “Th e Science behind the Netfl ix Algorithms.”
57. Ibid.
58. Ibid.
59. Ibid.
60. Tarleton Gillespie, “Th e Relevance of Algorithms,” in Tarleton Gillespie, 
Pablo Boczkowski, and Kirsten Foot, eds., Media Technologies (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, forthcoming). Special thanks to Irus Braverman.
61. Julia Angwin, “Why Online Tracking Is Getting Creepier: Th e Merger of 
Online and Offl  ine Data Is Bringing More Intrusive Tracking,” ProPublica, June 12, 
2014, www . propublica . org / article / why - online - tracking - is - getting - creepier.
62. Ibid.
63. Ibid.
64. Kevin Weil, “Experimenting with New Ways to Tailor Ads,” Th e Offi  cial 
Twitter Blog, July 3, 2013, https:// blog . twitter . com / 2013 / experimenting - with - new 
- ways - to - tailor - ads.
65. Facebook, “What Is Hashing? How Is Hashing Diff erent than Encryption?,” 
https://www.facebook . com/help/112061095610075.
66. Ibid.
67. See Facebook, “What Are Lookalike Audiences?,” www.facebook . com/
help/164749007013531.
68. Facebook, “How Do I Create a Custom Audience?,” https://www.facebook 
. com/help/170456843145568.
69. Facebook, “What Are Lookalike Audiences?”
70. Facebook, “What Does It Mean to Optimize for ‘Similarity’ or ‘Reach’ 
When Creating a Lookalike Audience?,” https://www.facebook . com/help/1377 
07129734780.
71. Clark Tibbitts, “Success and Failure on Parole Can Be Predicted,” Journal of 
Criminal Law and Criminology 22, no. 1 (1931): 40.
72. Kenneth Neil Cukier and Viktor Mayer- Schoenberger, Big Data: A Revolu-
tion Th at Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Th ink (New York: Houghton Mif-
fl in Harcourt, 2013), 68.
73. William Petty, Po liti cal Arithmetick (London: Clavel, 1691), xxiv.
74. Ibid., 31–32.

Notes to Pages 165–167  319
75. Richard Cantillon, Essai sur la nature du commerce en général (Paris: Institut 
national d’études démographiques, 1997), 186.
76. Ibid., 40.
77. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Capital, Volume 1 (Moscow: Progress, 1965), 
54 n. 18, 57 n. 33, 179.
78. Alessandro Roncaglia, Petty: Th e Origins of Po liti cal Economy (Armonk, 
NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1985), 22.
Chapter Six: the eclipse of humanism
1. Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson, “Th e Surveillant Assemblage,” 
British Journal of Sociology 51, no. 4 (2000): 616.
2. Bobbie Johnson, “Privacy No Longer a Social Norm, Says Facebook Founder,” 
Guardian, January 10, 2010.
3. Centre for International Governance Innovation and IPSOS, “CIGI- IPSOS 
Global Survey on Internet Security and Trust,” November  24, 2014, 3, www 
. cigionline . org / internet - survey.
4. Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, “Majority Views NSA 
Phone Tracking as Acceptable Anti- terror Tactic. Public Says Investigate Ter-
rorism, Even if It Intrudes on Privacy,” June 10, 2013, www . people - press . org / 2013 
/ 06 / 10 / majority - views - nsa - phone - tracking - as - acceptable - anti - terror - tactic.
5. See D. A. Miller, Th e Novel and the Police (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1988), 162. Special thanks to Christopher Stolj for his discussion of Miller’s 
classic study in our seminar with W. J. T. Mitchell, “Spectacle and Surveillance,” 
Columbia University and University of Chicago, Monday, January 26, 2015. I will 
use these terms— privacy, autonomy, and anonymity— interchangeably and as 
shorthand to refer to the bundle of valuables that includes not only privacy and au-
tonomy but also at times a certain anonymity (the ability to not be identifi ed), some 
secrecy, and the right to be left  alone and to not have to explain why. I subscribe 
 here to a copious notion of privacy that has several dimensions. As Eben Moglen 
suggests— and I agree— our usual notion of “privacy” contains a number of as-
pects: “First is secrecy, or our ability to keep the content of our messages known 
only to those we intend to receive them. Second is anonymity, or secrecy about who 
is sending and receiving messages, where the content of the messages may not be 
secret at all. It is very important that anonymity is an interest we can have both 
in our publishing and in our reading. Th ird is autonomy, or our ability to make our 
own life decisions free from any force that has violated our secrecy or our ano-
nymity. Th ese three— secrecy, anonymity and autonomy— are the principal com-
ponents of a mixture we call privacy.’ ” Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack: Th e 

320  Notes to Pages 167–171
NSA Files Revealed New Th reats to Democracy,” Guardian, Tuesday May 27, 2014. 
In this respect, I also appreciate and agree with Daniel Solove’s multidimensional 
view of privacy, along the lines of Wittgenstein’s “family resemblances,” as well as 
Jed Rubenfeld’s intervention to make us see the special importance of anonymity 
in the digital age. See generally Daniel Solove, Nothing to Hide (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 2011), 24–25; Jed Rubenfeld, “We Need a New Jurisprudence 
of Anonymity,” Washington Post, January 12, 2014.
6. Living a full and rewarding life resembled, far more than today, reading a 
novel— which, in the words of D. A. Miller, “takes for granted the existence of a 
space in which the reading subject remains safe from the surveillance, suspicion, 
reading and rape of others.” Miller, Th e Novel and the Police, 162.
7. See generally Bernard E. Harcourt, Th e Illusion of Free Markets (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
8. Siva Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything (and Why We Should 
Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011), xii.
9. Eric Schmidt, quoted in Vaidhyanathan, Th e Googlization of Everything, 45.
10. Jean- Paul Sartre, Existentialism Is a Humanism, trans. Carol Macomber 
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007).
11. Mark Poster, Existential Marxism in Postwar France (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton 
University Press, 1975), 90.
12. Chris Th ornhill, “Humanism and Wars: Karl Jaspers between Politics, Cul-
ture and Law,” in Helmut Wautischer, Alan M. Olson, and Gregory J. Walters, eds., 
Philosophical Faith and the Future of Humanity (New York: Springer, 2012), 299–319.
13. Chris Butler, Henri Lefebvre: Spatial Politics, Everyday Life and the Right to the 
City (New York: Routledge, 2012), 14, 21.
14. François Mauriac’s intimate journals are a testament to these humanist 
 interventions. See François Mauriac, Oeuvres autobiographiques complètes, ed. 
François Durand (Paris: Gallimard / Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1990).
15. In fact, humanism was so hegemonic at the time that many found it 
 suff ocating. See Foucault, “Interview with André Berten,” in Michel Foucault, 
Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling: Th e Function of Avowal in Justice (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2014), 264–265. See also “Francois Mauriac (1885–1970),” in Lawrence 
D. Kritzman, ed., Th e Columbia History of Twentieth- Century French Th ought (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2006), 607–608.
16. Carl J. Richard, Th e Battle for the American Mind: A Brief History of a Nation’s 
Th ought (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 2006), 311–312.
17. Andrew R. Heinze, Jews and the American Soul: Human Nature in the Twen-
tieth Century (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University Press, 2004), 273–274.

Notes to Pages 171–175  321
18. Hannah Arendt, Th e Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1998 [1958]); see generally Seyla Benhabib, Th e Reluctant Modernism of 
Hannah Arendt (New York: Rowman and Littlefi eld, 2003); Lewis P. Hinchman 
and Sandra K. Hinchman, “In Heidegger’s Shadow: Hannah Arendt’s Phenomeno-
logical Humanism, Review of Politics 46, no. 2 (April 1984): 205–206.
19. Deborah Nelson, Pursuing Privacy in Cold War America (New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 2002), 9.
20. Ibid.
21. Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 405 U.S. 156 (1972).
22. Ibid., 156.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid., 163.
25. Ibid., 164.
26. Ibid., 164 n. 7 (quoting Henry David Th oreau, Excursions [1893], 251–252).
27. Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 484 (1965).
28. Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967).
29. Chimel v. California, 395 U.S. 752 (1969). Deborah Nelson documents and 
traces the expansion in the scope of privacy— from Samuel Warren and Louis 
Brandeis’s famous 1890 law review article (“Th e Right to Privacy,” Harvard Law Re-
view 4, no. 5 [December 15, 1890]: 193) through the impact of feminism in the 1970s. 
She demonstrates well how the “universalist” conception of the privacy- bearing 
subject— originally formulated by Warren and Brandeis, developed in Justice Doug-
las’s 1957 Th e Right to Privacy, and culminating in the “zone of privacy” invoked in 
the Griswold decision— was gradually particularized but extended to other groups. 
It eventually “expanded beyond the home” and the “domestic autonomy” of the 
heterosexual marital bond. See Nelson, Pursuing Privacy in Cold War America, 21.
30. United States v. United States District Court, 407 U.S. 297 (1972) (“Th e danger 
to po liti cal dissent is acute where the Government attempts to act under so vague a 
concept as the power to protect ‘domestic security.’ Given the diffi  culty of defi ning 
the domestic security interest, the danger of abuse in acting to protect that interest 
becomes apparent”).
31. Th is is refl ected, for instance, in the Second Circuit’s opinion on the legality 
of the NSA’s bulk telephony metadata program under section 215 of the USA 
 PATRIOT Act in ACLU v. Clapper, issued when this book was in page proofs. In its 
opinion dated May 7, 2015, the Second Circuit ruled that the NSA program was il-
legal, but declined to issue a preliminary injunction, and concluded its opinion on 
precisely this theme of the balancing of interests: “Th is case serves as an example of 
the increasing complexity of balancing the paramount interest in protecting the 

322  Notes to Pages 175–180
security of our nation— a job in which, as the President has stated, “actions are 
second- guessed, success is unreported, and failure can be catastrophic,” Remarks 
by the President on Review of Signals Intelligence— with the privacy interests of its 
citizens in a world where surveillance capabilities are vast and where it is diffi  cult if 
not impossible to avoid exposing a wealth of information about oneself to those 
surveillance mechanisms. Reconciling the clash of these values requires produc-
tive contribution from all three branches of government, each of which is uniquely 
suited to the task in its own way.” ACLU v. Clapper, Slip Opinion in 14-42 (2d Cir-
cuit, May 7, 2015), 96–97.
32. United States v. Adel Daoud, 755 F.3d. 479, 483 (7th Cir., June 16, 2014).
33. Wendy Brown does a brilliant job of tracing this history and its consequences 
in her book Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution (Cambridge, 
MA: Zone Books, 2015).
34. Naomi Klein, Th e Shock Doctrine: Th e Rise of Disaster Capitalism (New York: 
Metropolitan Books, 2007); David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2005); Noam Chomsky, Profi t over People: Neoliber-
alism and Global Order (New York: Seven Stories Press, 1999).
35. See Klein, Th e Shock Doctrine; see also “Cheney/Halliburton Chronology,” 
Halliburton Watch, www . halliburtonwatch . org / about _ hal / chronology . html.
36. Oft en, the neoconservative rhetoric is in fact not faithful to the original writ-
ings of Hayek and others. See Bernard  E. Harcourt, “How Paul Ryan Enslaves 
Friedrich Hayek’s Th e Road to Serfdom,” Guardian, September 12, 2012, http:// www 
. theguardian . com / commentisfree / 2012 / sep / 12 / paul - ryan - enslaves - friedrich 
- hayek - road - serfdom. And see, generally, Harcourt, “Th e Chicago School,” chap. 6 
in Th e Illusion of Free Markets, 121–150.
37. See also United States v. Jacobsen, 466 U.S. 109 (1984); United States v. Miller, 
425 U.S. 435, 443 (1976).
38. Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27, 38 (2001) (“Th e Agema Th ermovision 210 
might disclose, for example, at what hour each night the lady of the  house takes her 
daily sauna and bath— a detail that many would consider ‘intimate’ ”).
39. California v. Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35 (1988); Mary land v. King, 569 U.S. ___ 
(2013).
40. Th ose traditional conceptions of privacy— privacy as self- defi nition, privacy 
as individual dignity, and privacy as freedom— are all deeply humanist. For a dis-
cussion of those conceptions, see generally Robert Post, “Th ree Concepts of Pri-
vacy,” Georgetown Law Journal 89 (2001): 2087–2098; Daniel J. Solove, “A Taxonomy 
of Privacy,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 154, no. 3 (2006): 477–566.
41. See generally Nelson, Pursuing Privacy in Cold War America; Arthur Miller, 
Th e Assault on Privacy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1971); Jon 

Notes to Pages 181–189  323
L. Mills, Privacy: Th e Lost Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008); John C. 
Lautsch, “Computers, Communications and the Wealth of Nations: Some Th eoret-
ical and Policy Considerations about an Informational Economy,” Computer/Law 
Journal 4, no. 1 (1983): 101–132; Daniel Solove, “A Brief History of Information Pri-
vacy Law,” George Washington University Law School Public Law Research Paper 
No. 215, 2006, http:// scholarship . law . gwu . edu / faculty _ publications / 923; Secre-
tary’s Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems, Rec ords, Com-
puters and the Rights of Citizens (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health, 
Education and Welfare, 1973).
42. Tim Hwang and Karen Levy, “ ‘Th e Cloud’ and Other Dangerous Meta-
phors,” Atlantic, January 20, 2015.
43. Alan Rusbridger and Ewen MacAskill, “I, Spy: Edward Snowden in Exile,” 
Guardian, July  19, 2014; see also Dustin Volz, “Snowden: NSA Employees Are 
Passing around Nude Photos,” National Journal, July 17, 2014.
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.
46. Alina Selyukh, “NSA Staff  Used Spy Tools on Spouses, Ex- Lovers: Watchdog,” 
Reuters, September 27, 2013.
47. Solove, Nothing to Hide.
Chapter Seven: the collapse of state, economy, and society
1. For treatments of these earlier dilemmas, see, e.g., Edward A. Shils, Th e Tor-
ment of Secrecy: Th e Background and Consequences of American Security Policies 
(Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1956); Morton Grodzins, Th e Loyal and the Disloyal (Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1956).
2. Max Weber, Economy and Society, 2 vols. (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1978).
3. Evgeny Morozov, “Who’s the True Enemy of Internet Freedom— China, 
Rus sia, or the US?,” Guardian, January 3, 2015.
4. Matt Williams, “Apple Blocks ‘Objectionable’ App Th at Reports Deaths from 
US Drone Strikes,” Guardian, August 30, 2012.
5. Josh Begley, “Drones + iPhone App,” August  21, 1990, http:// vimeo . com 
/ 47976409.
6. Williams, “Apple Blocks ‘Objectionable’ App.” See also Lorenzo Franceschi- 
Bicchierai, “Aft er 5 Rejections, Apple Accepts App Th at Tracks U.S. Drone Strikes,” 
Mashable, February 7, 2014.
7. Franceschi- Bicchierai, “Aft er 5 Rejections, Apple Accepts App.”
8. Williams, “Apple Blocks ‘Objectionable’ App.”

324  Notes to Pages 189–194
9. Josh Begley, Dronestre.am, http:// dronestre . am (accessed December 23, 2014).
10. Franceschi- Bicchierai, “Aft er 5 Rejections, Apple Accepts App.”
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. “Obama Administration Lift s Blanket Ban on Media Coverage of the Return 
of Fallen Soldiers,” National Security Archive, George Washington University, 
February 26, 2009, http:// nsarchive . gwu . edu / news / 20090226.
15. Ibid.
16. Elisabeth Bumiller, “U.S. Lift s Photo Ban on Military Coffi  ns,” New York 
Times, December 7, 2009.
17. See http:// drones . pitchinteractive . com. For additional reporting on the 
drone wars, see Steve Coll, “A Reporter at Large: Th e Unblinking Stare: Th e Drone 
War in Pakistan,” New Yorker, November 24, 2014.
18. Austin Ramzy, “Facebook Deletes Post on Tibetan Monk’s Self- Immolation,” 
New York Times, December 27, 2014.
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid.
21. Benjamin Joff e et al. v. Google, Inc., 746 F.3d 920 (9th Cir. 2013). As the Ninth 
Circuit noted in note 1, “Google may have also used its soft ware to capture en-
crypted data, but the plaintiff s have conceded that their wireless networks  were 
unencrypted.”
22. Ibid., 923.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid. As Google explains in its brief to the United States Supreme Court: “In 
addition to collecting identifying information about Wi- Fi networks, Google’s 
Street View cars also collected so- called ‘payload data’ that was sent over unen-
crypted Wi- Fi networks if the data was being broadcast at the moment the Street 
View cars passed within range of the networks. App. 4a. Google did not use any of 
this data in any product or ser vice. Upon learning of the collection of payload data, 
Google took its Street View cars off  the road and segregated the payload data the 
cars had collected.” Google, Inc. v. Joff e et al., Petition for Writ of Certiorari, United 
States Supreme Court, No. 13- ___, 5, www . documentcloud . org / documents / 1100394 
- google - v - joff e . html.
25. Google, Inc. v. Joff e et al., Petition for Writ of Certiorari, United States Su-
preme Court, No. 13- ___.
26. Ibid., 22.
27. Ibid.

Notes to Pages 194–198  325
28. Charles Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets,” New York Times, 
February 16, 2012.
29. Ibid.
30. See Ira S. Rubinstein, R. D. Lee, and P. M. Schwartz, “Data Mining and In-
ternet Profi ling: Emerging Regulatory and Technological Approaches,” University 
of Chicago Law Review 75 (2008): 273 (“Once a person discloses information to a 
third party, as she does when requesting a URL or when running search queries, 
she relinquishes any reasonable expectation of constitutional privacy she has in 
that information. . . .  Individuals have a right to keep their information secluded, 
but once they share it with others [i.e., reveal it via the Internet], privacy rights 
end”). See also James Risen and Laura Poitras, “N.S.A. Gathers Data on Social 
Connections of U.S. Citizens,” New York Times, September 28, 2013.
31. Duhigg, “How Companies Learn Your Secrets.”
32. Marc Parry, “Big Data on Campus,” New York Times, July 18, 2012.
33. Regarding the trucking industry, see Chris Baraniuk, “Haulin’ Data: How 
Trucking Became the Frontier of Work Surveillance,” Atlantic, November 18, 2013, 
and, more generally, Karen Levy, “Th e Automation of Compliance: Techno- legal 
Regulation in the  U.S. Trucking Industry” (PhD diss., Sociology Department, 
Prince ton University, 2014); regarding tracked nurses, see Jill A. Fisher and Torin 
Monahan, “Evaluation of Real- Time Location Systems in Th eir Hospital Contexts,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics 81 (2012): 705–712, and Torin Monahan 
and Jill A. Fisher, “Implanting In e qual ity: Empirical Evidence of Social and Ethical 
Risks of Implantable Radio- Frequency Identifi cation (RFID) Devices,” Interna-
tional Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care 26, no. 4 (2010): 370–376.
34. Sarah O’Connor, “Amazon Unpacked: Th e Online Giant Is Creating Th ou-
sands of UK Jobs, So Why Are Some Employees Less than Happy?,” Financial 
Times Magazine, February 8, 2013.
35. Simon Head, “Worse than Wal- Mart: Amazon’s Sick Brutality and Secret 
History of Ruthlessly Intimidating Workers,” Salon, February 23, 2014.
36. Ibid.
37. Detlev Zwick and Janice Denegri Knott, “Manufacturing Customers: Th e Data-
base as a New Means of Production,” Journal of Consumer Culture 9, no. 2 (2009): 226.
38. Ibid., 228.
39. Ibid., 223; see also Greg Elmer, Profi ling Machines: Mapping the Personal In-
formation Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 55.
40. Zwick and Knott, “Manufacturing Customers,” 273.
41. Statement of Sen. John D. (Jay) Rocke fel ler IV at the Senate Hearings on 
December 18, 2013, “What Information Do Data Brokers Have on Consumers, and 

326  Notes to Pages 198–205
How Do Th ey Use It?,” U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Trans-
portation; see also Yasha Levine, “You’ll Be Shocked at What ‘Surveillance Valley’ 
Knows about You,” AlterNet, January 8, 2014, www . alternet . org / media / what 
- surveillance - valley - knows - about - you.
42. Levine, “You’ll Be Shocked.”
43. Frank Pasquale, “Th e Dark Market for Personal Data,” New York Times, Oc-
tober 17, 2014.
44. Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Data Broker Removes Rape- Victims List aft er Journal 
Inquiry,” Digits blog, Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2013.
45. Th e website is preserved  here: https:// www . evernote . com / shard / s1 / sh 
/ 235f0aab - 785b - 4a10 - bf3b - f39b3fd0dec7 / ed697225af44a19f18240183df03cd0f.
46. Dwoskin, “Data Broker Removes Rape- Victims List.”
47. Statement of Sen. John D. (Jay) Rocke fel ler IV at the Senate Hearings on 
December 18, 2013.
48. Ibid.
49. Charles Duhigg, “Bilking the El derly, with a Corporate Assist,” New York 
Times, May 20, 2007; Frank Pasquale discusses and develops this in his book Th e 
Black Box Society: Th e Secret Algorithms behind Money and Information (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2015).
50. Duhigg, “Bilking the El derly, with a Corporate Assist.”
51. Natasha Singer, “Mapping, and Sharing, the Consumer Genome,” New York 
Times, June 16, 2012.
52. Ibid.
53. Ibid.
54. Lois Beckett, “Everything We Know about What Data Brokers Know about 
You,” ProPublica, June 13, 2014.
55. Ibid.
56. Julia Angwin, “Why Online Tracking Is Getting Creepier: Th e Merger of 
Online and Offl  ine Data Is Bringing More Intrusive Tracking,” ProPublica, June 12, 
2014.
57. Pam Dixon and Robert Gellman, “Th e Scoring of America: How Secret Con-
sumer Scores Th reaten Your Privacy and Your Future,” World Privacy Forum, 
April 2, 2014, www . worldprivacyforum . org / wp - content / uploads / 2014 / 04 / WPF 
_ Scoring _ of _ America _ April2014 _ fs . pdf.
58. Ibid., 6.
59. Ibid., 9.
60. Ibid., 47.
61. Ibid., 50.

Notes to Pages 205–211  327
62. Ibid., 84.
63. Emily Steel, “Companies in Scramble for Consumer Data.” Financial Times, 
June 12, 2013.
64. Emily Steel, “Financial Worth of Data Comes In at under a Penny a Piece,” 
Financial Times, June 12, 2013.
65. Steel, “Companies in Scramble for Consumer Data.” See also Emily Steel, 
Callum Locke, Emily Cadman, and Ben Freese, “How Much Is Your Personal Data 
Worth?,” Financial Times, June 12, 2013.
66. Steel, “Financial Worth of Data.”
67. Steel, “Companies in Scramble for Consumer Data.”
68. Natasha Singer, “Shoppers Who Can’t Have Secrets,” New York Times, May 1, 
2010. See also Stephanie Cliff ord and Quentin Hardy, “Attention, Shoppers: Store 
Is Tracking Your Cell,” New York Times, July 14, 2013.
69. Levine, “You’ll Be Shocked.”
70. Jen Wieczner, “How the Insurer Knows You Just Stocked Up on Ice Cream 
and Beer,” Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2013.
71. Alexander Furnas, “Everything You Wanted to Know about Data Mining but 
Were Afraid to Ask,” Atlantic, April 3, 2012.
72. David Lyon, “Surveillance Technology and Surveillance Society,” in  T. 
Misa, P. Brey, and A. Feenberg, eds., Modernity and Technology (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 2003), 172.
73. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. 
Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 81; transcript of President Obama’s 
interview with PBS host Charlie Rose on June 17, 2013, available at Buzzfeed, “Presi-
dent Obama Defends NSA Spying,” www . buzzfeed . com / buzzfeedpolitics / president 
- obama - defends - nsa - spying.
74. Ibid.
75. See Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 129; transcript of President Obama’s inter-
view with PBS host Charlie Rose on June 17, 2013; see also Louis Jacobson, “Barack 
Obama Says the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court ‘Is Transparent,’ ” Politi-
fact . com, June 21, 2013, www . politifact . com / truth - o - meter / statements / 2013 / jun / 21 
/ barack - obama / barack - obama - says - foreign - intelligence - surveillanc.
76. See generally Bloomberg . com.
77. Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack,” Guardian, May 27, 2014.
78. David Easton, Th e Po liti cal System: An Inquiry into the State of Po liti cal Science 
(New York: Knopf, 1953), 112.
79. Rémi Lenoir, “L’état selon Pierre Bourdieu,” Sociétés contemporaines 
87 (2012–2013): 126.

328  Notes to Pages 212–215
80. Pierre Bourdieu, Sur l’état (Paris: Le Seuil, 2012), 25.
81. Ibid., 53. By way of example, Bourdieu focuses on the calendar and daylight 
savings time, which produce eff ects of reality on social existence. Ultimately, in his 
later lectures in 1990–1991, Bourdieu crystallizes this thought into a model of sym-
bolic force that he uses to supplement Weber’s defi nition: “Max Weber says that the 
State is the monopoly over the legitimate use of violence. And I correct that, by 
saying: it is the monopoly over the legitimate use of physical and symbolic vio-
lence”; ibid., 545. His early deconstruction of the notion of the state, though, is per-
haps more useful: the state as the unspoken glue that binds us together.
82. See Th eda Skocpol, “Five Minutes with Th eda Skocpol: ‘Even Th ose on the 
American Centre- Left  Are Now Viewing Eu rope in a Negative Sense Because of 
Austerity,’ ” London School of Economics and Po liti cal Science, November 7, 2013, 
http:// blogs . lse . ac . uk / europpblog / 2013 / 05 / 13 / interview - theda - skocpol - climate 
- change - tea - party - state - theory - europe. “Th e work that I did with colleagues that 
was embodied in the book, Bringing the State Back In, was in many ways drawing on 
the traditions of Max Weber, and other— especially German— theorists who in 
dialogue with Marxists argued that we need to take the organisations of the state 
more seriously in their own right.”
83. Th eda Skocpol, Protecting Soldiers and Mothers: Th e Po liti cal Origins of Social 
Policy in the United States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), viii, x.
84. Skocpol, “Five Minutes with Th eda Skocpol.”
85. Timothy Mitchell, “Th e Limits of the State: Beyond Statist Approaches and 
Th eir Critics,” American Po liti cal Science Review 85, no. 1 (March 1991): 77–96.
86. Ibid., 90.
87. Ibid.
88. Ibid., 77–96.
89. Ibid., 90.
90. Ibid.
91. Ibid., 91.
92. Stephen Sawyer has an excellent paper, “Foucault and the State,” which he 
presented at the Neubauer Collegium at the University of Chicago on May 16, 2014; 
the audio is at https:// www . youtube . com / watch ? v = RMis0C0JUk0.
93. Ibid.
94. Ibid., 215 n. a (“Ce n’est pas un appareil d’État, c’est un appareil pris dans le 
noeud étatique. Un système infra- étatique”).
95. Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: 
Vintage, 1979), 308. In the original French, it is a footnote on the last page. See Sur-
veiller et punir: La naissance de la prison (Paris: Gallimard, 1975), 315 n. 1.

Notes to Pages 215–219  329
96. Michel Foucault, Th e Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France, 
1978–79, trans. Graham Burchell (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008); see also 
Wendy Brown, Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution (New York: 
Zone Books, 2015).
97. Barack Obama, “Speech on  N.S.A. Phone Surveillance,” transcript, Jan-
uary 17, 2014, New York Times.
98. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 134–135.
99. Ibid., 135.
100. Obama, “Speech on N.S.A. Phone Surveillance.”
Chapter Eight: the mortification of the self
1. Shanyang Zhao, “Th e Digital Self: Th rough the Looking Glass of Telecopre-
sent Others,” Symbolic Interaction 28, no. 3 (2005): 392.
2. Keith Hampton, Lee Rainie, Weixu Lu, Maria Dwyer, Inyoung Shin, and 
Kristen Purcell, “Social Media and the ‘Spiral of Silence,’ ” Pew Research Internet 
Project, August 26, 2014, www . pewinternet . org / 2014 / 08 / 26 / social - media - and - the 
- spiral - of - silence.
3. M. J. Smith, P. Carayon, K. J. Sanders, S- Y. Lim, and D. LeGrande, “Employee 
Stress and Health Complaints in Jobs with and without Electronic Per for mance 
Monitoring,” Applied Ergonomics 23, no. 1 (February 1992): 26; see also G. L. Rafns-
dóttir and M. L. Gudmundsdottir, “EPM Technology and the Psychosocial Work 
Environment,” New Technology, Work and Employment 26, no. 3 (2011): 210–221; 
Kate Murphy, “We Want Privacy, but Can’t Stop Sharing,” New York Times, Oc-
tober 4, 2014.
4. Murphy, “We Want Privacy, but Can’t Stop Sharing.”
5. See, e.g., Shelley T. Duval and Robert A. Wicklund, A Th eory of Objective Self- 
Awareness (New York: Academic Press, 1972); Paul J. Silvia and Shelley T. Duval, 
“Objective Self- Awareness Th eory: Recent Progress and Enduring Problems,” 
Personality and Social Psychology Review 5 (2001): 230–241.
6. Murphy, “We Want Privacy, but Can’t Stop Sharing.” Glenn Greenwald 
chronicles some of the social science data as well in his book No Place to Hide: 
Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 
2014), 178–181.
7. Michael McCahill and Rachel Finn, “Th e Social Impact of Surveillance in 
Th ree UK Schools: ‘Angels,’ ‘Dev ils’ and ‘Teen Mums,’ ” Surveillance and Society 7, 
nos. 3–4 (2010): 273–289, quotation p. 278. All further references to this article will 
be in parentheses.

330  Notes to Pages 219–226
8. Gregory L. White and Philip G. Zimbardo, “Th e Chilling Eff ects of Surveil-
lance: Deindividuation and Reactance,” Department of Psychology, Stanford Uni-
versity, 1975.
9. PEN American Center, “Chilling Eff ects: NSA Surveillance Drives  U.S. 
Writers to Self- Censor,” November 12, 2013, www . pen . org / sites / default / fi les /Chill 
ing%20Eff ects _ PEN%20American . pdf.
10. See generally Jill A. Fisher and Torin Monahan, “Evaluation of Real- Time 
Location Systems in Th eir Hospital Contexts,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics 81 (2012): 705–712; Torin Monahan and Jill A. Fisher, “Implanting In e-
qual ity: Empirical Evidence of Social and Ethical Risks of Implantable Radio- 
Frequency Identifi cation (RFID) Devices,” International Journal of Technology 
Assessment in Health Care 26, no. 4 (2010): 370–376; Karen Levy, “Th e Automation 
of Compliance: Techno- legal Regulation in the U.S. Trucking Industry” (Ph.D. 
diss., Department of Sociology, Prince ton University, 2014).
11. Daniel Soar, “It Knows,” London Review of Books, October 6, 2011, 3–6.
12. Daniel Solove, Nothing to Hide (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 26.
13. Ibid., 27.
14. Ibid.
15. Julia Angwin, “Why Online Tracking Is Getting Creepier: Th e Merger of 
Online and Offl  ine Data Is Bringing More Intrusive Tracking,” ProPublica, June 12, 
2014, www . propublica . org / article / why - online - tracking - is - getting - creepier.
16. Erving Goff man, Asylums (Piscataway, NJ: Transaction, 2007), xxii.
17. For an analysis of mass institutionalization in asylums and later in prisons, 
see Bernard E. Harcourt, “From the Asylum to the Prison: Rethinking the Incarcera-
tion Revolution,” Texas Law Review 84 (2006): 1751–1786; Bernard E. Harcourt, “An 
Institutionalization Eff ect: Th e Impact of Mental Hospitalization and Imprison-
ment on Hom i cide in the United States, 1934–2001,” Journal of Legal Studies 40 
(2011): 39–83.
18. See Michel Foucault, History of Madness (London: Routledge, 2006); David 
Rothman, Th e Discovery of the Asylum: Social Order and Disorder in the New Republic 
(New York: Little, Brown, 1971); R. D. Laing and Aaron Esterson, Sanity, Madness, 
and the Family: Families of Schizophrenics (London: Routledge, 1964); David 
Cooper, ed., Psychiatry and Anti- psychiatry (London: Paladin, 1967); Th omas  S. 
Szasz, Th e Myth of Mental Illness (New York: Hoeber- Harper, 1961).
19. Goff man, Asylums, 19.
20. Ibid., 33.
21. Ibid., 38–39.
22. Ibid., 48.
23. Ibid., 62.

Notes to Pages 226–231  331
24. Ibid.
25. In this regard, see the exchange between Steven Lukes, “In Defense of ‘False 
Consciousness,’ ” University of Chicago Legal Forum, 2011, 19–28, and Bernard E. 
Harcourt, “Radical Th ought from Marx, Nietz sche, and Freud, through Foucault, 
to the Present: Comments on Steven Lukes’s ‘In Defense of False Consciousness,’ ” 
University of Chicago Legal Forum, 2011, 29–51.
26. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti- Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizo-
phre nia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 104–105.
27. Zhao, “Th e Digital Self,” 402–403.
28. Gilles Deleuze, quoted in “Les intellectuels et le pouvoir” (discussion be-
tween Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze, March 4, 1972, L’Arc, no. 49), in Foucault, 
Dits et écrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 2:306–315 (Quarto ed. [Paris: Gallimard, 2001], 
1:1182); I am giving a slightly modifi ed translation based on Language, Counter- 
Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews by Michel Foucault, ed. Donald F. 
Bouchard (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980). And to which Foucault 
would respond: “It is possible that the struggles now taking place and the local, re-
gional, and discontinuous theories that derive from these struggles and that are 
 indissociable from them, stand at the threshold of our discovery of the manner in 
which power is exercised.” Foucault and Deleuze, “Les intellectuels et le pouvoir.”
29. Deleuze and Guattari, Anti- Oedipus, 139.
30. Ibid., 105
31. Kevin D. Haggerty and Richard V. Ericson, “Th e Surveillant Assemblage,” 
British Journal of Sociology 51, no. 4 (2000): 606.
32. Alan Rusbridger and Ewen MacAskill, “I, Spy: Edward Snowden in Exile,” 
Guardian, July  19, 2014; see also Dustin Volz, “Snowden: NSA Employees Are 
Passing around Nude Photos,” National Journal, July 17, 2014.
33. Associated Press, “British Spies Reportedly Snoop on Video Chats, X- Rated 
Webcam Pics,” CBS News, February 27, 2014.
34. Tarleton Gillespie, “Th e Relevance of Algorithms,” in Tarleton Gillespie, 
Pablo Boczkowski, and Kirsten Foot, eds., Media Technologies (Cambridge MA: 
MIT Press, forthcoming).
35. Ibid.
36. Amy L. Gonzales and Jeff rey T. Hancock, “Mirror, Mirror on My Facebook 
Wall: Eff ects of Exposure to Facebook on Self- Esteem,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior, 
and Social Networking 14, nos. 1–2 (2011): 79–83.
37. Notice that it is only one of the more entitled young boys in the U.K. study 
who says about CCTV outside of school, “I never notice them but I don’t really 
mind because I’m not doing anything wrong. . . .  So, I’ve got nothing to be worried 
about” (279).

332  Notes to Pages 233–235
38. Goff man, Asylums, 320.
39. According to a survey conducted in October and November 2014, more than 
a third of American Internet users (36 percent) “share personal information with 
private companies online all the time and say ‘it’s no big deal’ ”; about 35 percent of 
American Internet users believe that “the chance of their personal information 
being compromised [on the Internet] is so small that it’s not worth worrying 
about.” See Centre for International Governance Innovation and IPSOS, “CIGI- 
IPSOS Global Survey on Internet Security and Trust,” survey carried out between 
October 7 and November 12, 2014, www . cigionline . org / internet - survey.
Chapter Nine: the steel mesh
1. “Highest to Lowest,” International Centre for Prison Studies, 2014, www 
. prisonstudies . org / highest - to - lowest.
2. See, generally, Bernard E. Harcourt, Th e Illusion of Free Markets (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
3. “One in 100: Behind Bars in America 2008,” Pew Research Center, February 
2008, www . pewtrusts . org / en / research - and - analysis / reports / 2008 / 02 / 28 / one - in 
- 100 - behind - bars - in - america - 2008. On page 5 of this study, the authors state that 
one in nine black men between the ages of twenty and thirty- four are incarcerated. 
Th is statistic was also cited in Adam Liptak, “1 in 100 U.S. Adults behind Bars, 
Study Shows,” New York Times, February  28, 2008, which notes that the Pew 
 report’s fi nding is higher than the offi  cial Justice Department statistics because the 
latter “calculates the incarceration rate by using the total population rather than 
the adult population as the denominator. Using the department’s methodology, 
about one in 130 Americans is behind bars.” According to the 2011 Justice Depart-
ment report, the incarceration rate of black men twenty to thirty- four years old in 
2011 was roughly 6.367 percent (note that the 2011 data from the Justice Department 
only include incarceration rates per 100,000 for sentences of one year or more).
4. Laura M. Maruschak and Erika Parks, “Probation and Parole in the United 
States, 2011,” Bureau of Justice Statistics, November 2012, 3, 7, www . bjs . gov / content 
/ pub / pdf / ppus11 . pdf. Th e total population of black men in 2011 was 19,463,223, ac-
cording to U.S. Census estimates, and 2,144,787 divided by 19,463,223 is 0.11, so that’s 
11 percent of the black male population in 2011, about one of every nine individuals.
5. Th e prison today recalls the premodern models of the seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries, depicted and described by Foucault in his lecture of March 21, 
1973; see Michel Foucault, La société punitive: Cours au Collège de France (1972–1973), 
ed. Bernard E. Harcourt (Paris: Gallimard/Le Seuil, 2013), 213–214.

Notes to Pages 235–239  333
6. I agree with Loïc Wacquant that we should diff erentiate between rates of 
 incarceration among diff erent demographic groups and would be well advised to 
refer to mass incarceration as “the hyperincarceration of (sub)proletarian African 
American men from the imploding ghetto”; Loïc Wacquant, “Class, Race and Hy-
perincarceration in Revanchist America,” Daedalus 139, no. 3 (2010): 74. However, 
I also agree with Marie Gottschalk that the problem of overincarceration aff ects 
practically every demographic group, even if at diff erent levels. See Gottschalk, 
comments at Harvard University, December 5, 2013, www . youtube . com / watch ? v 
= sOl5o3npe3o. To keep matters straight, I will refer to the problem of “massive 
overincarceration.”
7. Peter Baehr, “Th e ‘Iron Cage’ and the ‘Shell as Hard as Steel’: Parsons, Weber, 
and the Stahlhartes Gehäuse Meta phor in Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capi-
talism,” History and Th eory 40, no. 2 (2001): 153–169.
8. See Matthew DeMichele and Brian Payne, Off ender Supervision with Elec-
tronic Technology: Community Corrections Resource, 2nd ed., Offi  ce of Justice Pro-
grams, Bureau of Justice Assistance, Department of Justice, 2009, www . appa - net 
. org / eweb / docs / APPA / pubs / OSET _ 2 . pdf.
9. Ibid., 17.
10. Ibid.
11. William Bales, Karen Mann, Th omas Blomberg, Gerry Gaes, Kelle Barrick, 
Karla Dhungana, and Brian McManus, “A Quantitative and Qualitative Assess-
ment of Electronic Monitoring,” Offi  ce of Justice Program, National Institute of 
Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, January 2010, www . ncjrs . gov / pdffi  les1 / nij 
/ grants / 230530 . pdf.
12. Michael D. Abernethy, “Someone’s Watching: Electronic Monitoring on the 
Rise, Better Technology and Newer State Laws Driving,” Times- News (Burlington, 
NC), June 21, 2014.
13. Tessa Stuart, “Th ere Has Been a 4,000% Increase in Ankle- Monitoring of 
Women in New York Th is Year,” Village Voice, September 5, 2014.
14. Peter Hirschfeld, “State Eyes Electronic Monitoring as Alternative to Incar-
ceration,” Vermont Public Radio, June 17, 2014.
15. Trent Cornish and Jay Whetzel, “Location Monitoring for Low- Risk In-
mates— A Cost Eff ective and Evidence- Based Reentry Strategy,” Federal Probation 
78, no. 1 (June 2014): 19–21.
16. Joseph Shapiro, “As Court Fees Rise, the Poor Are Paying the Price,” NPR, 
May 19, 2014; for a graph comparing the common fees that diff erent state courts 
are charging to defendants and off enders, see “State- by- State Court Fees,” NPR, 
May 19, 2014.

334  Notes to Pages 239–244
17. See http:// bi . com / news.
18. Associated Press, “Electronic Monitoring in Domestic Violence Cases to Ex-
pand in Maine,” Portland Press Herald, November 20, 2014.
19. See Addendum No. 1 to “Canyon County’s Request for Proposals, Electronic 
Monitoring System— Alternative Sentencing Program,” July 16, 2014, www . canyon 
county . org / getattachment / Elected - Offi  cials / Commissioners / Legal - Notices - and 
- RFPs / Electronic - Monitoring - System - Alternative - Sentencin / Addendum - No - 1 
- to - Electronic - Monitoring - System - RFP . pdf . aspx.
20. David E. Sanger and Th om Shanker, “N.S.A. Devises Radio Pathway into 
Computers,” New York Times, January 14, 2014. See also Floor Boon, Steven Derix, 
and Huib Modderkolk, “NSA Infected 50,000 Computer Networks with Malicious 
Soft ware,” Nrc.nl, November 23, 2012, www . nrc . nl / nieuws / 2013 / 11 / 23 / nsa - infected 
- 50000 - computer - networks - with - malicious - soft ware.
21. Sanger and Shanker, “N.S.A. Devises Radio Pathway into Computers.”
22. Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA, and the U.S. 
Surveillance State (New York: Henry Holt, 2014), 117.
23. “Inside TAO: Documents Reveal Top NSA Hacking Unit,” Der Spiegel, 
December 29, 2013. Other articles referenced in this one include “Quantum Spying: 
GCHQ Used Fake LinkedIn Pages to Target Engineers,” Der Spiegel, November 11, 
2013; “Oil Espionage: How the NSA and GCHQ Spied on OPEC,” Der Spiegel, 
November 11, 2013.
24. “Inside TAO: Documents Reveal Top NSA Hacking Unit.”
25. Ibid.
26. Jacob Applebaum, Judith Horchert, and Christian Stöcker, “Shopping for 
Spy Gear: Cata log Advertises NSA Toolbox,” Der Spiegel, December 29, 2013.
27. Ibid.
28. Greenwald, No Place to Hide, 117–118; Sanger and Shanker, “N.S.A. Devises 
Radio Pathway into Computers.”
29. Boon, Derix and Modderkolk, “NSA Infected 50,000 Computer Networks.”
30. Joseph Goldstein and J. David Goodman, “Frisking Tactic Yields to Tighter 
Focus on Youth Gangs,” New York Times, September 18, 2013.
31. Ibid.
32. Ibid.
33. Joseph Goldstein, “In Social Media Postings, a Trove for Investigators,” New 
York Times, March 2, 2011.
34. Ibid.
35. Ibid.
36. Goldstein and Goodman, “Frisking Tactic Yields to Tighter Focus on Youth 
Gangs.”

Notes to Pages 244–248  335
37. Chris Hamby, “Government Set up a Fake Facebook Page in Th is Woman’s 
Name,” BuzzFeed, October 6, 2014.
38. Ibid.
39. See, e.g., G. W. Schulz, “Virginia Police Have Been Secretively Stockpiling 
Private Phone Rec ords,” Wired, October 20, 2014.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.
43. Kenneth Neil Cukier and Viktor Mayer- Schoenberger, “Th e Rise of Big 
Data: How It’s Changing the Way We Th ink about the World,” Foreign Aff airs, 
May– June 2013.
44. Peter Beaumont, “Israeli Intelligence Veterans Refuse to Serve in Palestinian 
Territories,” Guardian, September  12, 2014; James Bamford, “Israel’s  N.S.A. 
Scandal,” New York Times, September 16, 2014; Anshel Pfeff er, “Unit 8200 Refuse-
niks Shed Light on Ethics of Israel’s Intel Gathering,” Haaretz, September 15, 2014.
45. NSA memorandum agreement cited in Bamford, “Israel’s N.S.A. Scandal”; 
the memorandum can be read at www . theguardian . com / world / interactive / 2013 
/ sep / 11 / nsa - israel - intelligence - memorandum - understanding - document. See gen-
erally Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, and Ewen MacAskill, “NSA Shares Raw 
Intelligence Including Americans’ Data with Israel,” Guardian, September 11, 2013.
46. Bamford, “Israel’s N.S.A. Scandal.”
47. Beaumont, “Israeli Intelligence Veterans Refuse to Serve.”
48. Ibid.
49. Bamford, “Israel’s N.S.A. Scandal”; see also Beaumont, “Israeli Intelligence 
Veterans Refuse to Serve.”
50. Glenn Greenwald, Ryan Grim, and Ryan Gallagher, “Top- Secret Document 
Reveals NSA Spied on Porn Habits as Part of Plan to Discredit ‘Radicalizers,’ ” 
Huffi  ngton Post, January 24, 2014; Bamford, “Israel’s N.S.A. Scandal”; see also Gre-
enwald, No Place to Hide, 187.
51. Greenwald, Grim, and Gallagher, “Top- Secret Document Reveals NSA 
Spied.”
52. Ibid.
53. Bamford, “Israel’s N.S.A. Scandal.”
54. Ewen MacAskill, “Greenwald Is Said to Have Second US Intelligence 
Source,” Readersupportednews . org, October 12, 2014, http:// readersupportednews 
. org / news - section2 / 318 - 66 / 26357 - greenwald - is - said - to - have - second - us - intelligence 
- source; Citizenfour, dir. Laura Poitras, Weinstein Company (2014).
55. Baehr, “Th e ‘Iron Cage’ and the ‘Shell as Hard as Steel,’ ” 158.
56. Ibid., 159.

336  Notes to Pages 248–255
57. Parsons, for instance, would mistranslate Weber’s fi nal reference to “the last 
men”— one could hardly gesture more directly to Nietzsche—as a bland historical 
reference to “the last stage of this cultural development.” Ibid., 153.
58. Max Weber, Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Talcott 
Parsons (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1930), 182.
59. Baehr, “Th e ‘Iron Cage’ and the ‘Shell as Hard as Steel,’ ” 154.
60. Ibid., 157 n. 21 (quoting Arthur Mitzman’s book on Th e Iron Cage and Eric 
Matthews).
Chapter Ten: virtual democracy
1. Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack,” Guardian, May 27, 2014 (my emphasis).
2. For the most piercing research and analysis of the Stasi regime in East Germany, 
see Andreas Glaeser, Po liti cal Epistemics: Th e Secret Police, the Opposition, and the 
End of East German Socialism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011). Th e fi lm 
referred to  here is Florian Henckel von Donnersmarck’s Th e Lives of Others (2006), 
which presents a chilling fi ctionalized repre sen ta tion of life in the former GDR.
3. Quentin Skinner and Richard Marshall, “More Liberty, Liberalism and 
 Surveillance: A Historic Overview,” Opendemocracy . net, July 26, 2013 (emphasis 
added), www . opendemocracy . net / ourkingdom / quentin - skinner - richard - marshall 
/ liberty - liberalism - and - surveillance - historic - overview.
4. As Albert W. Dzur notes in his insightful article “Repellent Institutions and 
the Absentee Public: Grounding Opinion in Responsibility for Punishment,” in 
Jesper Ryberg and Julian V. Roberts, eds., Pop u lar Punishment: On the Normative 
Signifi cance of Public Opinion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014), there is si-
lence from the demo cratic theorists on these questions. Th e only close response 
that can be heard is from the moderate civil libertarians, like Th omas Friedman 
and Bill Keller: NSA surveillance is necessary to avoid another 9/11, because there 
could be nothing worse for civil liberties in this country than another terrorist at-
tack on American soil. Or, in the words of Bill Keller, “the gravest threat to our civil 
liberties is not the N.S.A. but another 9/11- scale catastrophe that could leave a pan-
icky public willing to ratchet up the security state, even beyond the war- on- terror 
excesses that followed the last big attack.” Bill Keller, “Living with the Surveillance 
State,” New York Times, June 16, 2013. In other words, we need to cede our civil lib-
erties to protect them.
5. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, 317.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.

Notes to Pages 255–259  337
8. Ibid., 318.
9. Ibid., 319.
10. Ibid.
11. See the United States Elections Project website at www . electproject . org / home 
(data available at “National General Election VEP Turnout Rates, 1789– Present,” 
www . electproject . org / national - 1789 - present); see also Michael  P. McDonald, 
“Turnout in the 2012 Presidential Election,” Huffi  ngton Post, February 11, 2013.
12. See United States Elections Project, “2014 General Election Turnout Rates,” 
www . electproject . org / Election - Project - Blog / 2014generalelectionturnoutrates.
13. See United States Elections Project, “National General Election VEP 
Turnout Rates, 1789– Present.”
14. Walter Dean Burnham and Th omas Ferguson, “Americans Are Sick to Death 
of Both Parties: Why Our Politics Is in Worse Shape than We Th ought,” AlterNet, 
December 18, 2014, www . alternet . org / americans - are - sick - death - both - parties - why 
- our - politics - worse - shape - we - thought.
15. Evgeny Morozov, Th e Net Delusion: Th e Dark Side of Internet Freedom (New 
York: Public Aff airs, 2011), xiii (defi ning cyberutopianism as “a naive belief in the 
emancipatory nature of online communication that rests on a stubborn refusal to 
acknowledge its downside”).
16. Dzur, “Repellent Institutions and the Absentee Public.”
17. See generally Bernard E. Harcourt, “An Institutionalization Eff ect: Th e Im-
pact of Mental Hospitalization and Imprisonment on Hom i cide in the United 
States, 1934–2001,” Journal of Legal Studies 40, no. 1 (January 2011): 39–83; Bernard 
E. Harcourt, “From the Asylum to the Prison: Rethinking the Incarceration Revo-
lution,” Texas Law Review 84 (2006): 1751–1786.
18. See generally Sheldon  S. Wolin, Tocqueville between Two Worlds: Th e 
Making of a Po liti cal and Th eoretical Life (Prince ton, NJ: Prince ton University 
Press, 2001), 383.
19. Ibid., 385. Wolin contends that this could be generalized to po liti cal theory 
more generally. As he suggests, since Plato’s Laws, most of the major po liti cal 
thinkers prior to Tocqueville had not theorized punishment much. Contemporary 
punishment theorists have excavated more of the punishment theory from the 
works of early modern po liti cal theory and would likely contest Wolin’s generaliza-
tion. Andrew Dilts has done important work on the central role of punishment 
theory in John Locke’s work. See Andrew Dilts, “To Kill a Th ief: Punishment, Pro-
portionality, and Criminal Subjectivity in Locke’s Second Treatise,” Po liti cal 
Th eory 40, no. 1 (February 2012): 58–83. Alice Ristroph has written important work 
on the central role of the right of self- defense to Hobbes’s po liti cal theory. See Alice 

338  Notes to Pages 259–261
Ristroph, “Respect and Re sis tance in Punishment Th eory,” California Law Review 
97 (2009): 601. Keally McBride has written an important book on punishment and 
po liti cal theory, Punishment and Po liti cal Order (Ann Arbor: University of Mich-
igan Press, 2007). See also Susan Meld Shell, “Kant on Punishment,” Kantian Re-
view 1 (March 1997): 115.
20. Cited in Wolin, Tocqueville between Two Worlds, 388.
21. Ibid.
22. Ibid., 389.
23. Ibid., 391.
24. Quoted in ibid., 394.
25. Quoted in ibid. Tocqueville’s writings on the prison would have been a per-
fect illustration for Foucault of the disciplinary turn in the early nineteenth cen-
tury: “Th e punishment is simultaneously the mildest and the most terrible that has 
ever been invented.” Quoted in ibid., 395.
26. Ibid., 386.
27. Ibid., 387.
28. Foucault develops this theme in La société punitive: Cours au Collège de 
France, 1972–1973 (Paris: Gallimard / Le Seuil, 2013), 34–39, 75 n. 2.
29. Vesla Weaver and Amy Lerman, “Po liti cal Consequences of the Carceral 
State,” American Po liti cal Science Review 104, no. 4 (November 2010): 817, 827.
30. Holder called for reforms to the federal prison system that would have no 
real eff ect on mass incarceration: the elimination of some mandatory minimum 
federal sentencing policies for nonviolent off enders, as well as “compassionate 
 release” or the early release of se nior citizen and ill federal inmates (essentially, 
people who present no risk of harm to others, and cost a lot to incarcerate). See 
“Holder’s Remarks at American Bar Association as Prepared for Delivery,” Talking 
Points Memo, August 12, 2013, http:// livewire . talkingpointsmemo . com / entry / read 
- ag - eric - holders - remarks - at - american - bar; the video is at www . c - spanvideo . org 
/ program / DrugOff . See also Carri Johnson, “With Holder in the Lead, Sentencing 
Reform Gains Momentum,” National Public Radio, August 7, 2013.
31. See Richard Stengel, Michael Scherer, and Radhika Jones, “Setting the Stage 
for a Second Term,” Time, December 19, 2012.
32. President Obama balances his discussion of prisons with strong law- and- 
order rhetoric, and minimizes the problem of massive overincarceration, in con-
trast to his focus on the economy. See Stengel, Scherer and Jones, “Setting the Stage 
for a Second Term.”

Notes to Pages 262–266  339
Chapter Eleven: digital re sis tance
1. Gilles Deleuze, “Postscript on the Societies of Control,” October 59 (Winter 
1992): 6.
2. Ibid.
3. Ibid., 4.
4. See Jennifer Lyn Morone, “Jennifer Lyn Morone, Inc.,” Project for the Royal 
Academy of Art, di14 . rca . ac . uk / project / jennifer - lyn - morone - inc.
5. Ibid.
6. Regine, “Jennifer Lyn Morone™ Inc., the Girl Who Became a Corporation,” 
We Make Money Not Art, June  23, 2014, http:// we - make - money - not - art . com 
/ archives / 2014 / 06 / jennifer - lyn - morone - inc . php.
7. Ibid.
8. Morone, “Jennifer Lyn Morone, Inc.”
9. P.H., “Th e Incorporated Woman,” Schumpeter blog, Economist, June 27, 2014.
10. Similar, she notes, to Google’s AdSense system. Regine, “Jennifer Lyn 
Morone™ Inc.”
11. Ibid.
12. Ibid.
13. Morone, “Jennifer Lyn Morone, Inc.”
14. P.H., “Th e Incorporated Woman.”
15. Ibid.
16. Regine, “Jennifer Lyn Morone™ Inc.”
17. Jennifer Lyn Morone, “Jennifer Lyn Morone, Inc.” (video), June 15, 2014, 
http:// vimeo . com / 98300179.
18. Regine, “Jennifer Lyn Morone™ Inc.”
19. Jennifer Lyn Morone, “Mouse Trap,” April 14, 2013, available at http:// vimeo 
. com / 64022517.
20. Special thanks to Léonard Ruyter- Harcourt for his research assistance on 
WikiLeaks.
21. WikiLeaks released the video, along with transcripts and other supporting 
documents on April 5, 2010. Th e video and information are still available at the web-
site http:// collateralmurder . com. See also David Leigh and Luke Harding, WikiLeaks: 
Inside Julian Assange’s War on Secrecy (London: Guardian Books, 2011), 65ff .
22. Leigh and Harding, WikiLeaks, 65.
23. See We Steal Secrets: Th e Story of WikiLeaks, dir. Alex Gibney (Jigsaw/Focus 
World, 2013).
24. “Profi le: Julian Assange,” BBC News, August 18, 2014, available at www . bbc 
. com / news / world - 11047811.

340  Notes to Pages 266–270
25. Simon Bowers, “Icelandic Bank Kaupthing’s Top Executives Indicted over 
Market Rigging,” Guardian, March 19, 2013.
26. Leigh and Harding, WikiLeaks, 3.
27. W. J. T. Mitchell commentary on the fi lm We Steal Secrets in seminar “Spec-
tacle and Surveillance,” Columbia University and University of Chicago, Jan-
uary 26, 2015.
28. See Jennifer Morone, JLM Inc. (website), http:// jenniferlynmorone . com.
29. Julian Assange quoted in Michael Hastings, “Julian Assange: Th e Rolling 
Stone Interview,” Rolling Stone, January 18, 2012.
30. Leigh and Harding, WikiLeaks, 47.
31. See Andy Greenberg, “WikiLeaks’ Assange Warns Sources against ‘Direct- 
to- Newspaper’ Leak Projects,” Forbes, February 8, 2011.
32. Hastings, “Julian Assange”; see also We Steal Secrets, dir. Gibney.
33. Esther Adley and Josh Halliday, “Operation Payback Cripples MasterCard 
Site in Revenge for WikiLeaks Ban,” Guardian, December 8, 2010.
34. Cora Currier, “Charting Obama’s Crackdown on National Security Leaks,” 
ProPublica, July 30, 2013.
35. Ibid.; Erin Lahman, “Bradley Manning Trial: An American Hero Gets 
Court- Martialed on June 3,” PolicyMic, May 29, 2013, http:// mic . com / articles / 45063 
/ bradley - manning - trial - an - american - hero - gets - court - martialed - on - june - 3.
36. Paul Lewis, “Bradley Manning Given 35- Year Prison Term for Passing Files 
to WikiLeaks,” Guardian, August 21, 2013.
37. Mirren Gidda, “Edward Snowden and the NSA Files— Timeline,” Guardian, 
August 21, 2013.
38. Th e video of the June 9, 2013, interview is available at the Guardian website: 
www . theguardian . com / world / video / 2013 / jun / 09 / nsa - whistleblower - edward 
- snowden - interview - video. For a rough transcript, see http:// mic . com / articles / 47355 
/ edward - snowden - interview - transcript - full - text - read - the - guardian - s - entire 
- interview - with - the - man - who - leaked - prism.
39. Ibid.
40. Centre for International Governance Innovation and IPSOS, “CIGI- IPSOS 
Global Survey on Internet Security and Trust,” November 24, 2014, www . cigion 
line . org / internet - survey.
41. Ibid., 10.
42. Ibid., 3.
43. Ibid., 11.
44. Ibid.
45. See the I Fight Surveillance website at https:// ifi ghtsurveillance . org.
46. See the Security in- a- Box website at https:// securityinabox . org.

Notes to Pages 270–273  341
47. Danny O’Brien, “13 Principles Week of Action: Human Rights Require a 
 Secure Internet,” Electronic Frontier Foundation, September 18, 2014, www . eff  . org 
/ deeplinks / 2014 / 09 / human - rights - require - secure - internet.
48. Jason Self, “Avoiding Surveillance,” http:// jxself . org / avoiding - surveillance 
. shtml; the Greycoder website is www . greycoder . com.
49. See, e.g., SAMURAI_LUCY, “Protecting Your Online Privacy— Basic 
Info,” July 7, 2014, http:// pastebin . com / nF0M3aVf.
50. David  E. Sanger and Brian  X. Chen, “Signaling Post- Snowden Era, New 
iPhone Locks out N.S.A.,” New York Times, September 26, 2014.
51. Ibid.
52. Craig Timberg and Greg Miller, “FBI Blasts Apple, Google for Locking Po-
lice out of Phones,” Washington Post, September 25, 2014.
53. Amrita Jayakumar, “As Mobile Device Privacy Hits the Spotlight, Silent 
Circle Zips Ahead,” Washington Post, October 12, 2014.
54. For information, visit http:// freedomboxfoundation . org.
55. Kim Zetter, “Middle- School Dropout Codes Clever Chat Program Th at 
Foils NSA Spying,” Wired, September 17, 2014.
56. Ibid.
57. Kevin Poulsen, “Th e FBI Used the Web’s Favorite Hacking Tool to Unmask 
Tor Users,” Wired, December 15, 2014.
58. See Jim Dwyer, More Awesome Th an Money: Four Boys and Th eir Quest to Save 
the World from Facebook (New York: Viking, 2014), 18–31.
59. Eben Moglen, quoted in Nancy Scola, “ ‘People Love Spying on One An-
other’: A Q&A with Facebook Critic Eben Moglen,” Washington Post, November 19, 
2014.
60. Ibid.
61. Zetter, “Middle- School Dropout Codes Clever Chat Program Th at Foils 
NSA Spying.”
62. Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack: Th e NSA Files Revealed New Th reats 
to Democracy,” Guardian, May 27, 2014 (“From now on,” Moglen suggests, “the 
communities that make free soft ware crypto for everyone  else must assume that 
they are up against ‘national means of intelligence’ ”).
63. See Th omas Fox- Brewster, “Why Web Giants Are Struggling to Stop Snoops 
Spying on Th ousands of Websites,” Forbes, September 10, 2014.
64. Poulsen, “Th e FBI Used the Web’s Favorite Hacking Tool to Unmask Tor 
Users.”
65. Ibid.
66. Ibid.
67. Ibid.

342  Notes to Pages 274–276
68. Lee Rainie and Janna Anderson, “Th e Future of Privacy,” Pew Research 
Center, December 18, 2014, www . pewinternet . org / 2014 / 12 / 18 / future - of - privacy.
69. Jaron Lanier, Who Owns the Future? (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2013).
70. See Pierre Collin and Nicolas Colin, “Mission d’expertise sur la fi scalité de 
l’économie numérique,” January 18, 2013, www . economie . gouv . fr / rapport - sur - la 
- fi scalite - du - secteur - numerique.
71. Nicolas Colin, “Corporate Tax 2.0: Why France and the World Need a New 
Tax System for the Digital Age,” Forbes, January 28, 2013.
72. See, e.g., Frank Pasquale, “Restoring Transparency to Automated Au-
thority,” Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology Law 9 (2011): 235.
73. William H. Simon, “Rethinking Privacy,” Boston Review, October 20, 2014.
74. See James Bridle, “Watching the Watchers,” http:// shorttermmemoryloss 
. com / portfolio / project / watching - the - watchers. Th e full series can be seen on Flickr: 
www . fl ickr . com / photos / stml / sets / 72157632721630789. Special thanks to Lucas 
Pinheiro for introducing me to this work.
75. Institute for Applied Autonomy, iSee (web- based app), www . appliedautonomy 
. com / isee . html. Th anks to Rebecca Zorach for introducing me to this work, and to 
Trevor Paglen’s.
76. Trevor Paglen, Blank Spots on the Map: Th e Dark Geography of the Pentagon’s 
Secret World (New York: Penguin, 2009); see also generally “Negative Dialectics in 
the Google Era: A Conversation with Trevor Paglen,” October 138 (Fall 2011): 3–14; 
Rebecca Zorach, ed., Art against the Law (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
2015). A number of artists and activists are also involved in projects to expose black 
sites, military spaces of secrecy, and the carceral geography of penal repression. 
See, e.g., Allan Sekula, “Polonia and Other Fables,” show documenting “black sites” 
in Poland, http:// x - traonline . org / article / allan - sekula - polonia - and - other - fables; Josh 
Begley, “Prison Map,” project documenting the geography of incarceration in the 
United States, http:// prisonmap . com / about.
77. See Whitney Museum exhibition for spring 2016, http:// whitney . org / Exhi 
bitions / LauraPoitras.
78. Special thanks to W. J. T. Mitchell for sharing Ed Shanken’s syllabus.
79. Th e citizen video capturing the hom i cide of Eric Garner by NYPD offi  cer 
Daniel Pantaleo in Staten Island on July 17, 2014, is the latest in a series of these. See 
generally Anna North, “What the Eric Garner Video Couldn’t Change,” New York 
Times, December 4, 2015.
80. Michael McCahill and Rachel Finn, “Th e Social Impact of Surveillance in 
Th ree UK Schools: ‘Angels,’ ‘Dev ils’ and ‘Teen Mums,’ ” Surveillance and Society 7, 
nos. 3–4 (2010): 285.

Notes to Pages 276–279  343
81. Pierre Manière and Sylvain Rolland, “L’open data: mirage ou Eldorado?” La 
Tribune, June 27, 2014.
82. Ibid.
83. Lawrence Lessig, Code: And Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0 (New York: 
Basic Books, 2006); Jack M. Balkin, “Th e Constitution in the National Surveillance 
State,” Minnesota Law Review, Vol. 93, 1–25 (1980), 21–25; H.R.2048 -  USA FREEDOM 
Act of 2015, Public Law No. 114-23, 114th Congress (2015–2016), passed on June 2, 2015, 
available at https:// www . congress . gov / bill / 114th - congress / house - bill / 2048 / text.
84. Daniel Solove, Nothing to Hide (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
2013), 205.
85. Margo Schlanger, “Infi ltrate the NSA,” Democracy: A Journal of Ideas, no. 35 
(Winter 2015), www . democracyjournal . org / 35 / infi ltrate - the - nsa . php ? page = all.
86. Moglen, “Privacy under Attack.”
87. Michael Scaturro, “Meet Germany’s ‘Average’ Data Protesters,” Deutsche 
Welle, September  22, 2014, www . dw . de / meet - germanys - average - data - protesters 
/ av - 17940098.
88. See, e.g., Benjamin Weiser and Nathaniel Popperjan, “Focus Is on Bitcoin 
Trader at Trial over Silk Road Black Market,” New York Times, January 15, 2015.
89. danah boyd, It’s Complicated: Th e Social Lives of Networked Teens (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014), 45.
90. Ibid.
91. McCahill and Finn, “Th e Social Impact of Surveillance,” 283–284.
92. Ibid., 288.
93. See Daniel Ellsberg, Secrets: A Memoir of Vietnam and the Pentagon Papers 
(New York: Penguin, 2003), 199–214.
94. Quoted in “Th e Most Dangerous Man in America: Daniel Ellsberg and the 
Pentagon Papers: Interview,” PBS, www . pbs . org / pov / mostdangerousman / inter 
view . php.
95. See Grant Robertson, “Edward Snowden and Daniel Ellsberg Speak Truth to 
Power at HOPE X,” Daily Dot, July 20, 2014, www . dailydot . com / politics / hopex 
- edward - snowden - daniel - ellsberg.
96. See Michel Foucault, Th e Courage of Truth: Th e Government of Self and Others 
II. Lectures at the College de France, 1983–1984 (New York: Picador, 2012); see also 
the forthcoming book by the French phi los o pher Frédéric Gros on disobedience 
and the courage of truth. John Rajchman at Columbia University is exploring these 
issues in a brilliant paper, “Citizen Four: Edward Snowden and the Question of 
Truth and Power,” presented at the Columbia Center for Contemporary Critical 
Th ought, April 6, 2015, and at the IX Colóquio Internacional Michel Foucault, Rio 

344  Notes to Pages 279–282
de Janeiro, April 14–17, 2015. Charleyne Biondi at Sciences Po is writing as well; see 
her “Edward Snowden: le courage de la vérité à l’âge de la surveillance de masse,” 
http:// web . law . columbia . edu / sites / default / files / microsites / academic - fellows 
/ images / journee _ detudes _ ehess _ dec _ 16 _ 2014 . pdf. Austin Sarfan at the Univer-
sity of Chicago is also writing on this topic.
97. Matt Apuzzo, “C.I.A. Offi  cer Is Found Guilty in Leak Tied to Times Re-
porter,” New York Times, January 26, 2015.
98. Ibid. For instance, in the case of Jeff rey A. Sterling, a former CIA agent who 
was accused and convicted of leaking information to the New York Times about a 
covert operation to disrupt Iran’s nuclear program, there was no direct evidence of 
a leak.
99. Snowden’s fi rst interview, Sunday, June 9, 2013.
Chapter Twelve: po liti cal disobedience
1. Taken from http:// goodsecurityquestions . com / examples . htm.
2. Eben Moglen, “Privacy under Attack: Th e NSA Files Revealed New Th reats 
to Democracy,” Guardian, May 27, 2014.
3. See generally Bernard  E. Harcourt, “Po liti cal Disobedience,” in  W.  J.  T. 
Mitchell, Michael Taussig, and Bernard E. Harcourt, Occupy: Th ree Inquiries in 
Disobedience (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013); David Graeber, Th e De-
mocracy Project: A History, a Crisis, a Movement (New York: Spiegel and Grau, 2013), 
87–98.
4. George Orwell, 1984 (New York: Random House, 2009), 263.
5. See Fabienne Brion and Bernard E. Harcourt, “Th e Louvain Lectures in Con-
text,” in Michel Foucault, Wrong- Doing, Truth- Telling: Th e Function of Avowal in Jus-
tice (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), 274–283; Daniel Defert, Une vie 
politique: Entretiens avec Philippe Artières et Eric Favereau, avec la collaboration de 
Joséphine Gross (Paris: Seuil, 2014), 36–76; Audrey Kiéfer, Michel Foucault: Le 
GIP, l’histoire et l’action (PhD diss., Université de Picardie Jules Verne d’Amiens, 
2009), 169–172; Philippe Artières, Laurent Quéro, and Michelle Zancarini- Fournel, 
eds., Le Groupe d’information sur les prisons: Archives d’une lutte, 1970– 1972 (Paris: 
Éditions de l’IMEC, 2003).
6. Kevin Th ompson, “Foucault and the Legacy of the Prisons Information 
Group,” paper presented at DePaul University, May 8, 2015.
7. See generally Bernard E. Harcourt, “Th e Dialectic of Th eory and Practice,” 
Carceral Notebooks, vol. 12, ed. Perry Zurn and Andrew Dilts (forthcoming 2015).
8. Ibid.
9. Graeber, Th e Democracy Project, 89.

Notes to Page 283  345
10. See Jodi Dean, “Occupy Wall Street: Aft er the Anarchist Moment,” Socialist 
Register 49 (2013): 54–55 (“Occupy Wall Street began as a left  politics for a neolib-
eral age, an age that has championed individuality and excluded collectivity”); 
Doug Henwood, “Th e Occupy Wall Street Non- Agenda,” LBO News from Doug 
Henwood, September 29, 2011, http:// lbo - news . com / 2011 / 09 / 29 / the - occupy - wall 
- street - non - agenda.
11. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, Anti- Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizo-
phre nia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), 344.


I cannot express fully how much this work owes to countless inspiring 
and enriching conversations with Mia Ruyter, Daniel Defert, François 
Ewald, Frédéric Gros, David Pozen, Jesús Rodríguez- Velasco, W. J. T. 
Mitchell, Isadora Ruyter- Harcourt, Léonard Ruyter- Harcourt, and 
Renata Salecl. It has benefi ted im mensely from rich exchanges, con-
versation, and seminars with friends and colleagues, and I would espe-
cially like to thank and acknowledge Etienne Balibar, Wendy Brown, 
Elizabeth Emens, Didier Fassin, Katherine Franke, Bob Gooding- 
Williams, Stathis Gourgouris, David Halperin, Todd May, Keally 
 McBride, Eben Moglen, Calvin Morrill, Martha Nussbaum, Frank 
Pasquale, Jonathan Simon, Ann Stoler, Mick Taussig, Kendall Th omas, 
Loïc Wacquant, and Tim Wu. Th e book was reworked, thankfully, as a 
result of the prodding and pushing of three anonymous reviewers for 
Harvard University Press. I thank them each for their insights, patience, 
and generosity of spirit and intellect.
For consistently excellent and extensive research, I am indebted to 
Daniel Henry at the University of Chicago and Julian Azran at Co-
lumbia University. Léonard Ruyter- Harcourt and Henry Utset con-
ducted probing research on surveillance in the early American and 
French republics, and Léonard also conducted excellent research on 
WikiLeaks. Isadora Ruyter- Harcourt provided outstanding guidance 
throughout on all aspects of the digital age, for which I am extremely 
Ac know ledg ments

348  Ac know ledg ments
grateful. Chathan Vemuri provided marvelous research on humanism 
in the twentieth century, and Alexander de la Paz continuously off ered 
feedback and material. I am also indebted to students in my research 
seminar at the École des hautes études en sciences sociales in Paris, at 
Columbia University, and at the University of Chicago.
Once again, Lindsay Waters proved to be insightful, encouraging, 
and demanding, for which I am deeply grateful. I am delighted as well 
to have worked so closely with Amanda Peery at Harvard University 
Press, with Deborah Grahame-Smith and Sue Warga at Westchester 
Publishing Ser vices, and with Claire Merrill at Columbia Law School.

Index
acausal, 162–163
Accurate Re sis tance (Germany), 277
ACLU v. Clapper, 295n7, 321n31
Actuarial: actuarial instruments, 23, 
147; actuarial logic, 147–149, 156
Acxiom, 14, 160, 199, 202, 204
addiction, 50, 110, 122, 200
adolescent access to digital tech-
nology, 23, 288n68
advertisements, 2, 6, 20, 39, 48, 98, 
126–127, 160–161, 210, 272
Agamben, Giorgio, 287n50
Alexander, Michelle, 260
algorithms, 14–17, 22, 25, 45, 61, 117, 
157–163, 195, 218, 230, 271
All American Cable Company, 68
Allen, Anita,  286n42
al- Mindhar, Khalid, 59
Almond, Gabriel,  211
al- Qaeda, 55
AlterNet . com, 222–223, 285n15
Alteveer, Ian, 109
Althusser, Louis, 214
Amadae, S.M., 317n45
Amatriain, Xavier, 158, 318n54
Amazon . com, 1, 48, 73, 114–116, 126, 
139, 188, 215, 268; Amazon books, 31, 
32; Amazon recommendations, 
20–22, 162–163, 207; workplace 
monitoring, 195–196
American Civil Liberties Union 
(ACLU), 34, 54, 210, 294n4, 295n7, 
321n31
amoral, 162–163
amusement park, 93–97
analog age, 13, 20–21, 28, 35, 132–136, 
166, 181, 188, 223–224, 234–237, 250
ancien régime, 17, 62, 288n66
Android, 20, 220, 271
ankle bracelet, 20, 124, 236–243, 248
anonymity, 2, 57, 240, 242; defi ned, 
319n5; loss of anonymity, 13–14, 19, 
229–231; anonymous messaging, 117, 
129–131; enhancing anonymity, 
270–271, 273, 277; privacy, 166–168, 
176; whistle-blowing, 266–268
Anonymous (hacker collaborative), 
268, 271, 277

350  Index
AOL, 10, 65–66, 114
apathy, 254, 258, 281
Apple Inc., 34, 48, 73, 271; Apple 
Watch, 20, 52, 122–129, 198, 237, 243, 
248, 310n67; governing (Begley), 
189–191; PRISM program, 10, 66; 
revenue, 210–211
App Store, 189, 192
Arce, Alberto, 286n16, 286n20
archaic data, 143–145
archaic forms of punishment, 235–236
Arendt, Hannah, 171, 287n50, 321n18
Assange, Julian, 266–268, 270, 339n21, 
340n29
Assassin’s Creed Unity, 3
Associated Press, 7–10, 112, 286n16, 
286n20
asylums, 223–224, 226, 229, 330n17, 
337n17
AT&T, 65, 71–72, 76, 79, 132, 245; 
AT&T Folsom Street facility, 65, 
71, 76
Atlas platform, 6–7, 285n8
Australia, 75, 113
autonomy, 26, 131, 175–176, 178–179; 
defi ned, 319n5; loss of, 19, 166–168, 
181, 277
Baehr, Peter, 248, 333n7
Balkin, Jack M., 54, 276
Bamford, James, 27, 66, 68, 71, 98, 121, 
246–247
Barnett, James, 74
Baudrillard, Jean, 94, 304n63
Bauman, Zygmunt, 73, 287n50, 299n96
Beaumont, Gustave de, 84, 259, 302n18. 
See also Tocqueville, Alexis de
Becker, Gary, 176, 297n59. See also 
University of Chicago
Begley, Josh, 188, 190, 323n5, 324n9, 
342n76
Bejar, Arturo, 4
Belgacom, 241–242
Benedictine monasteries, 224, 229
Benhabib, Seyla, 321n18
Benjamin, Walter, 140
Bennett, Tony, 110, 307n6
Bentham, Jeremy, 27, 80–93, 118, 120, 
197; acoustic surveillance, 115–116; 
invention of panopticon, 85; and 
Orwell, 38. See also panopticon
Bentham, Samuel, 85
Biden, Vice- President Joe, 115
Big Brother, 26–28, 31–48, 53, 55–56, 
229, 275
Big Data, 60, 62, 80, 115, 127, 162–163; 
benefi ts of, 21–22, 231, 245–246; 
categories of, 137–140; defi ned, 132. 
See also data
Bigo, Didier, 287n50
Bill of Rights, 173
Bing, 2, 22
Binney, William, 76
biometric data, 218
Biondi, Charleyne, 343n96
biopower, 17, 92, 103
Black Chamber, 67–68
Blackphone, 271
black sites, 248, 275, 342n76
Blackstone, William, 37, 291n21
blogging, 3, 39, 41, 103, 110, 256
Bloomberg, 221, 327n76
Boeing Corp., 65, 68
Boltanski, Luc, Th e New Spirit of 
Capitalism, 48, 293n53
Booz Allen Hamilton, 65, 68, 98, 101, 269
BOUNDLESS INFORMANT 
program, 209

Index  351
Bourdieu, Pierre, 64, 211, 297n60, 
327n79, 328nn80–81
boyd, danah, 18, 277, 287n52, 288n68, 
343n89
Braman, Sarah, 119
Brandeis, Louis, 321n29
Brazil, 269
Breton, André, 314n135
Bridle, James, 275, 342n74
Brooks, John, 271
Brown, Michael, 16
Brown, Wendy, 306n89, 322n33, 
329n96, 347
Bryman, Alan, 95, 304n66
bulk telephony metadata, 27, 32, 55–56, 
213, 321n31
Bunyan, John, 248
bureaucracy, 57, 181
Burgess, Ernest W., 149, 152, 163, 
316n29, 316n33
Burnham, Walter Dean, 256, 337n14
Bush, President George H. W., 191
Bush, President George W., 32, 56–57, 
177, 191
Butler, Desmond, 286n16, 286n20
BuzzFeed, 97, 305n85, 327n73, 335n37
Campbell, Colin, 96, 305n72
Canada, 75, 113, 216
Candy Crush, 19, 21
Cantillon, Richard, 165, 319n75
Carter, President Jimmy, 34
causality, 162
CCTV, 20, 94, 144, 206, 218, 221, 
229–231, 236–237, 265, 275, 278, 
331n37
Celebration (Florida), 95–96
cellphones, 1, 109, 131–139, 183, 206, 
244–245, 278; capture of cell phone 
data, 7–10; onboarding, 159–160; 
tracking by cell phone, 15–16, 92, 253
censorship, 14, 68, 191, 268, 298n75
census data, 132, 139
Center for Constitutional Rights, 210
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 162
Chamayou, Grégoire, 296n56, 
308n40
chat rooms, 130–131
chemical castration, 237
Cheney, Vice President Dick, 177–178, 
322n35
Chertoff , Michael, 74
Chiapello, Eve, 48, 293n53
Chicago School, 99, 178, 322n36
Chilling Eff ect, 218–219, 232, 330nn8–9
China, 188, 269–270, 297n62; Chinese 
prisoner camps, 226
Chomsky, Noam, 177, 322n34
Chrome, 234
Church Commission, 298n75
CIA, 24, 57, 344nn97–98
circulation of power, 15, 17, 22–23, 25, 
64, 84–85, 91, 97, 118, 213, 281
Cisco, 210, 242
Clapper, James, 34
Clinton, President Bill, 55, 57
code breakers, 59
Coen, Deborah, 315n22
Cohen, Julie, 24
COINTELPRO, 188
Cold War, 25, 59, 153, 156, 169, 172, 178, 
311n79, 317n45, 321n19, 322n41
Cole, David, 77, 289n72, 300n118, 
308n33
Colin, Nicolas, 274, 342n70
Collateral Murder video, 265–266
Collin, Pierre, 274, 342n70

352  Index
Colls, Robert, 33, 291n16
Combined DNA Index System 
(CODIS), 144
consumption, 18, 65, 94–97, 103, 107, 
126, 139, 145, 162, 187, 191–192, 194, 197, 
207, 230; consumer data, 198, 293n49, 
327n67; consumer scores, 204–205, 
326n57; consumerism, 51, 96, 127, 
305n72; consuming subject, 197
convergence of digital life and 
correctional supervision, 25, 236–240
cookies, 4–7, 52, 159–160, 181
Cooper, David, 37, 223, 291n24, 330n18
Coras, Jean de, 142, 145, 314n1, 314n4
Cornell University, 42, 101, 331n28
corporate espionage, 73, 216
correctional supervision, 20, 235–236, 
 239
cost- benefi t analysis, 57–58, 100, 167, 
176, 179
courage, 40, 171, 211, 279, 281, 283; 
courage of truth, 279, 343n96
Cox, Chris, 45
credit scores, 204–205
Crouch, Ian, 32, 37, 289n79, 290n11
Crowell, William P., 68–69
crystal palace, 25, 107, 110
Cuba, 7–9
Cukier, Kenneth Neil, 162, 245, 
288n63, 318n72, 335n43
dangerous individual, 23, 36, 148, 315n25
data: identity data, 137–138; machine 
data, 138; payload data, 193–194, 324; 
people data, 137–138; smart data, 137; 
social data, 138–139; structured data, 
139; transactional data, 138; unstruc-
tured data, 139; video data, 3, 6, 22, 
75, 111–114, 132, 139–140
data brokers, 2, 14, 159–160, 187, 
198–199, 202, 204, 265, 272, 325n41, 
326n44, 326n54
data control, 62, 146, 153
data double, 18, 157, 228
data exhaust, 138–139
datafi cation, 21–22, 245
Datalogix, 204
data markets, 187–188, 198, 207, 215
data mining, 3, 22, 26, 64, 91, 121, 124, 
129, 154, 159, 162–164, 194, 254; data 
skimming, 241–242
Davidson, Amy, 113, 291n13, 308n25
Davis, Natalie Zemon, 142, 144, 314n2, 
314n6
Dean, Jodi, 283, 287n49, 345n10
Debord, Guy, 19, 88–90, 287n54, 
303nn38–39
Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (DARPA), 101
Defert, Daniel, 282, 344n5, 347
Deleuze, Gilles, 19, 47–52, 227–228, 262, 
282–283; Anti- Oedipus, 48–49, 51, 
227, 262, 283, 293n54, 294n66, 331n26, 
345n11; “Postscript on the Societies 
of Control,” 19, 262–263, 317n48
Dell Corporation, 242
demo cratic theory, 258
Der Spiegel, 15, 34, 240–241, 266, 
287n45, 310n56, 334n23
desiring machines, 48–52, 228, 281
despotism, 254–255, 258–260, 281–283; 
ancient despotism, 254; demo cratic 
despotism, 255, 281
Diaspora (social network),  272
Didi- Huberman, Georges, 91, 304n49
digital avowals, 99–100, 129
digital devices, 50, 127
digital economy, 187, 207, 274

Index  353
digital lust, 13, 18, 20, 47–50, 110
digital monitoring, 20, 22, 219, 237, 243
digital narratives, 128
digital security, 97, 229, 270, 305n86
digital self, 1, 10–16, 102–104, 109–110, 
128, 157, 162, 227–231, 236, 253
digital sovereignty, 188
digital things, 135–136
Dilts, Andrew, 306n91, 337n19, 344n7
Direction Générale de la Sécurité 
Extérieure (DGSE), 2, 167, 297n61
disciplinary power, 82, 85–87, 223
discipline, 17, 21, 36, 80, 84, 86–89, 91, 
93, 148–149, 163–164, 275
dislike button, 41–42
Disney Corporation, 95–96, 305n69
Disneyland, 94–95
distributed denial of ser vice, 268, 277
Dixon, Pam, 205, 326n57
DNA, 23, 56, 144, 179, 312n95
DNI Presenter, 10, 75
DonorTrends, 205
doppelgänger logic, 25, 141–165, 217, 230
Douglas, Justice William O., 173–175, 
177–178, 321n29
drones, 21, 103, 115, 188–192, 248, 275
Dropbox, 15
Drug Enforcement Administration 
(DEA), 74, 244
Duhigg, Charles, 195, 310n69, 325n28, 
326n49
duodividual, 157, 159
Dwyer, Jim, 341n58
Dzur, Albert, 258
Easton, David, 211, 327n78
eBay, 22, 114, 139, 215
Eco, Umberto, 95, 304n64
economic espionage, 65, 73, 216
Efrati, Amir, 285n1
Egypt, 269
Ehrlich, Judith, 278
Eisenhower, President Dwight, 66, 
297n63
electronic bracelet, 20, 237. See also 
ankle bracelet
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 270, 
341n47
Ellsberg, Daniel, 267, 278–279, 343n93
Emens, Elizabeth, 308n37, 347
emotional contagion, 43–44, 292n31, 
293n47
empathy, 40
Ericson, Richard, 50, 157, 166, 228, 293n55
Espionage Act, 268
Étatlab, 276
Ewald, François, 90, 151, 297n59, 
303n45, 316n39, 347
examination of the self, 100
exercise of power, 22, 86, 88, 115, 120, 191
exhibitionary complex, 110, 307n6
Experian, 198
experimentation, 42–46, 110, 118–119, 
167, 234, 281; panoptic experiments, 
88; scientifi c experiments, 138, 164, 219
Explorer, 234
expository power, 15, 21, 25, 50, 91–92, 
124, 157; defi ned, 131
expository society, 1–28, 36, 95, 163, 
281; architecture of, 107–111; as total 
institution, 232–233; identifi ed, 19, 
90, 117; narratives, 128–129; and 
neoliberalism, 97–100
E- ZPass, 1
Facebook, 3–7, 21–24; censorship, 
191–192; digital advertising, 14; 
Diaspora alternative, 272; dislike 

354  Index
Facebook (continued)
 button, 41–42; emotional contagion 
research, 41–47; Millions March FB 
page, 16; neoliberalism, 99–100; 
NYPD, 90, 115, 243–245; onboarding, 
159–161; PRISM, 10–13, 66, 75; privacy 
as passé, 166; revenues, 210–211; 
sexual orientation, 131; size, 136, 138; 
statelike, 215; NSA Tailored Access 
Operations, 241; tracking, 3–7, 
222–223; UPSTREAM, 65
facial recognition, 22–23, 91, 112–113, 
144, 304n48
factory discipline, 85, 197, 241
FAIRVIEW program, 72
false consciousness, 227, 331n25
fascism, 49, 51, 99, 170
Fassin, Didier, 347
FBI, 65–67, 79, 91, 144, 188, 209, 211, 
219, 253, 272–273
Ferguson (Missouri), 16, 130
Ferguson, Th omas, 256, 337n14
fetish, 47, 110, 122. See also addiction
Financial Times, 206, 325n34, 327n63
Finlay, Robert, 314n6
Finn, Rachel, 329n7, 342n80, 343n91. 
See also McCahill, Michael
Firefox, 234, 272–273
Five Eyes, 75, 77, 113, 121, 269
Flickr . com, 14, 36, 342n74
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act 
(FISA), 11, 175, 210, 298n75
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance 
Court (FISC), 56, 58, 59–60, 71, 210, 
327n75
Fort Meade (MD), 70, 77
Foucault, Michel, 19, 27–28, 36–38, 51, 
80–93, 97, 100, 115, 119–120, 196, 
214–215, 223, 275, 282; Discipline and 
Punish, 80, 84, 87–89, 91; History 
of Madness, 223; knots of statelike 
power, 214–216; Penal Th eories and 
Institutions, 81, 214, 301n6; Security, 
Territory, Population, 92–93; Th e 
Birth of Biopolitics, 92, 297n59, 
316n39, 329n96; Th e History of 
Sexuality, 92, 306n101; Th e Punitive 
Society, 81, 89, 92, 97, 214; Truth and 
Juridical Form, 82; Wrong- Doing, 
Truth- Telling, 300n4, 306n93, 312n88, 
316n38, 320n15, 344n5
FreedomBox foundation, 271
French penal code, 20
Friedersdorf, Conor, 54, 295n6
Friedman, Milton, 177–178
Friedman, Th omas, 54, 294n5, 336n4
future dangerousness, 23. See also 
dangerous individual
Garner, Eric, 16, 130, 312n89, 342n79
Gaussian bell curve, 148
Geeksphone, 271
Gellman, Bart, 11, 286n36
Gellman, Robert, 205, 326n57
Gillespie, Tarleton, 159, 230, 318n60, 
331n34
Gilliom, John, 78, 300n123
Glaeser, Andreas, 336n2
glass  house, 111, 118, 125, 140, 236, 314n135
Gmail, 7, 17, 50, 101–103, 188, 285n15, 
306n95
Goel, Vindu, 6, 285n7, 292n31, 293n48
Goff man, Erving, 217, 221, 223–229, 
232–233; structure of the self, 223; 
systems of punishments and 
privileges, 224–227
Google, 1–7; Android, 271; digital 
advertising, 47–48; forecasting fl u 

Index  355
epidemics, 21; Gmail, 101–103; 
Google Calendar, 103; Google 
Checkout, 103; Google Docs, 103; 
Google Drive, 103, 198; Google 
Earth, 275; Google Groups, 103; 
Google Hangouts, 103; Google 
Inbox, 103; Google Maps, 189; 
Google Voice, 103, 220; Google+, 
3–4; mission, 120; neoliberalism, 169; 
Optic Nerve, 114; Orkut, 103; PRISM 
program, 10–15, 66; recommendation 
algorithms, 157–159, 198; ScanOps 
segregation, 125; Daniel Soar, 
220–221; statelike, 72, 79, 188, 
210–211, 215; Street View, 131, 193–194, 
222–223, 235; Tailored Access 
Operations, 241; tracking, 3–7; 
UPSTREAM program, 65, 76
Gottschalk, Marie, 333n6
Government Communications 
Headquarters (GCHQ), 2, 111–114, 
121, 167, 241–242, 246
GPS, 17, 20, 127, 136, 139, 144, 197, 
236–238, 243, 248; GPS surveillance, 
237; GPS tracking, 20, 197, 236, 243, 
248
Graeber, David, 255, 282, 344n3
Graham, Dan, 107–109, 140, 307n1
Graves, Michael, 96
Gray, Patrick, 272
Greenwald, Glenn, 11, 24, 32, 54, 
65–67, 70, 75–76, 80, 122, 216, 240, 
269
Greycoder, 270, 341n48
Griswold v. Connecticut, 174, 321n29
Gros, Frédéric, 343n96,  347
group- based prediction, 147, 149, 163
GrubHub, 183
Guantanamo Prison, 179, 248
Guardian (newspaper), 2, 31, 34; Josh 
Begley, 189–190; BOUNDLESS 
INFORMANT, 209; corporate- 
intelligence cooperation, 66–72; 
Optic Nerve, 111–114; PRISM, 11–13, 
209; Edward Snowden, 268–269; 
UPSTREAM, 209; WikiLeaks, 266; 
XKeyscore, 62–64
Guattari, Félix, 47–52, 227–228, 283. 
See also Deleuze, Gilles
Guerre, Martin, 141–144, 314n1, 315n13
Guillauté, Jacques- François, 62–63, 
164, 296n56, 297n57
habitual off ender, 36, 148. See also 
dangerous individual
hackers, 2, 65, 72, 253, 273, 279
Hacking, Ian, 148, 150, 315n19, 316n26
Haggerty, Kevin, 24, 50, 157, 166, 228, 
293n55
Halliburton, 177–178, 322n35
Haraway, Donna, 308n40
Hard Rock Café, 95
Harvard Business School, 153
Harvey, David, 177, 306n89, 322n34
hashing, 160, 318n65
Hayden, NSA Director Michael, 24, 
70–71, 77, 115
Hayek, Friedrich, 178, 322n36
Head, Simon, 196–197, 325n35
“Hedge Two- Way Mirror Walkabout,” 
107–109, 140, 307n4. See also 
Graham, Dan
Hegel, G.W.F., 82, 85, 92, 116, 304n56
Henwood, Doug, 283,  345n10
Hewlett- Packard, 210–211
Hilbert, Martin, 133–135, 313n101
Hirschman, Albert, 293n51
Hitler, Adolf, 49, 227

356  Index
Hobbes, Th omas, 17, 165, 337n19
Holder, Eric, 261, 338n30
home monitoring, 236
homeland security, 19, 74, 246
homo digitalis, 18
Hoover, J. Edgar, 187–188
Hoover, President Herbert, 68
HOPE X, 279, 343n95
hopelessness, 211
hospitals, 85, 197, 223, 258
Hotels . com, 116
Hotmail . com, 65, 67
Hotwire . com, 116
human capital, 99, 196
human essence, 168–169, 176–177, 179
humanism, 166–183, 319n5, 320n10; 
American humanism, 171–172; 
Eu ro pean post- war humanism, 
170–172; humanist discourse, 
171–172, 176, 179–180
humiliation/degradation, 224, 229
Huxley, Aldous, 46, 111
Hwang, Tim, 181, 323n42
hyperreality, 95, 304n64
identity theft , 141
ideology, 89, 94–95, 226–227, 260, 
293n65
India, 241, 269–270
Indonesia, 269–270
In for mants, 17, 62
Insecam, 24
Instagram, 1, 3, 13, 35–36, 41, 47, 50, 100, 
110, 233; Biden’s Instagram, 115; 
NYPD monitoring, 243; people- 
based marketing, 6
Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identifi cation System, 144, 315n16
Intel Corporation, 210
Internet of Th ings, 21, 135, 138
iPhone, 15, 20, 35, 52, 110, 127, 189, 
291n17, 323n5, 341n50
Iraq, 177, 190–191, 265–266
iron cage, 236, 248–249, 333n7, 335n55, 
336n59
IRS, 14, 116, 132, 181
Ive, Jony, 122–123
Jaspers, Karl, 170, 320n12
Jinman, Richard, 32, 290n10
Johnson, Philip, 96, 118, 125, 236, 249
Johnson, President Lyndon B., 154
jouissance, 40, 52
Julius, Nicolaus Heinrich, 82–85, 88, 
92, 116, 301n9, 302n19; Lectures on 
Prisons, 82, 85
Kafk a, Franz, 26–27, 91, 221
Kantorowicz, Ernst, 13. See also two 
bodies
Kardashian, Kim, 115, 307n9
Katz v. United States, 174, 321n28
Keller, Bill, 54, 289n81, 294n2, 336n4
Kelly, Ray, 244
Kennedy, Justice Anthony, 179
Kenya, 269
Kindle, 110, 253
King Jr., Rev. Martin Luther, 59
king’s two bodies, 13. See also two 
bodies
Klayman v. Obama, 32, 290n9, 295n7, 
311n86
Klein, Naomi, 177, 322n34
Koopman, Colin, 308n40
Kramer, Adam D.I., 42–43, 45, 292n31, 
293n47
Krauss, Rosalind, 309n41
Kristof, Nicholas, 31, 290n4

Index  357
Kurgan, Laura, 119, 309n49
Kyllo v. United States, 179, 322n38
Laing, R.D., 37, 50, 223, 330n18
Laney, Doug, 132
Lanier, Jaron, 274, 342n69
leaderless social movements, 281–283
Leahy, Sen. Patrick, 7, 10, 34
Le Corbusier, 118
Lefebvre, Henri, 170, 320n13
Leon, Judge Richard, 32, 56–57, 59, 
60–61, 78, 167, 311n86
Lerman, Amy, 260, 338n29
Lessig, Larry, 24, 276
Leviathan, 17, 55, 299n107
Levine, Yasha, 102–103, 206, 285n15, 
306n100, 326n41, 327n69
Levy, Karen, 181, 308n38, 323n42, 
325n33,  330n10
Lexis- Nexis, 198
liberal democracy, 13, 17, 20, 22–23, 47; 
liberalism, 208–216; repression in, 
90–92, 115, 235–236, 287n50; virtual 
democracy, 254–260
Light, Jennifer S., 317n46
“Like” button, 1, 3–5, 35, 41, 50, 90, 115, 
138, 157, 217, 228
Lindsay, Mayor John, 154
Lindsay, Vachel, 173
linguistic analysis, 43, 102–103
LinkedIn, 41, 114, 242, 334n23
Liptak, Adam, 332n3
liquid modernity, 73, 299n96
literal transparence, 125, 309n41
local police departments, 72, 245
Lookalike Audiences, 160–161, 318n67
López, Priscila, 132–135, 313n101
Louis XIII, 93
Louis XIV, 93
Louis XV, 62
LOVEINT, 182
Lukes, Steven, 331n25
LUSTRE program, 65
Lynch, Judge Gerald E., 295n8, 
296n54
Lyon, David, 207
MacAskill, Ewen, 24, 269, 286n30, 
297n62, 323n43, 331n32, 335n45
Mall of America, 97, 107
malware, 216, 240–243, 273, 297n62
Manning, Chelsea, 125, 265–266, 268, 
270, 278
Maoists, 81
Marin, Louis, 95, 304n64
marketized subjects, 22, 26, 207
Martin, Reinhold, 309n47
Marx, Karl, 165, 170, 212, 319n77, 331n25
Masco, Joseph, 311n79
Mashable . com, 189–190, 323n6
mass incarceration, 19–20, 223, 236, 
248–249, 258, 333n6, 338n30
MasterCard, 268, 277, 340n33
matching logics, 145, 157–159, 162–163
Mauriac, François, 170, 320n14
May 1968, 81
Maycotte, Higinio, 137,  312n95
Mayer- Schoenberger, Viktor, 162, 245, 
288n63, 318n72, 335n43
McBride, Keally, 96, 305n70, 338n19, 
347
McCahill, Michael, 329n7, 342n80, 
343n91; UK Schools Study, 218–221, 
229–233, 278
McCarthyism, 188
McConnell, NSA Director Michael, 
68–69
McDonaldization, 95, 304n66

358  Index
McKinsey and Company, 134, 136–137, 
312n95
McNamara, Robert S., 154–156
mechanical calculator, 163
Medbase200, 199–200, 202–204
meta phors, 26–27, 46, 81, 118, 132, 249
Metasploit app, 273
MetroCards, 1, 17
Mexico, 216, 220, 270
Microsoft , 34, 72, 79, 167, 188, 233; 
cooperation with NSA and FBI, 
65–67; PRISM, 10, 66; statelike 
power, 215; revenues, 210–211; Xbox 
privacy issues, 114
Miles, Steven, 77, 95–96, 240, 305n67
military discipline, 85,  197
military- industrial complex, 66, 227
Miller, D.A., 167, 287n47, 319n5, 320n6
Millions March NYC, 16, 130
Mills, Lindsay, 32
Mirowski, Phillip, 99, 306n90
mirrored glass pavilion, 25, 107–111, 
120–140, 236, 249, 253, 279. See also 
glass  house
Mitchell, Timothy, 212–213, 215, 
328n85; “Th e Limits of the State,” 
213–214, 328n85
Mitchell, W. J. T., 89, 267, 303n42, 
305n84, 319n5
Model Penal Code, 37, 291n21
Moglen, Eben, 24, 117, 211, 254, 272, 
277, 281; on defi nition of privacy, 
319n5
Monahan, Torin, 24, 78, 300n123, 
325n33, 330n10
moral career, 224, 229
moralistic, 162–163
Morone, Jennifer Lyn, 263–264, 
339n4
Morozov, Evgeny, 188, 256, 323n3, 
337n15
mortifi cation of the self, 19, 25, 217–225, 
233, 329n1
mosaics, 129, 311n86
Mouse Trap, 265, 339n19
MySpace . com, 36, 65, 244
narratives of self, 128–131
Narus (Boeing), 65, 68
National Reconnaissance Offi  ce, 78
national security, 2, 56–58, 69, 73–74, 
101, 112, 166, 175–178, 183, 190, 265
National Security Agency (NSA), 2, 
10–13, 24, 66–72, 75–77, 120–122, 
239–243; BOUNDLESS INFOR-
MANT, 209; call chaining analysis, 
121–122; corporate- intelligence 
cooperation, 66–77, 211; doppelgänger 
logic, 163; economic espionage, 65, 
216, 241; Global Access Operations, 
14, 121; harming reputations, 
247–248; “We kill people based on 
metadata,” 24, 115; LOVEINT, 
182–183; LUSTRE program, 65; 
malware, 240–243; mission, 122; 
neoliberalism, 65, 70, 98, 213; Optic 
Nerve, 112–114; Orwell, 31–33; 
outsourcing, 65, 70, 73, 98, 101; 
PRISM, 10–15, 18, 65–66, 75–76, 180, 
209, 239; QUANTUMINSERT, 
240–242; RFID devices, 240; 
Section 215 program, 27–28, 32, 55–61, 
115–116, 167, 213; sharing intimate 
images, 182, 230; size of, 77; Tailored 
Access Program, 126–127, 240–242; 
Trea sure Map, 120–121, 131; UP-
STREAM, 65, 76, 209, 239; Unit 
8200 (Israel), 246–247; Utah Data 

Index  359
Center, 275; Xbox surveillance, 114; 
XKeyscore, 24, 63–64, 75–76, 113, 134
Neiman Marcus, 65, 297n62
Nelson, Deborah, 172, 321n19
neoliberalism, 19, 64, 73, 92–93, 
95–100, 98–100, 167–169, 176–178, 
199, 215, 283; architecture of, 93–97; 
defi ned, 98–99; distinct from 
securitarian logics, 97–100; Face-
book, 99–100; Foucault, 93, 215; 
impact on privacy, 176–178
Netfl ix, 22, 48, 73, 79, 114, 145, 157–159, 
188, 215, 227
Neustar, 73–74
New Deal, 55, 57–61, 78
New York City Police Department 
(NYPD), 16, 79, 90, 243–244, 342n79
New York Times, 2, 34; art review, 109; 
best- seller list, 260; editorializing, 
31, 54, 130; exposing, 6–7, 266; 
reporting, 74, 194, 202, 240, 242–243, 
247
New Zealand, 75, 113
News Feed, 43–45, 292n31
Next Generation Identifi cation, 91, 144
nonymous, 231
nothing to hide, 19, 178, 181, 183, 221, 
232–233
Noyes, Andrew, 4
nudity, 112–113
Nussbaum, Martha, 40, 292n28, 347
NYU Brennan Center, 238
Obama, President Barack, 27, 31–33, 55, 
57–61, 115, 191, 209–210, 216, 261, 279
objective self- awareness theory, 218, 
329n5
Occupy Wall Street, 277, 282, 344n3, 
345n10
Offi  ce of Tailored Access Operations 
(TAO), 126, 240–242
onboarding, 159–160, 239
online shopping, 13, 189, 206
opacity, 25, 107, 119, 124–126, 205
Open Data movement, 276
Operation Crew Cut (NYPD), 243; 
see also New York City Police 
Department (NYPD)
Operation Shamrock, 68, 298n75
Operation Torpedo, 273
Optic Nerve, 111–113, 116, 230, 307n11, 
308n22
Orbitz . com, 116
Orwell, George, 26, 31–39, 41, 43, 
45–47, 49, 51–53, 56, 282, 289, 290n1, 
344n4; 1984, 26, 31–37, 39–40, 46–48, 
282; Orwellian, 28, 32, 36, 52, 56, 221, 
288n61, 290n7
Outlook . com, 65–67, 169
outsourcing, 64, 70, 73, 79, 98
packet sniff er, 73, 115
Paglen, Trevor, 275, 342nn75–76
Paltalk, 10, 66
panoptic power, 81, 91–92, 301n8
panopticon, 27, 38, 80–103, 120, 267; 
acoustic surveillance, 115; contrast to 
expository power, 90–92, 115–118, 
126; employee supervision, 197; 
positive view, 80, 275. See also 
Bentham, Jeremy
Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 
173–175,  321n21
paper- squeeze, 40–41, 164. See also 
Guillauté, Jacques- François
Parole board, 152, 316n33
Parsons, Talcott, 236, 248–249, 
336n57

360  Index
Pasquale, Frank, 24, 124, 198, 275, 
289n78, 310n71, 326n43, 342n72, 347; 
Th e Black Box Society, 124, 289n78, 
310n71, 326n43
PatternTracer, 121
Pauley III, Judge William H., 55–56, 57, 
59, 61, 78, 295n8, 296n54
PayPal, 268
penitence, 100, 129
Pentonville prison (London),  84
people- based marketing, 6–7, 159, 239
Petty, William, 164, 318n73
Pew Research Center, 166, 274, 313n112, 
319n4, 329n2, 332n3, 342n68
phenomenal opacity, 25, 119, 124
Philosophy, 170–172; philosophy of 
risk, 152; philosophy of transparence, 
266–267
Pidgin, 271
Pitch Interactive, 191
Planet Hollywood, 95
pockets of opacity, 124–126
Podesta, John, 60
Poindexter, Adm. John, 101, 120, 
291n26
Poitras, Laura, 24, 66, 269, 275, 287n45, 
297n62, 310n56, 325n30, 335n45
Polaroid, 13
po liti cal disobedience, 280–283
po liti cal disobedient, 46, 280–283
Poncela, Pierrette, 288n60
Posner, Richard, 175, 177
Pozen, David, 75, 299n107, 311n86, 347
PPBS analysis, 154
predilections, 13, 34, 47, 205. See also 
addiction; fetish
President’s Review Group on Intelli-
gence and Communications 
Technologies, 27, 57–60, 290n85
PRISM program, 10–12, 18, 65, 98, 100, 
286n30, 297n61, 298n65
prison, 20, 38, 81–84, 149, 223–233, 
235–236, 248–249, 259–261, 267–269, 
282
Prisons Information Group (GIP), 
282–283, 344n5
privacy, 32, 40, 211, 213, 218, 242–243, 
274–275; defi ned, 319n5; eclipse of, 
166–183; enhancing, 27, 58–60, 211, 
269–272; Goff man, 229–233; 
historical, 68; loss of, 13–14, 19, 207, 
277; Optic Nerve, 113–114; prospects, 
274–275; risks to, 58
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight 
Board, 58, 60
privatization, 64, 73, 98–99, 167, 176, 
274–275
Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 44, 292n31
ProPublica, 223, 287n43, 300n109, 
318n61, 326n54, 330n15, 340n34
Prosody, 271
Puritans, 86, 248
Pynchon, Th omas, 31
Quakers, 86, 248
quantifi ed self, 13, 47, 128–129, 164–165
QUANTUMINSERT program, 241
Quetelet, Adolphe, 148
racialized overincarceration, 235, 248, 
333n6, 338n30. See also mass 
incarceration
Radio Communications Act of 1912, 68
Radio Frequency/Pathway technology, 
38, 219, 237, 240, 242, 291n26, 325n33, 
334n20
Rajchman, John, 343n96

Index  361
RAND Corporation, 153–155
rational choice approaches, 163, 168, 
176–178, 180, 317n45
Reagan, President Ronald, 101
reasonable expectations of privacy, 172
recommendation algorithms, 14, 20, 
22, 48, 60, 102, 157–160, 207, 217, 227, 
318n54
regression analysis, 146, 150, 156, 162–163
Regulation of Investigatory Powers 
Act (UK), 113
Reich, Wilhelm, 47, 49–50, 228
relations of power, 15, 24, 64, 81–82, 89, 
215, 262, 281
reputational harm, 112, 247
Reuters, 112, 114, 183, 265–266, 307n18, 
323n46
Revere, Paul, 59
reversal of the spectacle into surveil-
lance, 83–85, 88–89
RFID tags, 136
Riley, Terence, 309n43
risk, 19, 57–59, 61, 129, 141, 148–149, 
151–152, 205, 238, 268, 279
Ritzer, George, 95, 304n66
Rocke fel ler IV, Sen. John D., 198–199, 
 202
Rodríguez- Velasco, Jesús, 347
Rohe, Mies van der, 118
Roosendaal, Arnold, 4
Rosa, Hartmut, 299n97
Rose, Nikolas, 148, 315n20
Rosenberg, Karen, 109, 307n4
Rothman, David, 223, 330n18
Rowe, Colin, 309n41
Rubenfeld, Jed, 320n5
Rumsfeld, Donald, 177
Rusbridger, Alan, 31, 290n3, 323n43, 
331n32
Salecl, Renata, 347
Salon . com, 33, 291n16, 325n35
Samsung, 20, 188, 210, 215, 242, 288n61
Sanchez, Julian, 54, 294n3
Sartre, Jean- Paul, 170–172, 320n10
satellites, 78–79, 132, 172, 238
Sawyer, Stephen, 328n92
Scalia, Justice Antonin, 179
ScanOps (Google), 125
schizoanalysis, 50–51, 228
Schlanger, Margo, 277, 343n85
Schlesinger, James R., 155, 317n47
Schmidt, Eric, 169, 198, 288n58, 320n9
Schneier, Bruce, 54, 289n81, 294n1
Schnitt, Barry, 4–5
school discipline, 17, 85–87, 96, 197, 
219–221, 278
Schopfl in, Jaime, 5
Schumpeter, Joseph, 257
Scorelogix, 205
Secret Department of the Post Offi  ce, 
68
securitarian logics, 17, 95, 101
securitarian power, 93, 95, 100, 116
sécurité, 2, 92–93, 96–97, 116–117, 
 304n59
security- commerce complex, 27, 65, 
72–74, 77–79, 187, 215,  253
security- corporate collusion, 11, 26, 
66–72
Sedwick, Eve Kosofsky, 311n75
Self, Jason, 270,  341n48
self- awareness, 218,  279
self- confi dence, 26, 173, 217–219
self- esteem, 22, 218,  231
self- governance, 14, 86,  254
self- sacrifi ce, 279
selfi e, 47, 52, 108–110, 115, 119, 122, 
129–130

362  Index
Semantic Traffi  c Analyzer STA 6400, 
65
Sensenbrenner, Jim, 34
sensors, 32, 123, 132, 138
sexuality, 36, 49–50, 92, 214, 306n101
sexual orientation, 131, 247
Shanken, Ed, 275, 342n78
shell as hard as steel, 249–250, 283
Silent Circle, 271, 341n53
Silicon Valley, 65–66, 72, 157, 253
Simon, Jonathan, 315n20, 347
Simon, William, 80, 275
simulacrum, 94
Skinner, Quentin, 254, 336n3
Skocpol, Th eda, 212, 328n82
Skydrive, 65, 67
Skype, 10–11, 14, 18, 22, 47, 66, 75, 79, 
111, 188
Slutzky, Robert, 309n41
Smith, Adam, 165
Smith, Winston, 32–41, 46–47, 52–53, 
282
Snapchat, 3, 36, 41, 110
Snowden, Edward, 2–3, 23–24, 75, 121, 
256, 265–270, 278–279, 281; BOUND-
LESS INFORMANT, 209; 
corporate- intelligence cooperation, 
66–72; courage of truth, 278–279; 
economic espionage, 65, 216; “Five 
Eyes,” 77; harming reputations, 
247–248; LOVEINT, 182; Optic 
Nerve, 112–114; Orwell, 31–34; 
PRISM program, 10–11, 66, 209; 
reactions to revelations, 166–167, 180, 
256; Section 215 program, 27; 
self- presentation, 98, 279; sharing 
nude pictures, 182, 230; Tailored 
Access Operations, 126–127, 
240–243; Trea sure Map program, 15; 
UPSTREAM, 209; urgency, 281; 
XKeyscore, 64–66
Soar, Daniel, 220, 313n110, 330n11
social control, 148, 150, 153, 225
society: punitive society, 19, 81, 89–90, 
92, 97, 214; society of the spectacle, 
19, 88–90, 303n38; societies of 
control, 19, 262, 288n66, 317n48, 
339n1; surveillance society, 78, 233, 
300n123, 327n72
Solove, Daniel, 24, 221, 277, 287n51; 
on defi nition of privacy, 320n5
soma, 45, 111
Souter, Justice David, 179
sovereignty, 64, 93, 188, 262
speaking truth to power, 279
Sprint, 72
stahlhartes Gehäuse, 236, 249, 333n7
Stasi regime (GDR), 17, 126, 254, 336n2
state: “bring the state back in,” 78, 212, 
328n32; boundary of the state, 26, 
187–216; state and society, 8, 208, 
211–213; state security apparatus, 2, 
22–23, 33, 81, 87–90, 101, 117–120, 198, 
214–215, 275; state statistics, 132, 140, 
146–150, 246; statelike, 79, 214–215; 
surveillance state, 27–28, 32, 54–79, 
277
Stateville Prison (Joliet, IL), 90, 147, 
149, 303n44
statistical control, 153–155, 162–163
Steel Mesh, 25, 234–235, 237, 239, 241, 
243, 245, 247, 249, 332n1
Stefancik, Gregg, 5
Stewart, Jon, 97
stoic examination of conscience, 129
Stoler, Ann,  347
stop- and- frisk, 16
Storify . com, 128

Index  363
Strauss, Leo, 178
Street View (Google), 15, 131, 193–194, 
222, 235, 324n24
Studeman, William, 69
subjectivity, 14, 23, 26, 165, 217–221, 
224–226, 233; humanist conception of, 
172–175; rational choice approach to 
subjectivity, 178–179; shift  in concep-
tions of, 180–181; subjectivation, 227. 
See also mortifi cation of the self
Sunstein, Cass, 292n29
Supercomputer, 163
Supreme Court, 172, 174–176, 178–180, 
193–194,  324
surveillance- industrial empire, 27, 66, 98
surveillant assemblage, 50, 228, 287n51, 
293n55, 294n67, 317n49, 319n1, 331n31
symbolic interaction/power, 64, 79, 
130, 229, 328n81
Szasz, Th omas, 37, 223, 291n24, 330n18
Target, 65, 124, 138, 162, 188, 194–195, 215; 
predicting pregnancy, 124, 194, 246
Taussig, Michael, 344n3
Taylorism, 196
TechAmerica Foundation, 139, 312n95, 
313n116, 314n133
Telcordia, 74
telecommunications companies, 2, 27, 
64–74, 178, 209, 213, 241, 245
telescreen, 21, 38
tenticular power, 78–79
themed space, 93, 96–97, 107; theme 
park, 93, 95–96; themed shopping 
mall, 93. See also amusement park
Th omas, Kendall, 347
Th ompson, Kevin, 344n6
Th oreau, Henry David, 173, 321n26
thoughtcrime, 35, 37, 40
Tilh, Arnauld du, 141, 143–144
timetables, 17, 196
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 84, 254–255, 
258–260, 281; Democracy in America, 
254, 258, 260, 336n5; On Th e Peniten-
tiary System, 84, 259–260
Tor, 271, 273, 277, 341n57
total awareness, 39, 62, 100, 115, 122, 131, 
164–165
total institutions, 224, 226–227, 
232–233
Travelocity . com, 116
Trea sure Map program, 15, 120, 131, 
287n45
trucking, 195, 325n33,  330n10
truth- telling, 100, 278–281. See also 
courage
Tumblr . com, 13, 75, 114
Twitter . com, 3–4, 31, 42, 75, 100, 
114–115, 131, 138, 189, 227; Cuban 
Twitter, 7–10; NYPD, 243–244; 
onboarding, 160; recommend 
algorithms, 158
two bodies, 13, 124, 236, 253
Unit 8200 (Israel), 246, 335n44
United Kingdom, 65, 68, 75, 113, 195, 
218, 276, 298n76
United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 7–10
University of California, Berkeley, 
101
University of Chicago, 149, 176, 209, 
221
UPS, 162, 168, 271
UPSTREAM program, 65
Uribe, Carlos Gomez, 158
USA FREEDOM Act, 27, 61, 167
USA PATRIOT Act, 295n8

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
364  Index
Vaidhyanathan, Siva, 25, 47, 91, 126, 168
Venmo . com, 22
Venturi, Robert, 96
Verizon, 72, 245, 291n13
Vidler, Anthony, 118, 289n77, 309n44
Vimeo . com, 189, 297n59, 323n5, 339n17
Vine . com, 3, 47, 198
virtual authenticity, 127
virtual democracy, 253, 255–257, 259, 261
virtual seduction, 122
virtual transparence, 15–18, 22, 25, 
107–109, 131, 249, 270; defi ned, 
118–122; mortifi cation, 233; radiation, 
243; steel mesh, 234–237
Visa, 268
voter turnout, 16, 255–257
voy eur is tic, 90, 115, 183, 229
Wacquant, Loïc, 333n6, 347
Wall Street Journal, 3–4, 202, 204, 207, 
285n1
Walmart, 136, 162, 196
war on terror, 32, 56, 311n79
Warren, Samuel, 321n29
Weaver, Vesla, 260, 338n29
Weber, Max, 78, 188, 236, 248–249; 
Th e Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism, 248, 333n7, 336n58
Western Union, 67–68, 298n75
WeTransfer . com,  15
whistle- blower, 266, 268, 271, 278, 
294n5
Whitman, Walt,  173
Wi- Fi, 1, 15, 35, 47, 127, 193–194, 222
WikiLeaks, 24, 265–268, 277, 339n21, 
340n26, 347
Wilson, Andrew Norman, 125, 310n74
Wired . com, 19, 52, 97, 137, 194, 243, 245, 
273
Wiretap Act, 193–194
Wolfowitz, Paul, 177
Wolin, Sheldon S., 260, 337n18, 338n20
World Economic Forum, 139, 314n129
World Privacy Forum, 326n57
Wu, Tim, 125, 310n73, 347
Xbox, 20, 114, 234
XKeyscore Program, 24, 38, 62–64, 
112–113, 122, 134; and PRISM, 10–13, 
75–76
Yahoo!, 75, 210, 241, 293n49; and 
PRISM, 10, 66; and Optic Nerve, 
111–114; Yahoo Messenger, 111–112
Yardley, Herbert, 67
Yoff e, Emily, 294n69, 307n10
youth gangs, 243–244, 292n30, 334n30
YouTube . com, 3, 10, 36, 103, 131, 136, 
138, 241, 243; and PRISM, 65–66
Zappos . com, 116
Zerilli, Linda, 311n75
Zhao, Shanyang, 128, 287n51, 311n83, 
329n1
Zimbardo, Philip, 219
Zuckerberg, Mark, 136, 166, 192, 
286n41, 313n113
ZunZuneo, 8–10
www.Ebook777.com

