www.allitebooks.com

Extending Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 
Cookbook
A practical guide to extending and maximizing the potential 
of Dynamics AX using common Microsoft technologies
Murray Fife
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Extending Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
Cookbook
Copyright © 2013 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the 
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without 
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers 
and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or 
indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies 
and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt 
Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: August 2013
Production Reference: 1190813
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78216-833-1
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Sandeep Vaity (sandeep.vaity@yahoo.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Murray Fife
Reviewers
Angela Buchanan
Kamalakannan Elangovan
Chris Merchant
Muhammad Amir Nazim
Acquisition Editor
Joanne Fitzpatrick
Lead Technical Editor
Antony Lowe
Technical Editors
Larissa Pinto
Amit Ramadas
Project Coordinator
Kranti Berde
Proofreader
Julie Jackson
Indexers
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Rekha Nair
Production Coordinator
Shantanu Zagade
Cover Work
Shantanu Zagade
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Murray Fife is a Microsoft Dynamics AX MVP, a presenter, and an author with over 18 years 
of experience in the software industry.
Like most people he has paid his dues as a developer, as an implementation consultant, 
and a trainer. He has a hard-to-ind blend of technical and interpersonal skills and spends 
his days working with companies solving their problems with the Microsoft suite of products, 
specializing in Dynamics AX solutions.
No ideas are ever created in a vacuum, and there were a lot of people that 
helped and inspired a lot of what is in this book. Some of the people that I 
need to thank in particular are Jack Payne, for letting me experiment with 
coding examples over the many years that we worked together; Larry Farley, 
for introducing me to Dynamics AX and giving me a whole new world of 
tools to tinker with; Ryan Kaul, for helping me with my irst line of X++ code; 
Chris Hoer, for showing me all of the ins and outs of Dynamics AX, and for 
answering all of my many questions; and Andy Vabulas, for supporting me 
throughout the book.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Angela Buchanan is a Software Developer and Technical Consultant for Dynamics AX. She 
is currently working as a freelance consultant in the United Kingdom.
Angela began working with AX in 2001, while completing her Computer Science degree at The 
University of Waikato in New Zealand. After a successful implementation of version 2.5, and 
later upgrade to 3, the husband and bags were packed up and moved over to England to seek 
out bigger project challenges, and for a taste of world travel.
Since this move, Angela has worked on many AX implementations, specializing in business 
solutions design, X++ programming, reporting, and business intelligence. She is a Microsoft 
Certiied Professional for AX: Development, Installation, and Coniguration, as well as key 
modules: Finance, Projects, Production, Trade, and Logistics; and is also a Microsoft  
Certiied Trainer for AX.
A big thanks to the author for all his efforts in writing this book and for 
inviting me to be one of the reviewers. I've learned lots of useful tricks 
through the process.
www.allitebooks.com

Kamalakannan Elangovan started his career in 2005 as a Technical Consultant in ERP 
for Sonata, where he played a key role in the development of Business Integration solutions 
for Microsoft. He later moved on to head the Business Integration Development Team. He 
spearheaded the development of a commodity trading vertical for a U.K.-based ISV. It is 
through his experience that Kamal picked up his passion for product development, and  
this passion has driven his career since then.
In 2008 Kamal joined InnoVites and led their product development team, creating one  
of the irst verticals, such as cable and wires, for Dynamics AX on multidimension industry. 
Currently, he works with CuroGens, Inc. as a Development Manager overseeing the  
product development efforts. As a Microsoft Dynamics AX enthusiast and architect,  
he shares his insights by contributing to the Microsoft Dynamics community through  
his blog http://kamalblogs.wordpress.com.
I would like to thank Packt Publishing and the author for offering me the 
chance to review and read this wonderful book. It has been a great  
learning experience.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support iles, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support iles and downloads related to your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub iles 
available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print book 
customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at service@
packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
TM
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book library. 
Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books. 
Why Subscribe?
 
f
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
 
f
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
 
f
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access PacktLib 
today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notiied! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on Twitter, 
or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Extending Out with SharePoint 
7
Introduction 
7
Coniguring a My Site host site  
8
Using note boards to microblog from the Role Centers 
14
Adding My Site proile links to the Role Centers 
16
Creating shared document libraries 
20
Linking document libraries to Dynamics AX records 
26
Summary 
32
Chapter 2: Reports and Dashboards 
33
Introduction 
33
Creating a Power View report from Dynamics AX 
34
Creating a Power View report from Power View cubes 
37
Saving Power View dashboards and reports 
43
Adding a Power View report to a Role Center 
45
Exporting a Power View report to PowerPoint 
49
Creating a PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint 
52
Creating a PowerPivot data source for Power View 
56
Creating a Power View report via the PowerPivot gallery 
60
Linking Power View reports to Dynamics AX forms 
63
Summary 
68
www.allitebooks.com

ii
Table of Contents
Chapter 3: Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards 
69
Introduction 
69
Creating a Business Intelligence site 
70
Coniguring a PerformancePoint workspace to connect to the  
Dynamics AX cubes 
73
Creating a scorecard in PerformancePoint 
76
Adding scorecards to a user's Role Center 
80
Creating an analytical chart in PerformancePoint 
84
Adding an analytical chart to a user's Role Center 
88
Using Decomposition Trees to drill into the analytical charts 
91
Creating PerformancePoint dashboards in SharePoint 
94
Summary 
102
Chapter 4: Communication and Collaboration 
103
Introduction 
104
Linking Outlook with Dynamics AX 
104
Flagging Dynamics AX contacts for synchronization 
108
Synchronizing Dynamics AX contacts with Outlook 
110
Using the Outlook Social Connector to research Dynamics AX contacts 
111
Communicating with contacts from within Dynamics AX 
117
Using Lync to collaborate with other users directly from Dynamics AX 
119
Summary 
124
Chapter 5: Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests 
125
Introduction 
125
Creating Case categories 
126
Assigning tasks through Cases 
130
Creating appointments through Cases 
132
Deining the standard processes for Case management 
134
Assigning Knowledge articles to Cases 
138
Associating additional business entities to Cases 
141
Creating projects from Cases 
142
Creating collaboration workspaces for Case projects 
144
Summary 
146
Chapter 6: Organizing Your Worklows 
147
Introduction 
147
Creating a new worklow design from a template 
148
Adding task steps to worklows 
151
Saving and activating worklows 
154
Setting the default worklows 
156

iii
Table of Contents
Submitting and using worklows 
157
Adding conditional decisions to a worklow 
160
Adding manual decisions to a worklow 
164
Adding worklow status notiications 
169
Adding text placeholders to worklow messages 
173
Summary 
177
Chapter 7: Reporting in Ofice 
179
Introduction 
179
Creating a document data source 
180
Creating a Dynamics AX document template within Word 
181
Creating document template libraries 
187
Registering documents to template libraries 
189
Summary 
195
Chapter 8: Talking to the Outside World 
197
Introduction 
197
Adding login accounts for customers in Active Directory 
198
Coniguring customer accounts in Dynamics AX 
201
Associating customer logins with customer accounts 
203
Coniguring a product catalog 
206
Adding images and presentation information to product catalogs 
212
Summary 
217
Chapter 9: Creating Help 
219
Introduction 
219
Creating a new help publisher ID 
220
Creating a new help publisher content folder 
222
Creating your help content 
226
Creating a Task Recorder walkthrough 
230
Turning a task recording document into a help topic 
234
Summary 
237
Chapter 10: Web Services and Forms 
239
Introduction 
239
Creating a Dynamics AX web service 
240
Creating a web service wrapper 
244
Using a Dynamics AX web service in an InfoPath form 
251
Creating custom OData queries to retrieve Dynamics AX data 
257
Building InfoPath lookups using OData queries 
261
Summary 
267

iv
Table of Contents
Chapter 11: Role Center Personalization and Customization 
269
Introduction 
269
Creating a new Role Center template 
270
Creating a new Dynamics AX user proile 
274
Adding cues to Role Center proiles 
278
Adding cues through the Advanced Filter editor 
280
Adding RSS feeds to Role Centers 
283
Removing the ribbon bar from Role Centers 
287
Removing the navigation bar from Role Centers 
288
Embedding Role Centers into Outlook 
289
Summary 
292
Index 
293

Preface
Dynamics AX is a great application for businesses, but if you are just using it to track 
customers, sales, vendors, purchase orders, and inventory, you are not getting the most out 
of the system. There is a lot of free functionality that is built into Dynamics AX, and because it 
is also built and integrated with all of the other Microsoft tools such as Microsoft SQL Server, 
Microsoft SharePoint, and the Microsoft Ofice Suite, there is so much more that you can use 
to help you make Dynamics AX even more productive.
This book will take you through a number of recipes that will help you extend and personalize 
your Dynamics AX installation with very little to no coding using Microsoft technologies that 
should already be available and conigured as part of your default installation. As a result,  
it will just cost you a little elbow grease and a little investment in time.
Each recipe will guide you through all the conigurations that you need to make to your 
Dynamics AX system, and also give you examples of how you can use them in the real world. 
Although you may not need the particular examples that we show in this book, it should be 
easy to ind situations that you will be able to apply techniques and tools that we will show  
in this book that will make your life just a little easier.
What the book covers
Chapter 1, Extending Out with SharePoint, will show you how to take advantage of some of  
the features within SharePoint to help you augment data within Dynamics AX through My  
Sites and Document Repositories.
Chapter 2, Reports and Dashboards, shows you how to create your own ad hoc reports and 
dashboards by using tools that you are already using such as Excel, or by using PowerPivot 
and Power View to create interactive dashboards and reporting galleries.
Chapter 3, Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards, will focus on how you can extend out Role 
Centers by using PerformancePoint charts and reports, and also how you can add external 
data such as RSS feeds and internal blog posts to Role Centers to get real-time information.

Preface
2
Chapter 4, Communication and Collaboration, will show how to link and use the productivity 
and collaboration tools such as Outlook and Lync to keep an up-to-date track on all your tasks 
and appointments, and also to contact others inside and outside your organization.
Chapter 5, Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests, will give examples of how you 
can use the new cases capabilities within Dynamics AX 2012 to manage and streamline your 
business processes.
Chapter 6, Organizing Your Worklows, shows how to take advantage of the in-built worklow 
capabilities in Dynamics AX 2012 to manage common business processes, and also how to 
develop your own worklows to manage the not so common processes.
Chapter 7, Reporting in Ofice, focuses on how you can use the Microsoft Dynamics AX Ofice 
Add-Ins to create report and form templates in Word and Excel that are then accessed through 
Dynamics AX, and also how you can use Visio to create unstructured dashboards.
Chapter 8, Talking to the Outside World, will show how you can use the Customer and  
Vendor portals that are delivered with Dynamics AX to share information with people  
outside the organization.
Chapter 9, Creating Help, will introduce the help authoring system that is built into the 
Dynamics AX framework, and show you how you can take advantage of it to build your  
own integrated help system and knowledge base.
Chapter 10, Web Services and Forms, will show you how you can use Microsoft InfoPath to 
create custom forms that are linked to Microsoft Dynamics AX, and also how you can use 
these forms to capture information for your business.
Chapter 11, Role Center Personalization and Customization, will review all of the user 
personalization that is available within Dynamics AX such as iltering, cues, showing,  
hiding and adding ields to screens, and also the creation of custom user menus.
What you need for this book
All the examples shown in this book were done with the Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 virtual 
machine image that was downloaded from the Microsoft CustomerSource or PartnerSource 
site. If you don't have your own installation of Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012, you can also use 
the images found on the Microsoft Learning Download Center. The following list of software 
from the virtual image was leveraged within this book:
 
f
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 (both R1 and R2)
 
f
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 Enterprise
 
f
Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2 (both Standard and Enterprise)
 
f
Microsoft SharePoint 2010 (both Foundation and Enterprise)
 
f
Microsoft Ofice Excel 2010

Preface
3
 
f
Microsoft Ofice Word 2010
 
f
Microsoft Ofice Outlook 2010
 
f
Microsoft Ofice InfoPath 2010
 
f
Microsoft Ofice Visio 2010
 
f
Microsoft Lync 2010
 
f
Microsoft Visual Studio 2010 Developer Edition
 
f
Microsoft Internet Explorer 8
 
f
Notepad
Even though all the preceding software was used during the development and testing of the 
recipes in this book, they may also work on earlier versions of the software with minor tweaks 
and adjustments, and should also work on later versions without any changes. You can 
download this software from the links mentioned in the following table:
Sr No.
Software name
URL
1
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 (both R1 and R2)
http://www.microsoft.com/
2
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 Enterprise
http://www.microsoft.com/
3
Microsoft SQL Server 2008 R2 (both Standard 
and Enterprise)
http://www.microsoft.com/
4
Microsoft SharePoint 2010 (both Foundation 
and Enterprise)
http://www.microsoft.com/
5
Microsoft Office Excel 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
6
Microsoft Office Word 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
7
Microsoft Office Outlook 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
8
Microsoft Office InfoPath 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
9
Microsoft Office Visio 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
10
Microsoft Lync 2010
http://www.microsoft.com/
11
Microsoft Visual Studio 2010 Developer Edition
http://www.microsoft.com/
12
Microsoft Internet Explorer 8
http://www.microsoft.com/
13
Notepad
Who this book is for
Although in some of the recipes that we will show there may be some coding required, the 
code itself is very simple; so you don't have to have to be a developer, just be willing to get 
under the Dynamics AX hood for a short time.

Preface
4
And, although we will be using SharePoint and Microsoft SQL Server to conigure some of the 
examples, you don't have to be a SharePoint guru or a DBA in order to make the changes; you 
just need to be willing to roll your sleeves up and make a few simple tweaks here and there.
Whether you are a power user looking to ill a need, a systems administrator looking for a 
inexpensive solution to a solve a business problem, or a developer wanting to try out other 
technologies rather than spend hours coding, this is the book for you.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between different kinds of 
information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "From the Organization administration area page, 
click on the Case worklow menu item in the Cases folder of the Setup group to view all the 
worklows associated with cases."
A block of code is set as follows:
    <entry>
      <text>Walkthroughs</text>
      <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
      <children>
        <entry>
          <text>Released Product Inventory Lookup</text>
          <Microsoft.Help.F1>108B0027-6EF1-4F3F-80A4-5A5A416FDC2C</
Microsoft.Help.F1>
        </entry>
      </children>
    </entry>
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, in 
menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Then, click on the Save as 
HTML button within the Save group of the Microsoft Dynamics Help tab to publish the  
HTML iles."
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Preface
5
Reader Feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this  
book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us to develop 
titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com,  
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or 
contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer Support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you to 
get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen. 
If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or the code—we would be 
grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can save other readers from frustration 
and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you ind any errata, please report them 
by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata 
submission form link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any 
list of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed by 
selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. At Packt, 
we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come across any 
illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please provide us with the location 
address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with any 
aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.


1
Extending Out with 
SharePoint
In this chapter, we will show you how to take advantage of some of the features within 
SharePoint, to help you add value to Dynamics AX through My Sites and Document 
Repositories. This chapter will cover:
 
f
Coniguring a My Site host site
 
f
Using note boards to microblog from the Role Centers
 
f
Adding My Site proile links to the Role Centers
 
f
Creating shared document libraries
 
f
Linking document libraries to Dynamics AX records
Introduction
SharePoint is one of the core Microsoft technology platforms which allows you to organize 
your iles with shared document libraries, collaborate with others through shared task lists 
and calendars, communicate with others with blogs, and much more, all through a web portal. 
Something that makes SharePoint even more useful is that you don’t have to be a developer 
to conigure these features.
If you have Dynamics AX up and running, then chances are you should already have 
SharePoint installed and conigured, since it is also the foundation for all of the Role Centers 
and enterprise portals that are delivered with Dynamics AX. Although the Role Centers and 
portals are preconigured and use a lot of the features of SharePoint, there are still more 
features that you can take advantage of in conjunction with Dynamics AX that will make  
your system even better.
www.allitebooks.com

Extending Out with SharePoint
8
First we will show how to conigure the My Sites feature so that the users are able to microblog 
and maintain their personal information within SharePoint. Once you have this conigured, 
then you are able to add content from your personal My Site, or links to other My Sites into 
the Role Centers in Dynamics AX. This provides a better collaboration system for the business, 
and also adds a social element to the application.
We will also show how you can create your own document libraries within SharePoint to allow 
users to store documents, such as scanned invoices, and then index and link them back to 
Dynamics AX. This is an alternative to the standard document attachments feature within 
Dynamics AX. SharePoint document libraries allow multiple records to be linked to the same 
document list, and also give you document management features, such as ile check-in and 
out to control who updates the documents.
None of these examples are hard to set up or conigure, but since they require you to add to 
your existing SharePoint sites, you will need to have administrator rights to SharePoint. Also, 
for the last two examples, there is some X++ coding required. Each has only about 10 lines of 
simple code, so even novices should be able to work through the examples.
Coniguring a My Site host site 
SharePoint My Sites give your users the chance to have their very own part of SharePoint  
that they can use to store documents, to update their own personal proile and description,  
to make notes and blog entries and also to connect with other people within the organization. 
In a socially connected workplace, My Sites are great tools to allow the users to post and 
capture knowledge.
If you do not have My Sites conigured, then the irst step is to create a My Sites site within 
SharePoint and link it to your Role Centers so that the users will then be able to access their 
personal proile and content.
Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have access to the 
SharePoint Central Administration console. To check this:
1. Access your server that has SharePoint installed on it.
2. From the program menu, you should be able to ind the SharePoint Central 
Administration Console in the Microsoft SharePoint Products group.

Chapter 1
9
3. When you open the application, you should see a screen similar to this:
How to do it...
To create and link your own My Sites site, follow these steps:
1. From your SharePoint Central Administration console, navigate to the Application 
Management group.
2. Select the Create Site Collection from the Site Collections group.
3. Name your application My Sites.
4. Set the website address to be in the my/personal folder, and name the subfolder 
My Sites.
5. From the Enterprise tab on the Template selection choose My Site Host.

Extending Out with SharePoint
10
6. Don’t forget to assign the Primary and Secondary administrators to the site that you 
are creating:
7. 
Click on OK to create your site.
8. From the Application Management option in Central Administration, select  
the site that we added the My Sites host site to.

Chapter 1
11
9. Click on the Deine button in the ribbon bar, and then select the Managed  
Paths option:
10. Here we will add our new My Site link. You don’t need to type in the full URL, so you 
can skip the host preix.

Extending Out with SharePoint
12
11. Also, you may just want to check the Self-Service Site Creation option, to make sure 
that the feature is turned On:
12. Finally, we need to conigure the User Proile Service application.
13. When you select the application, you will be able to see all of the My Site and  
user proile coniguration options. From here you need to choose the Setup My  
Site menu option.
Remember this link because you may need to come back here 
later to configure profiles, and so on.
14. We just need to conigure the site parameters, the administrator users, and so on.
Make sure that the host URL matches, that is, SharePoint.

Chapter 1
13
How it works...
Once you have My Sites conigured, you will see a My Site option when you select the  
drop-down menu under the user name within SharePoint, as follows:

Extending Out with SharePoint
14
Opening up your My Site will take you to your personal site within SharePoint. Initially it will 
be a little dull, but since you will be the administrator of this little slice of SharePoint, you 
can add information and pictures to your proile, create your own blogs, and browse through 
the organization to see other’s My Sites to see what they are up to. You also have your own 
personal documents area that you are able to save iles to, that you can then share with  
other users in the organization.
Using note boards to microblog from the 
Role Centers
A part of your My Site is a personal note board. If you don’t want to create a full-ledged blog, 
then you can use this to take quick notes for yourself or others within the organization, such 
as reminders that you will be on vacation, alerts about upcoming events, and much more that 
you can publish to the entire organization.
In this recipe, we will show you how to make this even more useful by adding the note board 
directly into the Dynamics AX Role Center. This will allow your users to view your posts quickly 
and get back to work, without having to open another window.

Chapter 1
15
How to do it...
To add a note board panel to the Role Center, follow these steps:
1. From within the Role Center, click on the Personalize this page link in the top-right 
hand corner to enter into the edit mode.
2. Click on the Add a Web Part link where you would like to add the note board.
3. This will open up the web part explorer. From the categories, select the Social 
Collaboration group and this will ilter the available web parts to the My Site controls.
4. Select the Note Board control and click on the Add button:
5. Now click on the Stop Editing button to return to the view mode for the Role Center.
How it works...
Since the Note Board is a direct link to the user’s personal My Site Notes, they are able to post 
directly from Dynamics AX without opening up another browser window:

Extending Out with SharePoint
16
The notes that are posted on the Note Board on the Role Center will show up on the Tags and 
Notes panel within the user’s My Site page. Additionally, if the user makes notes from their My 
Site, then these will show up on the wall of the Role Center.
Adding My Site proile links to the Role 
Centers
Another feature of My Sites is the ability for users to personalize their own proile with 
descriptions, contact details, proile pictures, and also personal notes and interests. Users 
conigure and update their proiles, and then these can be used as a company directory, and 
an easy way to get to know the people you work with.
In this recipe, we will show how you can add your proile link to the Dynamics AX Role Center 
to give you quick access to your own My Site, and also how to add people that you frequently 
contact on your Role Center for quick access. Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have conigured your 
own personal proile within your My Site. To do this carry out the following steps:
1. Access your My Site by selecting the My Site option on the drop-down menu under 
your name in SharePoint.
2. Once you are in your My Site, click on the My Proile link in the top-left hand corner to 
access your proile page.

Chapter 1
17
3. Click on the Edit My Proile link under your proile picture.
This will open up the Proile Maintenance page allowing you to add descriptions, 
avatars, and any other information that you may want to include on your proile:
How to do it...
To add a Contact Details panel to the Role Center, follow these steps:
1. From within the Role Center, click on the Personalize this page link in the top-right 
hand corner to enter into the edit mode.
2. Click on the Add a Web Part link where you would like to add your contact information.
3. This will open up the web part explorer. From the categories, select the Social 
Collaboration group and this will ilter the available web parts to the My Site controls.
www.allitebooks.com

Extending Out with SharePoint
18
4. Navigate to the Contact Details control, and then click on the Add button:
5. This will add the Contact Details web part to the Role Center, but you need to 
conigure it with a contact. To do that, navigate to Click here to add or modify a 
contact link.
6. This will open up the Web Part properties panel, and you will be able to select a 
contact from the address book:
7. 
Click on the Stop Editing button and you are done.

Chapter 1
19
How it works...
Once you have deined a contact for Contact Details, then the information from the My Site of 
that person will be displayed on the Role Center:

Extending Out with SharePoint
20
If you click on the name of the person, then that will take you directly to their personal site:
Creating shared document libraries
One of the strengths of SharePoint is that it is a great document management system. 
Although you can attach documents to records directly within Dynamics AX, you may want to 
use SharePoint as a store, so that people without access to Dynamics AX can still have access 
to the documents. SharePoint also allows you to index documents a number of different ways, 
allowing them to link to more than one record within Dynamics AX.

Chapter 1
21
For this recipe, we will show how you can create an Accounts Payable document library to 
store all of your vendor invoices and scanned documents.
Before we show you how to access these documents from within Dynamics AX, you need to 
create a library to store the documents.
Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have administrator 
privileges on your document management site. To check this carry out the following step:
1. Access the site, and open up the Site Actions menu. You need to make sure that  
you have the ability to create a New Document Library:

Extending Out with SharePoint
22
How to do it...
To create a new document library for your Accounts Payable scans and images, follow  
these steps:
1. From your SharePoint site that you want to store your documents in, access  
the Site Actions menu, and then select the New Document Library menu item:
2. This will open up the Document Library creation form. Give the library a name  
for the area of the business that will be using the documents, and then click  
on the Create button:

Chapter 1
23
3. Now you should have a generic document library. We want to be able to index and 
search through our documents though. So we will add a few index ields to the 
document library. To do this, click on the Create Column button in the Library/
Manage Views section of the ribbon bar:
4. This will open up the Create Column dialog box, and we will create a column for 
Vendor Account Number:

Extending Out with SharePoint
24
5. After doing that, create non-required columns for Invoice Number (AccountNum), 
Document Amount (Amount), Document Date (Date), Purchase Order Number 
(PurchaseOrder), and Company ID (Company).
6. From the Library/Manage Views tab on the ribbon bar, you may also want to 
rearrange and hide the columns to make the library tidier.
How it works...
From the document library, we can now upload our scanned documents and images to 
SharePoint through the Upload Documents button.
Once you have your documents uploaded, you can the open up the Properties panel for the 
document through the drop-down box beside the document name.

Chapter 1
25
The column properties allow you to add additional index information to documents, so that 
later on we are able to search and ind documents that relate to speciic data in the database.
As we index these documents we are able to see the indexed column values in the main view 
of the document library.

Extending Out with SharePoint
26
Additionally, if you have a number of documents in your library, you can use the ilter button to 
just ind the documents that you are looking for.
Linking document libraries to Dynamics AX 
records
Now that you have a document library conigured, you can make it accessible directly from the 
Dynamics AX forms, and have it automatically iltered so that you just see the documents that 
are associated to the information that you are looking for.
In this recipe, we will show how you can link the document library that we just created to the 
Vendor form, and do just that.
Getting ready
This example requires that you access the development environment and make changes to 
forms. Before you start on this example, make sure that you have developer rights on your 
installation of Dynamics AX. To check this carry out the following steps:
1. Open up the form that you are going to modify.
2. Right-click on the form and navigate to the Personalize option.

Chapter 1
27
3. Click on the Information tab and you should be able to see the system form name:
4. Click on the Edit button to the right of the form name and you should be taken  
into the AOT development environment.
How to do it...
To add a link to a SharePoint document library within a form, follow these steps:
1. Create a new development project in AOT, AccountsPayableSharePointDocs.  
Add the VendorTable form to the project:
www.allitebooks.com

Extending Out with SharePoint
28
2. We are going to add a new tab group to the VendorTable form to show the documents 
that relate to the Vendor record. To do that expand the Designs group and ind the 
Design form deinition. Expand MainTab and TabPageDetails, and then right-click  
on the Tabs group, navigate to New Control, and then TabPage:
3. Rename TabPage to AccountsPayableDocuments and also add a caption for 
TabPage in the properties box of Vendor Documents.

Chapter 1
29
4. We need to add a browser to the form so that we can display the SharePoint 
documents window. To do this, right-click on the new tab that we created,  
navigate to the New Control menu, and then select the ActiveX control.
5. When the ActiveX control browser shows up, navigate to the Microsoft Web  
Browser control, and add it to the tab.
6. In the properties panel for the Web Browser control, set the Name property  
to Documents, set the Width property to Column width, and the Height  
property to Column height, so that the control will ill the space that is  
available in the tab control:

Extending Out with SharePoint
30
7. 
Now that we have a control to show the SharePoint site with the documents,  
we just need to initialize it when entering the vendor form. To do this, right-click  
on the Methods group in the VendTable form, select the Override method menu,  
and then activate:
8. This will open up the code editor for the activate method. We will change this by 
creating a URL string that references the Accounts Payable document library in 
SharePoint, and then navigate the browser control to the URL, as follows:
public void activate(boolean _active)
{
    String255 url = “http://intranet.contoso.com/
      Accounts%20Payable%20Documents/Forms/
        AllItems.aspx?IsDlg=1”;
    url = url + “&FilterField1=AccountNum&
      FilterValue1=” + VendTable.AccountNum;
    url = url + “&FilterField2=Company&

Chapter 1
31
      FilterValue2=” + VendTable.dataAreaId;
    Documents.Navigate(url);
    super(_active);
}
Code Snippet 1: VendTable Form activate method
9. Two items to note, we added the IsDlg=1 qualiier to the URL which removes all 
of the navigation and gutter options on the page, and also the Filter qualiiers will 
automatically add a ilter on the AccountNum ield, and the Company indexes.
10. Now we can save the project, and we are inished.
How it works...
When we open up the Vendor Detail form, we will see a new tab at the bottom of the page 
that will list the documents that are indexed with Vendor Account Number:

Extending Out with SharePoint
32
At any time, the users are able to open up the documents, and view the scanned images.
Summary
SharePoint is a great tool for sharing and collaborating, and is even more useful because  
you don’t need to be a developer in order to set it up. In this chapter we looked at just a 
couple of the features that you can use with Dynamics AX, but there are a lot more that  
you can take advantage of.
Some other ways that you can use SharePoint include:
 
f
Creating knowledge bases with Wiki’s, allowing the users to collaboratively update 
information related to products, customers, vendors, or other records in the system
 
f
Enabling blogging within SharePoint so that users can share business insights with 
everyone else in the organization
 
f
Adding document worklows to manage the approval of documents such as Invoices
Since you probably have SharePoint up and running, then it would be a shame not to take 
advantage of it. 

2
Reports and 
Dashboards
In this chapter, we will show you how to create your own ad-hoc reports and dashboards  
by using tools that you are already using such as Excel, or by using PowerPivot and Power  
View to create interactive dashboards and reporting galleries. This chapter will cover:
 
f
Creating a Power View report from Dynamics AX
 
f
Creating a Power View report from Power View cubes
 
f
Saving Power View dashboards and reports
 
f
Adding a Power View report to a Role Center
 
f
Exporting a Power View report to PowerPoint
 
f
Creating a PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint
 
f
Creating a PowerPivot data source for Power View
 
f
Creating a Power View report via the PowerPivot gallery
 
f
Linking Power View reports to Dynamics AX forms
Introduction
Power View is a new reporting tool that was introduced by Microsoft with the release of 
Microsoft SQL Server 2012. Unlike many of the other reporting tools that are available, this 
one is designed so that users can create their own dashboards and reports without needing a 
lot of help, making everyone just a little more productive. Gone are the days where you have to 
export data from Dynamics AX to Excel, and then create a one-off dashboard when you want 
to analyze some data. Now you can create a dashboard in Power View, save it, and return to it 
any time you like.

Reports and Dashboards
34
With the R2 release of Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012, Power View was also embedded directly 
into the forms allowing users to create dashboards and reports on the ly without even 
knowing that they are using Power View.
In this chapter we will show how you can use Power View with the Dynamics AX 2012 R2 to 
create reports, how the users are able to save the reports for others to use, and also how 
you can export the reports to PowerPoint to create interactive presentations that include the 
Power View dashboards.
Later on we will also show how you can use PowerPivot for Excel and PowerPivot galleries in 
SharePoint to create data sources for Power View dashboards and reports, and then even 
embed links within the Dynamics AX forms for the users to quickly access them regardless  
of the version of Dynamics AX that you are running.
The later examples in this chapter may require coniguration to your SharePoint sites in order 
to create the PowerPivot gallery, requiring administrator access, and the last example does 
have a little bit of X++ coding, but apart from that, these examples shouldn't require much 
technical expertise to set up and conigure.
Creating a Power View report from 
Dynamics AX
The Dynamics AX 2012 R2 release has links to Power View embedded directly into the 
application, allowing the users to create their own reports and dashboards with just a  
click of a button.
In this quick recipe, we will show how you can quickly create a report directly from the 
Dynamics AX application.
Getting ready
In order to work through this example, you need to be running Microsoft Dynamics  
AX 2012 R2, or later.
How to do it...
To create a simple ad-hoc report from Dynamics AX, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Customers list from within Accounts Receivable.

Chapter 2
35
2. In the far right corner of the ribbon bar, in the Customer tab there is an Analyze data 
button. Click on this button to open up Power View:
3. When the Power View window opens up, ind the Accounts receivable open 
transactions measure from the ield list on the right and select the checkbox  
to add it to the report canvas:
4. Find the Month dimension that is in the Transaction Date group in the ield list and 
add it to the report.
5. Change the report design to be a column chart by clicking on the Column chart type 
in the Visualizations group on the Design tab of the ribbon bar:

Reports and Dashboards
36
6. To show some segregation of the data, you can ind the Customer group name ield 
that will be in the Customer ield group, and drag it into the legend properties box:
7. 
To inish off the dashboard, we can update the title so that it shows something a little 
more descriptive.
How it works...
Once we have generated our Power View report on the ly,  we are able to click on any of the 
groupings or data within the report and the dashboard will ilter out the data for us, or show 
related information in the chart:

Chapter 2
37
Creating a Power View report from Power 
View cubes
With the Dynamics AX 2012 R2 release, there are additional reporting cubes hidden within 
SharePoint that are not currently linked to the main forms. If you ind them, then you are able 
to create Power View dashboards and reports.
In this example we will show how you can use the Sales cube to build a more elaborate Power 
View dashboard.
www.allitebooks.com

Reports and Dashboards
38
Getting ready
Before you start this recipe, you need to ind where the Power View dashboards are stored. 
You may need to have administrator access to SharePoint for this step. To ind the Power  
View Reports library follow these steps:
1. Open up any Dynamics AX Role Center, and from the Site Actions drop-down menu in 
the top left corner, select the View All Site Content menu option:
2. This will open up the Site Content browser. Here you should be able to see a Power 
View Reports document library and drill down into the contents to see all of the 
reports that have been saved, and also all of the available cubes:

Chapter 2
39
How to do it...
To create a dashboard directly from a Power View cube, follow these steps:
1. Open the drop-down menu for the cube that you want to report off and select the 
Create Power View Report option. In this case we are choosing the Sales cube  
which hasn't been linked to the Dynamics AX client yet:
2. This will open up a blank Power View canvas. We will start off the by adding a title to 
the dashboard:

Reports and Dashboards
40
3. Create a new dashboard panel by checking the Gross proit margin measure from 
the Measures ield group, and also the Month dimension from the Transaction date 
ield group:
4. From the Design tab on the ribbon bar, select the Column chart type from the 
Visualizations group to convert the report to a column chart:

Chapter 2
41
5. Drag the Item group name measure from the Released products ield group into the 
Legend box on the right of the dashboard designer:
6. Add another panel to the report by clicking on the blank canvas. Select the Month 
and Item group name dimensions and the Gross proit margin percent measure. 
Then change the visualization type to be Bar.

Reports and Dashboards
42
7. 
For the third dashboard, create a new Column chart using the Month and Item group 
name dimensions, the Invoice amount measure.
8. For the inal chart, create a Column chart with the Item group name as the only 
dimension, and add the Commission line amount, Cost of goods sold, and Sales  
tax measures:
How it works...
Now you should have a multipanel dashboard. Clicking on any of the elements will ilter out 
the view to show you the related data in the other views:

Chapter 2
43
Saving Power View dashboards and reports
Although creating a Power View dashboard is a simple task, you probably don't want to 
recreate the same report over and over again, and others may be interested in using your 
dashboard as well.
In this quick recipe, we will show how you can save your dashboards back to the  
Power View Reports folder in Dynamics AX so that you and others are able to  
access the data at any time.

Reports and Dashboards
44
How to do it...
If you have a Power View report that you would like to use again, you can save it by following 
these steps:
1. From the File menu on the Power View report designer, just select the  
Save As option:
2. Then give your report a name and save it:

Chapter 2
45
How it works...
Once your dashboard is saved, you can access it from the Power View Reports folder 
within your Role Center content:
Adding a Power View report to a Role Center
With Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 R2, a new Web Part was added that allows you to easily 
embed your Power View dashboards into the Role Centers. Any report or dashboard that you 
create may be added this way, and users are able to view and ilter the information directly 
within the Role Center, or pop the dashboard out of the Role Center and edit the report on  
the ly.
This recipe will show you how to customize your Role Center and add a Power View report  
or dashboard.
How to do it...
To add a Power View dashboard to a Role Center, follow these steps:
1. Click on the Personalize this page link in the top-right of your Role Center within 
Dynamics AX.
2. Click on the Add a Web Part link on the panel that you would like to add the Power 
View dashboard to.

Reports and Dashboards
46
3. This should open up the Web Part browser. Find the Microsoft Dynamics AX category 
group and you should see an SQL Server Power view web part:
4. Select the SQL Server Power view web part and then click on the Add button.
5. Now that you have the web part on your Role Center, conigure it by choosing Edit My 
Web Part option from the context menu of the web part.
6. In the properties box for the SQL Power View web part, click on the list browser icon to 
the right of the Select a report ield to open up the report browser:

Chapter 2
47
7. 
This will take you to the Power View Reports document library on SharePoint and you 
should see all of the Power View dashboards and reports that you have created. Just 
select the one that you would like to add to the Role Center and click on OK:
8. Now click on OK on the web part properties to save the changes, and then click on 
the Stop Editing button on the ribbon bar to return to view mode.
www.allitebooks.com

Reports and Dashboards
48
How it works...
Now when you see your Role Center, the Power View report will be displayed. The data that 
shows up will also be iltered based on the company that you are in, making the report  
context sensitive:
Additionally, if you click on the pop-out icon in the top-right of the Power View report in the 
Role Center, then the report will open in a new explorer window, allowing you to also enter  
edit mode and change the report:

Chapter 2
49
Exporting a Power View report to 
PowerPoint
If you spend your days recreating the same presentation, by refreshing the data in reports 
from Dynamics AX and then reformatting the information, then Power View has a very 
cool feature that you will be able to take advantage of that allows you to export any of the 
dashboards that you create to PowerPoint.
This is not your ordinary export that just takes a screen capture of your current view and then 
pastes it into your presentation, instead Power View is embedded into your presentation. If 
you have security to access the data, then your PowerPoint becomes an interactive dashboard 
whenever you enter into presentation mode. If you deliver the presentation to someone who 
does not have access to the source data, then the reports look just as they did when you last 
updated the data.

Reports and Dashboards
50
You can use this to create internal review presentations, or even start with a template  
and then ilter the data individually to be delivered to customers or vendors for  
performance analysis.
In this quick recipe, we will show how you can easily use the Export to PowerPoint feature  
in Power View to create PowerPoint views.
How to do it...
To export a Power View report to PowerPoint, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Power View report that you want to export, and from the File menu, 
select the Export to PowerPoint option:
2. When the Save As dialog box shows up, give your PowerPoint a name and click  
on Save.

Chapter 2
51
How it works...
When you open up your PowerPoint presentation, your report will be embedded in the slides:

Reports and Dashboards
52
What makes this special though is that when you go into presentation mode, there will be an 
Interact button on the bottom-right of the dashboard:
Clicking on the Interact button will turn the slide into a live dashboard that you are able to drill 
around just like you can do with all of the original dashboards.
Creating a PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint
Up until now, we have just been creating dashboards and reports within Power View from the 
pre-deined cubes that are delivered with Dynamics AX 2012 R2 or later. You are not limited 
to those data sources for reporting though, and you can use Excel and PowerPivot for Excel to 
create your own data sources that you can report off. This is also an option that is available to 
all versions of Dynamics AX, so if you have not yet upgraded to the R2 or higher releases, then 
you can still take advantage of all the beneits of Power View for user reporting.

Chapter 2
53
In order to use Power View in this way you need to have a PowerPivot Gallery site conigured 
in SharePoint. This  is where you will store your data sources, dashboards, and reports that 
you create.
If you do not currently have a PowerPivot Gallery site conigured, then the following recipe will 
step through the process of creating the site in SharePoint.
Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have access to the 
SharePoint Central Administration console. To check this carry out the following steps:
1. Access your server that has SharePoint installed on it.
2. From the program menu, you should be able to ind the SharePoint Central 
Administration console in the Microsoft SharePoint Products group.
3. If you cannot access this feature, then you may need to get help from your SharePoint 
administrator for this recipe.
How to do it...
To create a PowerPivot Gallery site in SharePoint, follow these steps:
1. From the SharePoint Central Administration console, access the Application 
Management area, and click on Manage web applications.
2. From the Web Applications tab, create a new SharePoint site by clicking on the New 
button on the ribbon bar:

Reports and Dashboards
54
3. To create a new site, select the Create a new IIS web site option on the IIS Web Site 
group. Give the website a name, port, and host header, and then click on OK:

Chapter 2
55
4. After the web  application has been created we need to create a PowerPivot Gallery 
site. To do this return to the Application Management area of the SharePoint 
Administration console and click on the Create site collection link in the Site 
Collections group.
5. Select the Power View web application that we just created, give your site a title, enter 
a subfolder for the Web Site Address, select the PowerPivot Site template from the 
Collaboration templates, and then click on OK to create the site:
How it works...
Once you have created the site,  you will be able to access the gallery. Right now it will look a 
little empty, but in the next set of recipes, we will start adding content to the site:

Reports and Dashboards
56
Creating a PowerPivot data source for  
Power View
You can create Power View reports directly off the data within Dynamics AX by building 
your own personal data sources through Excel and saving them to a PowerPivot gallery in 
SharePoint. This gives you the lexibility of accessing data that may not be in the existing 
Power View cubes, including custom tables and ields that you have added, without having  
to become a DBA and tweak the reporting cubes themselves.
In the following recipe we will work through a simple example of how you can use the 
PowerPivot add-on for Excel to access inventory information from Dynamics AX, and  
then save it to a PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint so that we can report off it.
Getting ready
Before you are able to create a PowerPivot data source, you need to make sure that you have 
the PowerPivot add-on conigured in Excel. If you have it installed, then when you open up 
Excel, there should be a PowerPivot tab in the ribbon bar:
If you don't have it installed, then follow these steps to download the add-in before starting 
this recipe:
1. Download and install the Microsoft SQL Server 2012 PowerPivot for Microsoft Excel 
from the Microsoft Download Center:
http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=29074
How to do it...
To create a PowerPivot data source against Dynamics AX for reporting through Power View, 
follow these steps:
1. Open Excel, and go to the PowerPivot tab. Click on the PowerPivot Window button:

Chapter 2
57
2. This will open up a new window that allows us to create our reporting data source.  
To add data from Dynamics AX, navigate to the From Datasource button on the 
ribbon bar, and then select the From SQL Server option:
3. In the Table Import Wizard form, specify the server where your Dynamics AX 
database is stored, and then select the database name from the drop-down list:
4. The next option allows us to either select data directly from the tables within 
Dynamics AX, or write an SQL query to grab the data. For this example, navigate  
to the table list option.
www.allitebooks.com

Reports and Dashboards
58
5. The next form will allow you to select any table(s) from the database to use in your 
data source. In this example, select the InventSum table so that we will be able to 
report off all of the inventory levels:
6. Once this is inished, Excel will retrieve the data from Dynamics AX and create a 
spreadsheet for us.
7. 
There are only a few columns in the table that we are interested in, so we can 
hide every column except for the ItemID, AvailPhysical, PhysicalValue, 
PhysicalInvent, and DataAreaID by right-clicking on these other columns  
and selecting Hide from Client Tools:

Chapter 2
59
8. Rather than use the default ield names for the columns, double-click on the column 
headings, and rename the visible ields to Item ID, Available Qty, Available 
Value, Physical Qty, and Company:
9. Finally, change the tab name for the data from INVENTSUM to Inventory Summary.
10. Now that we have deined the data for our data source, close the PowerPivot window 
and return to Excel. From the File menu, select the Save & Send option so that we 
are able to save the data source to your PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint. If you have 
done this already, then your PowerPivot gallery location will be remembered by Excel, 
if this is the irst time that you publish the data, then you need to click on the Browse 
for a location option:
11. In the address bar of the Save As dialog box, enter the URL for your PowerPivot 
gallery, give the data source a name, and then click on the Save button.

Reports and Dashboards
60
How it works...
By saving your PowerPivot view to the PowerPivot gallery, it is stored away and available to  
be reused:
Creating a Power View report via the 
PowerPivot gallery
Once you have PowerPivot data sources published to your PowerPivot gallery in SharePoint, 
they become linked to Power View, and you are able to create dashboards and reports from 
them. Users can be given access to the PowerPivot gallery directly, or they can be given links 
to the Power View report designer so that they are able to create their own ad-hoc reports at 
any time.
In the following recipe we will show how you can create Power View reports directly from the 
PowerPivot gallery.

Chapter 2
61
How to do it...
To create a Power View report from the PowerPivot gallery, follow these steps:
1. Open the PowerPivot gallery and ind the data source that you want to report off:
2. There are three icons on the top-right of the data source. The irst will open up the 
data source in Excel, the second will allow you to create a Power View report from  
the data source, and the third allows you to deine the refresh schedule of the data. 
For this example, click on the second icon labeled Create Power View Report.
3. This will open up the Power View report canvas, and the ields that are available for 
reporting will be the visible ields from our data source that we created. Select the 
Item ID, Company, and Available Qty ields, turn the report into a Column  
style chart, and then add a ilter to the report to just show a single Company:

Reports and Dashboards
62
4. After you have created the report, select the Save As option from the File menu. You 
can save the Power View report to the PowerPivot gallery, or if you navigate through 
the site explorer in the address bar of the dialog then you are also able to save it to 
any other Power View folder, including the Power View library in the Dynamics AX  
Role Center:
How it works...
The Power View reports from PowerPivot data sources work almost exactly the same way as 
the others that we created earlier on in the chapter, except, when you add them to the Role 
Center, in the Microsoft Dynamics AX group of the web part properties, make sure that you 
check the IgnoreAxFilters option:

Chapter 2
63
If you do not do this, the Role Center will try to pass through ilters for Company and so on, 
into the dashboard.
Linking Power View reports to Dynamics AX 
forms
If you want to make your Power View dashboards and reports even more useful to the users, 
then you may want to add links to them directly within your Dynamics AX forms. This does 
require a little bit of X++ code, and a little bit of coniguration in the AOT.
In this recipe we will show how you can easily add a button to the ribbon bar of an existing 
form that will link directly to a Power View report that you have, and even ilter out the data  
so that you are just seeing the data that is related to the current record that you are in.
Getting ready
This example requires that you access the development environment and make changes to 
forms. Before you start on this example, make sure that you have developer rights on your 
installation of Dynamics AX.

Reports and Dashboards
64
How to do it...
To add links to Power View reports directly into Dynamics AX forms, follow these steps:
1. Create a new development project in AOT and call it CustomerPowerViewButton.
2. Find the CustTable form in the AOT forms and add it to your new project.
3. Expand the CustTable structure and open up the ActionPanelTab for the  
form Design.
4. Right-click on the ActionPanelTab and select the ButtonGroup control in the  
New Control menu to add a new button group to your form:
5. Move the button group to the bottom of the form by holding down the Alt key and 
using the down arrow.
6. Rename the button group to be ReportingGroup and change the caption  
to Reporting.

Chapter 2
65
7. 
Right-click on the ReportingGroup tab and select the Button from the New Control 
menu item to add a new button to the form.
8. Rename the button to be GrossProitMarginAnalysis and set the Text property to 
Gross Profit Margin Analysis:

Reports and Dashboards
66
9. If you want to, you can assign an image to the button by linking an image ile to the 
NormalImage property of the command button:
10. Expand out the button that you added so that you can see the button methods,  
right-click on the methods icon, and select the Override method menu item,  
and then the clicked method.
11. Change the code for the clicked method to be the following:
void clicked()
{
    str url = "";
    url = url + "http://dynamicsax.contoso.com/sites/DynamicsAx/_
layouts/ReportServer/AdHocReportDesigner.aspx";

Chapter 2
67
    url = url + "?RelativeReportUrl=/sites/DynamicsAx/Power View 
Reports/SalesGrossProfitMarginAnalysis.rdlx";
    url = url + "&ViewMode=Presentation";
    url = url + "&rf=[Customer].[Customer] eq '" + CustTable.
AccountNum + "'";
    infolog.urllookup(url);
    super();
}
Code Snippet 1
12. Save your project and you are done.
How it works...
Now when you open up the customer form, there is a new menu group in the Customers tab 
for reporting:
When you click on this link it will open up the Power View dashboard in another window, 
iltered out by the current customer record.
This example works by using some of the URL qualiiers that are available to be used with  
the Power View viewer. Inside the X++ code for this example, there are three qualiiers that  
we used to make this linked report dynamic.
RelativeReportURL allows you to deine the default report that will be opened when the 
report viewer opens. In our case, we opened up the Gross Margin report.
We used the ViewMode qualiier to put the report in presentation mode, so that the users 
didn't immediately see ields from the report.
And to ilter out the data that is returned in the report, you can use the rf qualiier, along with 
the ield name, and the ilter value.

Reports and Dashboards
68
Summary
Power View and PowerPivot are tools that are simple enough for almost everyone to use,  
and allow you to quickly build reports and dashboards that are useful. It becomes even  
more useful to the power users since they can also create their own data sources within  
Excel, a tool that everyone is familiar with using.
Once you start creating dashboards, you will discover that there are a lot of cool features  
that you can take advantage of. You may want to try:
 
f
Adding external Azure services, XML feeds, and Dynamics AX ODataQueries to  
your PowerPivot data sources. This allows you to blend in dynamic reference data, 
such as weather, currency rates, or Twitter searches to make your dashboards  
more informative.
 
f
Turning URL columns into pictures to allow your users to ilter out the information 
visually rather than having lo look at codes.
 
f
Using geographic information, such as city, state, and country to create  
geo-mapped reports.
Also, you don't just have to use Power View within Dynamics AX. Since you can publish the 
dashboards that you create to your SharePoint as a gallery, then everybody could access  
them directly. You may want to take advantage of this and use it to do some of the following:
 
f
Show daily company metrics such as shift productivity metrics or real time sales 
volume on public monitors
 
f
Use PowerPivot dashboards within presentations while working with customers  
and vendors
 
f
Access Power View dashboards from tablets or surface devices
You don't have to be a reporting guru any more to create dashboards and reports with  
Power View and PowerPivot, but people will probably think that you are if you use them.

3
Dashboards, Charts, 
and Scorecards
In this chapter, we will focus on how you can use the Business Intelligence (BI) capabilities 
that are delivered with SharePoint and PerformancePoint to create your own charts and 
reports, and then share these with the users through the Dynamics AX Role Centers, and  
also to others through SharePoint dashboards. This chapter will cover:
 
f
Creating a Business Intelligence site
 
f
Coniguring a PerformancePoint workspace to connect to the Dynamics AX cubes
 
f
Creating a scorecard in PerformancePoint
 
f
Adding scorecards to a user's Role Center
 
f
Creating an analytical chart in PerformancePoint
 
f
Adding an analytical chart to a user's Role Center
 
f
Using Decomposition Trees to drill into the analytical charts
 
f
Creating PerformancePoint dashboards in SharePoint
Introduction
For more advanced dashboards, charts, and scorecards for Dynamics AX, you don't have to 
go much further than your existing SharePoint portal. SharePoint 2010 has default template 
sites for BI, and also has a dashboard designer called PerformancePoint embedded in the 
system that allows you to build dashboards, KPIs, scorecards, and reports. When you combine 
this with the inbuilt reporting cubes, default charts, and reports that are delivered with the 
standard Dynamics AX 2012 installation, you end up with a great BI platform.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
70
In this chapter, we will show how you can conigure SharePoint to become a BI platform 
for Dynamics AX by setting up a BI site, and then how to attach PerformancePoint to the 
Dynamics AX default reporting cubes.
We will then show how you can use the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer to create new 
charts and reports that can then be turned into dashboards that all users are able to access 
in order to view metrics directly from Dynamics AX.
Finally, we will show how you can embed the charts, scorecards, and reports created through 
PerformancePoint directly within the user's Role Centers, allowing them to view and drill into 
information without having to exit from Dynamics AX.
The PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer is a more powerful reporting tool than Power View, 
but that comes at the price of being a little more intimidating to general users. As a result, this 
is probably something that is of more use to the power users, or the technical users within an 
organization. But if you want to take the plunge and learn it, then it's well worth it, because 
you will be able to create much better reporting views on Dynamics AX.
Creating a Business Intelligence site
In order to use the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer to create reports and scorecards, 
you irst need to have a Business Intelligence site conigured on your SharePoint server. Once 
you have this, you will be able to access the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, and you 
will also have a place that you can store all of your custom charts, scorecards, and reports.
In this recipe, we will show how you can set up a Business Intelligence site if you don't have 
one already conigured.
Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have access to the 
SharePoint Central Administration console. To check this carry out the following steps:
1. Access your server that has SharePoint installed on it.
2. From the program menu, you should be able to ind the SharePoint Central 
Administration console in the Microsoft SharePoint Products group.
3. If you cannot access this feature, then you may need to get help from your  
SharePoint administrator for this recipe.

Chapter 3
71
How to do it...
To create a Business Intelligence site in SharePoint, follow these steps:
1. For this recipe, it is a good idea to create your BI site in the same web application 
as your Dynamics AX Role Centers, so that it's easier for the Role Centers to access 
the charts and scorecards that you will build. So, from the SharePoint Central 
Administration console, access the Application Management area, and then  
click on the Create Site Collection page.
2. On the Create Site Collection page, select your Dynamics AX Role Center web 
application, give your site a name of Business Intelligence, give the Web Site 
Address a subfolder of bi, and from the Enterprise tab of the Template Selection 
box, navigate to the Business Intelligence Center template.
3. Click on OK, and SharePoint will create the site for you.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
72
How it works...
The Business Intelligence center that is created will become the location where you can store 
all of your charts and scorecards that you create, but more importantly, if you click on the 
Create Dashboards option on the main page, there will be a link shown that says Start using 
PerformancePoint Services that will take you to the Dashboard Designer installation page.
If you click on the Run Dashboard Designer button on this form, it will download and install 
Dashboard Designer, and start up the application.

Chapter 3
73
Now you are ready to start using PerformancePoint.
Coniguring a PerformancePoint workspace 
to connect to the Dynamics AX cubes
Once you have access to the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer you can then connect it 
to the default cubes that are delivered with Dynamics AX. Dynamics AX 2012 is delivered with 
10 standard cubes for reporting, and Dynamics AX 2012 R2 increases the number of cubes 
available to 16. The cubes that are available, as of writing this book, are:
 
f
Accounts payable
 
f
Accounts receivable
 
f
Budget control
 
f
Budget plan
 
f
Environmental sustainability
 
f
Expense management
 
f
General ledger
 
f
Inventory valuation
 
f
Production
 
f
Proit tax totals
 
f
Project accounting
 
f
Purchasing
 
f
Retail
 
f
Sales
 
f
Sales and marketing (also known as, Customer Relationship Management before R2)
 
f
Worklow
In this recipe, we will show you how you can connect these cubes to a PerformancePoint 
workspace so that you can start creating charts and scorecards against the data.
Getting ready
Before you start on this example, you will need to make sure that you have deployed  
your analysis services cubes for Dynamics AX, and have fully processed them with your 
Dynamics AX data. If you are not sure if this has been done, you may need to check with  
your system administrator.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
74
How to do it...
To connect a cube to a PerformancePoint workspace, follow these steps:
1. First, open up the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer in a new  
blank workspace.
2. From the Create tab, select Data Source from the Dashboard Items group.
3. To connect to the default cubes that are delivered with Microsoft Dynamics AX, select 
the Analysis Services template data source.
4. Rename the new data source that is created in the workspace browser.
5. In the Editor section of the data connection properties, enter the Server name where 
your SQL Analysis Services are running.
6. In the Database ield, select the Analysis Services database that you would like to 
report off.
7. 
This will allow you to see all of the available reporting cubes for Dynamics AX. In this 
example, select the Sales cube.

Chapter 3
75
8. You can repeat the previous steps for all of the other cubes that you will want to 
report off.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
76
9. Once you have all of your cubes deined in your workspace, then save your workspace 
so that you are able to reuse this setup later on.
How it works...
Deining the data connections in the workspace not only creates connections in your 
workspace that you saved, but also saves the connections to SharePoint. This is useful 
because if someone else wants to create their own workspace, then they can add the 
connection information by selecting the SharePoint connection, and then clicking on  
the Add Items buttons from the Workspace group on the ribbon bar.
Creating a scorecard in PerformancePoint
The standard cubes that are delivered with Dynamics AX include a number of predeined Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) that you can start using right away. An easy way to display 
KPIs is through a scorecard, which you can easily create through the PerformancePoint 
Dashboard Designer.
In this recipe, we will show you how you can connect to the default cubes to ind the KPIs that 
have already been deined, and use these within a scorecard Dashboard Item to create your 
own personal scorecard.

Chapter 3
77
How to do it...
To create a new scorecard through PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, follow these steps:
1. Open up the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, and then open up the 
workspace created in the last recipe that has the Dynamics AX cubes already deined.
2. From the Create tab, click on the Scorecard icon in the Dashboard Items group to 
start creating a new scorecard.
3. When asked to select the Scorecard template, choose the Analysis Services template.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
78
4. This will start the wizard process for coniguring the scorecard. The irst step is to 
select a cube that you want to show KPIs from. In this case we will navigate to the 
Sales cube.
5. You can either create the KPIs individually, or import all of the KPIs from the Analysis 
Services cubes. For this example, select the Create option.

Chapter 3
79
6. This will open up the KPI selection option. You can add KPIs individually by clicking on 
the Add KPI button, but for this example, we will select multiple KPIs by clicking on 
the Select KPI button.
7. 
PerformancePoint will show you all of the KPIs that are available for you to add to 
your scorecard. Select Gross Proit, Gross Proit Margin, Sales, and Total Revenue 
from the KPIs and click on OK.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
80
8. After selecting the KPIs, click on Next through the rest of the dialog boxes to accept 
the defaults, and you will see the new scorecard that you just created.
9. The inal step is to give your scorecard a name and save it.
How it works...
By creating the scorecard through PerformancePoint,  the deinition is saved to the Business 
Intelligence site. Once it is there, it becomes a Template Dashboard Item that you are able to 
use on dashboards, and also embed in user's Role Centers.
Adding scorecards to a user's Role Center
Once you have created scorecards through PerformancePoint, they can be added to any user's 
Role Center so that they can quickly see the KPIs that they are interested in and also track 
trends. In the following recipe we will show you how to easily do that.
How to do it...
To add a PerformancePoint scorecard to a user's Role Center, follow these steps:
1. Through the Dynamics AX client, go to the home page so that you are able to see  
the user's Role Center, and click on the Personalize this page link in the top-right  
of the page.

Chapter 3
81
2. When the page goes into edit mode, click on the Add a Web Part link in the area that 
you would like to add the scorecard to.
3. From the Web Parts browser, navigate to the PerformancePoint category, and then 
the PerformancePoint Scorecard web part and click on the Add button.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
82
4. This will add a  PerformancePoint panel to your page. Click on the Click here  
to open the tool pane link to open up the web part properties so that we can 
conigure the scorecard.
5. Click on the list search icon to the right of the Location property to search SharePoint 
for your scorecard.

Chapter 3
83
6. When you  irst open up the search, it will probably be pointing to the wrong  
location for the scorecard. In the Location URL ield, change the path to point  
to your Business Intelligence center. There will be a subfolder there called  
PerformancePoint Content where all of the Dashboard Items are stored.  
After selecting that folder, you should be able to ind your scorecards. Select  
the scorecard that you want to add, and then click on OK.
7. 
Give the web part a title, and then click on the OK button to save your scorecard.
8. Finally, click on the Stop Editing button to return to the view mode in the Role Center.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
84
How it works...
By linking the PerformancePoint scorecard to the user's Role Center, the user is able to  
see the KPI details from their home page. Also, if you make a change to the scorecard  
itself through the Dashboard Designer then that changes on every user's Role Center  
page automatically.
Creating an analytical chart in 
PerformancePoint
Another type of Dashboard Item that you can create through PerformancePoint is called an 
analytical chart and allows you to create dashboard charts from any data source that you have 
deined through the Dashboard Designer. Since there are 17 predeined cubes available with 
Dynamics AX 2012 R2, the number of different ways that you can use this to slice and dice 
the information is virtually unlimited.

Chapter 3
85
In this recipe, we will show how you can create a simple sales dashboard chart through the 
PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer.
How to do it...
To create a new analytical chart through PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, follow  
these steps:
1. Open PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, and then open up the workspace 
created in the last recipe that has the Dynamics AX cubes already deined.
2. From the Create tab, click on the Analytic Chart icon in the Reports group to start 
creating a chart.
3. When the data source selection dialog box pops up, select the cube that you want to 
create your chart from. In this recipe we will select the Sales cube.
4. This will now open up the chart designer. On the right-hand side of the form will 
be all of the dimensions and measures that are available in the cube that you 
selected. At the bottom of the page will be drop areas for the Series, Axis, and also 
Background ilters. From the measures group, ind the Customer invoice line amount 
– accounting currency measure and drag it down into the Series drop area.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
86
5. From the dimensions group, ind the Customer dimension group, expand it out, and 
you will be able to ind the Customer – name dimension. Drag that into the Bottom 
Axis drop box. You will now be able to see the chart.
6. In this example, there is too much data, so by right-clicking on the canvas of the 
report you can open the pop-up menu. From there select the Filter menu,  
and choose the Top 10 (Bottom Axis) menu item to open up the ilter window.

Chapter 3
87
7. 
From here we will accept the defaults to ilter out the customers to the top 10 highest 
grossing customers.
8. Now that you have the report completed, give it a more appropriate name, and save 
the chart to your PerformancePoint Content.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
88
Adding an analytical chart to a user's Role 
Center
Once you have created your charts through PerformancePoint, they can be added to any 
user's Role Center in almost the exact same way as we did with the scorecards. In the 
following recipe we will show you how.
How to do it...
To add a PerformancePoint analytical chart to a user's Role Center, follow these steps:
1. Through the Dynamics AX client, go to the home page so that you are able to see  
the user's Role Center, and click on the Personalize this page link in the top-right  
of the page.
2. When the page goes into edit mode, click on the Add a Web Part link in the area that 
you would like to add the chart to.
3. From the Web Parts browser, navigate to the PerformancePoint category, and then 
the PerformancePoint Report web part, and then click on the Add button.

Chapter 3
89
4. This will add a PerformancePoint panel to your page. Click on the Click here to  
open the tool pane link to open up the web part properties so that we can conigure  
the chart.
5. Click on the list search icon to the right of the Location property to search SharePoint 
for your chart.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
90
6. When you irst open up the search, it will probably be pointing to the wrong location 
for the chart. In the Location URL ield, change the path to point to your Business 
Intelligence center. There will be a subfolder there called PerformancePoint Content 
where all of the Dashboard Items are stored. After selecting that folder, you should be 
able to ind your charts. Select the chart that you want to add, and then click on OK.
7. 
Give the web part a title.
8. Sometimes charts render a little on the large size in the Role Center. To make sure 
this doesn't happen on this example, set the Width to 500, and the Height to 300 
within the web part properties.
9. Now click on the OK button to save your chart.
10. Finally, click on the Stop Editing button to return to the view mode in the Role Center.
How it works...
By linking the PerformancePoint analytical chart to the user's Role Center, the user is  
able to see it from their home page, but changes may be made globally through the 
Dashboard Designer.

Chapter 3
91
Using Decomposition Trees to drill into the 
analytical charts
The analytical charts have a feature enabled that allows you to drill into any piece of data that 
you see and then explore it using any of the available dimensions in your cube. This is useful 
if you see data such as a large spike in sales, and then want to look at that data to see who 
the customer was that purchased the largest amount of product, and then maybe what the 
products were. All this is possible through the Decomposition Tree function, without leaving 
the dashboard chart.
In this quick recipe we will show how you can use the Decomposition Tree feature to explore 
the chart that we created in the previous recipe.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
92
How to do it...
To drill into a PerformancePoint chart using the Decomposition Tree function, follow  
these steps:
1. Right-click on the data element on the analytical chart that you want to explore to 
open up the pop-up menu, and navigate to the Decomposition Tree menu item.
2. This will open up a new window allowing you to slice and dice the data based on 
any of the dimensions in the cube. In this example we will drill into the sales for the 
Yellow Square Co., navigate to the Released products ield group, and then select the 
Product name dimension to see the products that this customer purchased.

Chapter 3
93
3. We can continue slicing by selecting different dimensions to further explore the 
data. If you click on the ield name at the top of the page you get additional functions 
allowing you to change the sort options of the data, and also convert the data back to 
a bar chart.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
94
4. Once the data is converted back to a chart, you can select any type of chart that you 
like for presentation purposes.
Creating PerformancePoint dashboards in 
SharePoint
The scorecards and charts that you create through the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer 
do not have to just be shown through the Dynamics AX Role Centers. They can be combined 
together and deployed out to SharePoint as standalone dashboard pages, allowing you to 
create analytical pages that everyone in the organization is able to view.
In this recipe we will show how you can use the dashboard capabilities to easily publish this 
data to SharePoint.
How to do it...
To create a dashboard using PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, follow these steps:
1. Open up the PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer, and then open up the 
workspace with the charts and scorecards that you have built.

Chapter 3
95
2. From the Create tab, click on the Dashboard icon in the Dashboard Items group to 
start creating a new Dashboard Page.
3. The Dashboard Designer will then ask you to select a template for the dashboard.
4. When the dashboard template is displayed, change to the Properties tab and give 
your dashboard a name. In this example it will be the Sales Manager Dashboard.
5. Return back to the Editor tab of the dashboard template, and you will see the Pages 
section at the top of the template form. A dashboard may have a number of pages 
associated with it. Change the page name from Page 1 to something a little more 
descriptive. This example will be called Sales Manager Overview.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
96
6. From the right-hand panel you will be able to explore through the scorecards and 
reports that you have created and saved to your Business Intelligence site. Open up 
the Scorecards group, and add a few scorecards to the left column of the dashboard.

Chapter 3
97
7. 
Explore through the Reports group and add some of the sales reports to the right 
column sections of the dashboard.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
98
8. Once you have built your Dashboard Page, you need to save the dashboard and 
deploy it to SharePoint. To do this, select the Deploy option from the ile menu on  
the Dashboard Designer.
9. The irst time that you deploy the dashboard, you may be asked where you want to 
send it to. If you have multiple BI repositories, then you will need to select the portal 
that you want to save it to.

Chapter 3
99
10. Now you will be able to see your dashboard within SharePoint.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
100
How it works...
Anyone who has access to the SharePoint site where the dashboard is deployed will be able to 
view the dashboard. If you add a IsDlg=1 qualiier to the end of the URL, then the dashboard 
will become even more sleek by removing the navigation and title bars, making it perfect for 
displaying company metrics on public systems.

Chapter 3
101
Also, the form factors of the dashboards are perfect for deployment to tablet devices for users 
who just need to check information on the run.

Dashboards, Charts, and Scorecards
102
Summary
PerformancePoint is a very lexible reporting and dashboarding tool that allows you to quickly 
get information out to the users. However, in this chapter we have just scratched the surface 
of what you are able to do when it is paired up with Dynamics AX.
Once you have mastered these examples, you might also want to try:
 
f
Creating ilters that can be used to further reine your results
 
f
Linking dashboard elements together so that selecting one item also ilters others
 
f
Using Reporting Services reports as dashboard elements, allowing you to use the 
Reporting Services controls, such as gauges and maps within your dashboards,  
and to also use hyperlinks to link to the Dynamics AX forms
 
f
Attaching secondary databases that you may be using in conjunction with Dynamics 
AX, including other MSSQL databases, MS Access data sources, Excel worksheets, 
and more
Once you have your dashboards, charts, and views built, you can also re-use them in other 
ways such as:
 
f
Embedding them in your companies' intranet portal so that users who normally don't 
use Dynamics AX are able to see business metrics and measures
 
f
Using them within your customer and vendor portals to allow other companies to see 
how you are tracking their performance
That's not too bad for a tool that is included in your current SharePoint environment.

4
Communication and 
Collaboration
In this chapter, we will show how to conigure and use tools such as Outlook and Lync to  
keep up-to-date with all your tasks and appointments, and also to contact others inside  
and outside your organization. This chapter will cover:
 
f
Linking Outlook with Dynamics AX
 
f
Flagging Dynamics AX contacts for synchronization
 
f
Synchronizing Dynamics AX contacts with Outlook
 
f
Using the Outlook Social Connector to research Dynamics AX contacts
 
f
Communicating with contacts from within Dynamics AX
 
f
Using Lync to collaborate with other users directly from Dynamics AX

Communication and Collaboration
104
Introduction
Chances are you are already using Microsoft Outlook for your e-mail and contact 
management, and hopefully you are also using Lync within the organization for messaging 
and communication. So why not conigure Dynamics AX to use them as well so that you can  
be even more productive?
Dynamics AX allows you to link your user account with your Outlook client. Once you have 
done this, you are able to synchronize Dynamics AX contacts, tasks, and appointments with 
Outlook. This means that all this information will now be available on your desktop, tablet, 
and also your smartphone for the times that you are disconnected from Dynamics AX. You 
can then take advantage of tools such as the Outlook Social Connector to see what your 
Dynamics AX contacts are up to on Facebook, LinkedIn, and Microsoft Live. And if you want 
to send your contacts an e-mail through Outlook, then you can initiate it directly from the 
Dynamics AX client.
The Lync integration connects you as well, but this time with the other people in your 
organization. If you have Lync installed and have all of the users registered with their Lync IM 
account, Dynamics AX will turn on presence and messaging directly from the forms, allowing 
you to text, call, video chat, and share desktops directly from the their username. Because 
Lync has clients that run on the desktop, on tablets, and also on smartphones, if you have a 
question about something within Dynamics AX, you can get your answer right away, and then 
continue on, rather than having to track down people by foot. Lync is very cool, and I use it 
every day to do just that.
None of the recipes that are described in this chapter require you to have system administrator 
privileges to conigure, so as long as you have Outlook/Exchange and Lync running, then you are 
ready to test these out.
Linking Outlook with Dynamics AX
The irst step in using Outlook with Dynamics AX is to set up the connection through Dynamics 
AX. In this recipe we will show the steps required to do this.

Chapter 4
105
Getting ready
Before we start on this example, you will need to make sure that your user proile in Dynamics 
AX is associated with your e-mail account. This will ensure that Dynamics AX will be able to 
share information with your Outlook proile. To do this carry out the following steps:
1. From the File drop-down menu on the Dynamics AX client, navigate to the Tools 
menu, and then the Options submenu.
2. Within the Options dialog box, check that you have the e-mail address that is in the 
E-mail: ield:

Communication and Collaboration
106
How to do it...
To set up the synchronization link between Dynamics AX and Microsoft Outlook,  
follow these steps:
1. From the Home Area Page, open up the Microsoft Outlook setup wizard from  
the Setup group.
2. Step through the wizard screens until you reach the page Microsoft Outlook 
synchronization. This may already be populated with your current username  
and folders to synchronize with. If not, click on the Use current Microsoft  
Outlook proile button to load the details:
3. You can mingle your Outlook contacts, appointments, and tasks with the ones  
that are synchronized from Dynamics AX, but in this recipe we will conigure it so 
that items from Dynamics AX are stored in subfolders in Outlook. Open up Outlook, 
and go to the folders view. Right-click on the Calendar folder, and navigate to the 
New Calendar option to create a subcalendar folder. Name the Calendar folder, 
Dynamics AX Calendar.
4. Right-click on the Contacts folder, and navigate to the New Folder option to create 
a subcontacts folder. Name the Contacts folder, Dynamics AX Contacts.

Chapter 4
107
5. Right-click on the Tasks folder, and navigate to the New Folder option to create a 
subtasks folder. Name the Tasks folder, Dynamics AX Tasks:
6. Return to the Microsoft Outlook synchronization form in Dynamics AX, and  
click on the Pick contact Microsoft Outlook folder button. This will open up  
a folder explorer from Outlook. Navigate to the Dynamics AX Contacts  
folder that you just created.
7. 
Click on the Pick task Microsoft Outlook folder button. This will open up a  
folder explorer from Outlook. Navigate to the Dynamics AX Tasks folder  
that you just created.
8. Click on the Pick appointment Microsoft Outlook folder button. This will  
open up a folder explorer from Outlook. Select the Dynamics AX Calendar  
folder that you just created.

Communication and Collaboration
108
9. Set the Days before: ield for the appointment synchronization to 30, and the Days 
after: ield to 90 to pull in the past month, and 3 months of future appointments:
10. Click on the Next button and you should be able to inish the synchronization  
setup wizard.
Flagging Dynamics AX contacts for 
synchronization
You probably don't want all of the contacts from Dynamics AX to be moved over to Outlook, 
probably just the contacts that you are working with. Dynamics AX gives you the option to  
lag the contacts that you want to synchronize directly from the contact management screens. 
In this recipe we will show you how you can do this.
How to do it...
To lag your Dynamics AX contacts for synchronization to Outlook, follow these steps:
1. From the Sales and Marketing module, open up the My contacts list page  
from the Contacts folder in the Common group.
2. Select the contacts that you would like to synchronize:

Chapter 4
109
3. Click on the Add to Microsoft Outlook contacts button in the Include group of the 
Contact ribbon bar tab. You should get a dialog box showing how many new contacts 
have been lagged for synchronization:

Communication and Collaboration
110
Synchronizing Dynamics AX contacts with 
Outlook
After you have linked Dynamics AX with Outlook and then selected the contacts that you want 
to synchronize, getting the contacts over to Outlook is as simple as starting the synchronization 
process. This recipe will show how to start the synchronization task.
How to do it...
To synchronize Dynamics AX contacts with Outlook, follow these steps:
1. From the Home area page, open up the Synchronize menu item in the Microsoft 
Outlook synchronization folder of the Periodic group.
2. In the dialog box for synchronization, you can choose if you want to synchronize the 
contacts, tasks, and appointments. For this recipe we will synchronize everything:
3. After clicking on the OK button, Dynamics AX will process the updates and then you 
will be done.
How it works...
After running the synchronization process, all of your lagged contacts, new appointments,  
and new tasks will be transferred to your proile in Outlook including name, company,  
physical addresses, e-mail addresses, and phone numbers:

Chapter 4
111
Synchronization is only one way. Changing the contact information 
within Dynamics AX will update your contacts in Outlook, but if you 
change the contact in Outlook those changes will be overwritten the 
next time you synchronize with Dynamics.
Using the Outlook Social Connector to 
research Dynamics AX contacts
Since you now have your Dynamics AX contacts in Outlook, you can take advantage of some of 
the Outlook add-ons to automatically search online sources for additional information about 
them. In this recipe, we will show how you can conigure one add-on called the Outlook Social 
Connector that will search the social networks to ind out information about contacts based 
on their e-mail addresses. The Outlook Social Connector is available in Outlook 2010 and 
higher. All you need to do is link it to your social accounts.

Communication and Collaboration
112
Getting ready
Before you start walking through this recipe, you will need to make sure that you have the 
People Pane turned on within Outlook because it will display all of the social research on  
the contacts. To do this:
1. Go to the View tab on the Outlook ribbon bar.
2. Select the drop-down list for the People Pane in the View group and make sure that 
the Normal option is checked:
How to do it...
To conigure the Outlook Social Connector in the Outlook client, follow these steps:
1. When you open up a contact on Outlook, at the bottom of the contact preview  
panel will be the People Pane. The irst time that you see this, there will not be  
a lot of information showing, because no connectors will be conigured:

Chapter 4
113
2. Click on the preceding link on the proile picture for the contact, which says Connect 
to social networks, and Outlook will show you the available social connectors. 
Initially there will only be one, allowing you to connect to your SharePoint My Site:

Communication and Collaboration
114
3. We will want to add some more social connector providers before we continue.  
So click on the link, that says View social network providers available online,  
and you will be taken to the Ofice download page for the social connectors:
4. You can select any or all of the available connectors, which will then install the 
connector add-on for you. After you have inished, you can return to the Social 
Network Accounts dialog box and you will be able to enter in your credentials  
for the social networks:

Chapter 4
115
5. After you have conigured the social networks that you want to use, you can just  
click on the Finish button and you are done:

Communication and Collaboration
116
How it works...
Now when you open up a contact within Outlook, you will be able to see all of their social 
activity in the People Pane:

Chapter 4
117
Communicating with contacts from within 
Dynamics AX
You don't have to leave Dynamics AX in order to start e-mailing and instant messaging with 
contacts. As long as your contacts have e-mail addresses deined against their record, you  
can start communicating with them directly from the application. This quick recipe will show 
you how to do this.
Getting ready
In order to e-mail and instant message from Dynamics AX to a contact, you just need to make 
sure that you have the e-mail addresses deined against the contact itself. To do this:
1. Open up the contact record and make sure that the Contact Information  
is populated:

Communication and Collaboration
118
How to do it...
To start e-mailing directly from the contact on the Dynamics AX form, follow these steps:
1. Anywhere that a Contact ID is shown in Dynamics AX, you should be able to see a 
presence indicator (a small round ball) before the ID. If you right-click on the ball, 
then a pop-up menu will show that will allow you to create e-mails using any of the 
contact information that is deined against the contact:
How it works...
Initiating an e-mail directly from Dynamics AX will open up your Outlook client and you can 
start e-mailing.

Chapter 4
119
Using Lync to collaborate with other users 
directly from Dynamics AX
There may be times when you are looking at some information within Dynamics AX that 
someone else created, and you need to ask them a question about it. If you have Lync installed 
and conigured, then Dynamics AX gives you a quick and easy way to contact other users, and 
usually you don't even have to leave the current form that you are in. Through the users name 
that is shown on the form, you are able to see if they are online, if they are available, and then 
instant message (IM) them, call them, video chat with them, and even share your desktop  
with them.

Communication and Collaboration
120
This quick recipe will show how to start a communication with other employees directly from  
a Dynamics AX form.
Getting ready
Before you are able to use Lync to contact other people in the organization, you need to  
make sure that there is an IM account associated with the users Worker proile. To do this, 
follow these steps:
1. From the HR area page, open up the Workers form from the Common group,  
and make sure that there is an e-mail address:
2. Select the e-mail address, and from the More options drop-down list in the Contact 
Information group, select the Advanced option to open up the detailed view of the 
contact information. For the e-mail address that is going to be used for Lync IM 
communication, make sure that the Instant message checkbox is selected:

Chapter 4
121
How to do it...
To start an IM conversation in Lync directly from a Dynamics AX form, follow these steps:
1. When you are using Lync, if any of the users on any of the records are online with 
Lync as well, then the Presence icon will be colored in:

Communication and Collaboration
122
2. To communicate with the users through Lync, just right-click on the icon and you  
will be shown all of the different ways that you can start communications:
3. If you start a Lync IM, then all you have to do is start typing:

Chapter 4
123
How it works...
Apart from being able to IM others within the organization, Lync allows you to start voice and 
video calls from your chat session, invite other people to the session, and also share desktops 
if you need to show them something.
Lync is also integrated with Outlook and Exchange, and all of your conversations are saved in 
Outlook for you so that you can always reference back to them after the fact:

Communication and Collaboration
124
Summary
Not everyone will be in front of their computer all of the time and able to access Dynamics AX, 
but chances are they will have their tablet or smartphone within arm's reach almost all of the 
time, which makes them a great extension point for the Dynamics AX system.
Some other ways that you can use Outlook and Lync include:
 
f
Adding contact images to Outlook contacts: The Outlook Social Connector will do 
this for you, but you may need to do this for some of the more camera-shy contacts. 
This gives you a personal reminder of who you are communicating with, and will be 
shared with your smartphone as well.
 
f
Creating Lync meetings directly from Outlook: Even if the other people you are 
contacting do not use Lync, the web client includes voice, video, and desktop sharing.
 
f
Federating with other companies, Lync systems: This allows two companies that 
use Lync to see each other's availability and presence, as well as contact each other 
directly, which is great for key vendors, customers, and business partners.
You're almost certainly using Outlook, and probably using Lync as well, so linking them to 
Dynamics AX is just the natural thing to do.

5
Using Cases to Manage 
Incidents and Requests
In this chapter, we will give examples of how you can use the new Case and project 
management capabilities within Dynamics AX 2012 to manage and streamline your  
business. This chapter will cover:
 
f
Creating Case categories
 
f
Assigning tasks through Cases
 
f
Creating appointments through Cases
 
f
Deining the standard processes for Case management
 
f
Assigning Knowledge articles to Cases
 
f
Associating additional business entities to Cases
 
f
Creating projects from Cases
 
f
Creating collaboration workspaces for Case projects
Introduction
Sometimes you don't have to leave Dynamics AX in order to extend out your business 
processes. With Dynamics AX 2012, a new feature was added called Cases that allows  
you to record interactions, issues, and incidents throughout the system, assign them to 
users for investigation or management, and then track all information collected along the 
way. It works like a traditional Case ile, hence the name. Cases are not just a iling system 
though. Cases can be automatically routed to different people for review and investigation, 
and they can have standard processes assigned to them so that you can track their progress 
from creation to close, which may be different based on the Case category. The Case owners 
are able to assign tasks and create appointments linked to the Cases, or have the system 
automatically recommend them based on a suggested process.

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
126
By linking Knowledge Base articles with Case categories users are able to quickly access 
standard information in order to try to resolve issues. These can be rated by the users on their 
success or failure as they are being applied to the Cases, allowing you to retire the ones that 
are not successful.
When incidents or requests that are being managed through Cases start becoming more 
involved then there is the ability to create projects associated with them, managed through 
the project management module of Dynamics AX. This allows for project plans to be created, 
time and expenses to be applied, and also for collaboration workspaces to be created within 
SharePoint for collaboration.
In this chapter, we will show you how you can use Cases to manage the New Product Request 
and Development process within Dynamics AX.
Creating Case categories
All cases are assigned to a Case category within Dynamics AX, and separated by a category 
group which deines where within Dynamics AX the cases can be accessed from. These are 
the mechanisms that determine what processes the Case follows, allowing you to use the 
same functionality for different purposes, which is why Cases are such a useful feature within 
Dynamics AX.
In this recipe, we will show how you can create a Case category within Dynamics AX so that we 
can start creating Cases.
How to do it...
To create a new Case category, follow these steps:
1. From the Organization administration area page, open up the Case categories form 
from the Cases folder in the Setup group:

Chapter 5
127
2. Click on the New menu, and navigate to the Case category option to create a new 
base category for our New Product Request cases.
3. When the New Record form is shown, set the Case category and Description both 
to Requests, and set the Category type to General. The General Category type is 
visible to all of the modules, which makes it useful for sharing Case categories over 
all modules. We are creating a base folder for all requests to make it easier to ind 
them if we have different variations of requests later on.
4. Expand out the General folder on the left and select your new Requests Case 
category. Select the Child Case category function from the New menu to create  
a subcategory within the Requests group.
5. For this category, set the Case category to NewProd, and the Description to New 
Product Request. If you like, you can also assign a Worker as the Default owner 
of the Case category. This will be the user who is assigned to the case by default 
every time it is created:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
128
How it works...
Once you have a Case category deined, you can create cases associated with it throughout 
Dynamics AX. With this recipe we created a Case with a General category type which means 
that it may be used throughout Dynamics AX, whereas if we had created it within one of the 
other category types then security would restrict who is able to access the case and where it  
is shown.
To use cases to record a New Product Request from a customer, we can just open up the 
Customers form, and go to the General tab in the ribbon bar. In the New group you will see  
a Case button that will allow you to create a new case:
When the New case form is shown, it will automatically be associated with the customer that 
we created the case for. This form also allows us to select the NewProd Case category that 
we just created.

Chapter 5
129
While we are creating the Case, we can also record more information about the New Product 
Request from the customer, such as product specs, descriptions, and priorities:
Once you click on the Create button, you will have a request recorded in Dynamics AX.

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
130
Assigning tasks through Cases
Tasks can be created at any time through the Case allowing you to create reminders for yourself, 
or to assign tasks to others within the organization. The tasks will show up in the users' activity 
list, and also if you have the Outlook synchronization conigured (see Chapter 4, Communication 
and Collaboration), then these will also show up within Outlook. These will also be associated 
with the Case, so you can always track the progress of these tasks from one single location.
In this recipe, we will show how you can create a new task from a case.
How to do it...
To create a new task from within the Case form, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Case that you want to create the task and from the General tab on the 
ribbon bar, click on the Activities button in the Related Info group. From the drop-down 
box, select the New task item:

Chapter 5
131
2. This will open up a form for recording the new task. You can give the task a title by 
illing in the Purpose ield, set the Start date and End date, and also add additional 
information by using the Notes ield. The Responsible ield will default from the Case 
itself, but you can reassign the task to anyone within the organization if you like:
3. Click on the Close button to conirm the task and you will be done.

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
132
How it works...
Once the task is created, the user that is responsible for the task will see it on their activity 
list, which they could also turn into a Cue (see Chapter 11, Role Center Personalization  
and Customization):
Also, if you have your Work list showing on your Role Center page, then you will be notiied 
that a task has been assigned to you there as well:
From the Work list you are able to open up the Case from the Actions menu.
Creating appointments through Cases
Appointments can also be created and associated with the Case at any time via the ribbon 
bar. These will also show up in the users' activity list on Outlook (if you have Outlook 
synchronization conigured).
In this recipe, we will show how you can create a new appointment from a Case.

Chapter 5
133
How to do it...
To create a new appointment from within the Case form, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Case that you want to create the task and from the General tab on  
the ribbon bar, click on the Activities button in the Related Info group. From the 
drop-down box, select the Scheduled appointment item:
2. This will open up a form for creating the new appointment. You can give the task a 
title by illing in the Purpose ield, set the Start date and End date, and also add 
additional information by using the Notes ield:
3. Click on the Close button to conirm the task and you will be done.

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
134
How it works...
Just as with the tasks, the user who is associated with the Scheduled Appointment will see it 
within their activity and work list:
Deining the standard processes for Case 
management
Cases will typically have their own process or life cycle that you will want them to follow as a 
standard business procedure. Each type of case may be different though. Dynamics AX allows 
you do this with Case processes, which deine all of the standard steps that are required to be 
performed. Through the Case processes you can also have tasks and appointments created 
automatically at particular steps in the process so that you don't have to manually create 
them. These template processes can then be associated with one or more Case categories.
In this recipe, we will show how you can use the Case processes feature to turn a generic 
case into a specialized process that you want users to follow.
How to do it...
To create a new Case process and use it within Cases, follow these steps:
1. From the Organization administration area page, open up the Case processes form 
from the Cases folder in the Setup group.
2. Click on the New button in the menu bar to create a new Case process.
3. Set the Name and the Description for the Case process.

Chapter 5
135
4. In the body of the form, you will see an entry for Stage 1 of the Case process. 
Change the Purpose of the stage to something a little more appropriate. In this  
case we will always start off our new product requests with a Review step:
5. To add additional stages, click on the Activity menu button above stages, or right-click 
on the parent folder and select the Create level item:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
136
6. To create default tasks and appointments for the stages, just right-click on the stage 
that you want them to be associated with and select the Create task and Create 
appointment menu items:
7. 
After you have inished, click on Close to save your Case process.
8. The inal step in the setup is to open up your Case categories form and select the 
Case category that you would like to associate the process with. In the General tab, 
you will be able to select your Case process that you just deined within the Case 
process ield:

Chapter 5
137
How it works...
Now, when you create a new Case, the Process fact box will show the standard stages that 
your case should step through. If there are tasks and appointments associated with the 
stages, then it will automatically show them to you, and also create them within Dynamics AX 
so that you don't have to create them manually. Also, if you select the Change stage option 
from the Process group on the Case ribbon bar, you will be able to move the case from one 
stage to the next:
You can place constraints around the stages as well to ensure that all of the tasks and 
appointments have been completed, and that users are not skipping steps.

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
138
Assigning Knowledge articles to Cases
Many times, you will have Standard Operating Procedures or Knowledge Base articles that 
are useful when investigating or processing cases. These could be resolutions to common 
problems, standard procedures to be performed, or just information that may be useful to  
the person working through the case process.
Rather than making the user remember these documents and procedures, Dynamics AX allows 
you associate Knowledge articles that you have uploaded with the Case categories. Then when 
a case is accessed, these articles will be displayed automatically to the user and they can open 
them up directly from the Case itself.
In this recipe, we will show how you can create these associations within the cases.
Getting Ready
Before you start this recipe, make sure that you have your Knowledge articles uploaded into 
Dynamics AX. To do this:
1. From the Home area page, open up the Knowledge articles form from the Document 
management folder in the Common group.
2. If your articles are not uploaded, click on the Knowledge article menu item to add 
the ile. You will be able to give your article a name and also upload the document 
from your local system:

Chapter 5
139
3. This will allow you to upload as many documents as you like:
How to do it...
To associate Knowledge articles to your Case process, follow these steps:
1. From the Organization administration area page, open up the Case categories  
form from the Cases folder in the Setup group.
2. In the menu bar of the form, click on the Related Knowledge articles menu item.
3. Click on the New button on the menu bar to create a new Related Knowledge article. 
Within the Identiication ield you will be able to select any of the articles that have 
been uploaded:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
140
4. After adding all of the related articles, you will be able to close the form:
How it works...
Now, any time that you open up a Case that has Knowledge articles associated with the 
Case category, then the Knowledge article tab will be populated with links to those articles. 
The user is able to see the ile just by clicking on the Open button for instant access:
 

Chapter 5
141
Also, the users are able to track if they attempted to use any of the articles, and if they were 
useful, giving you metrics on the usefulness of the articles that you are providing to them.
Associating additional business entities  
to Cases
Cases are linked to business entities (such as customers, products, and vendors) within 
Dynamics AX through associations. When the cases are initially created, they are automatically 
linked with that entity so that you can always link back to them. As a case is processed though, 
more entities within Dynamics AX may be associated to it making it visible within other areas of 
the system.
Examples of this may be that a customer creates a complaint. Initially the Case will be 
associated with the customer. When the defective product is identiied, then this should  
be associated with the Case. If it is decided that this was caused by a vendor shipment  
issue, then the Case should be associated with that as well. Now, when looking at the 
customer, product, or vendor, the user will be able to track back to all of the Cases  
associated with them.
In this recipe, we will show how easy it is to create additional associations from a Case to 
other records in Dynamics AX.
How to do it...
To create a new association to a Case, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Case that you want to link to other records.
2. Open up the Associations tab within the form.
3. Click on the Add button to create a new association.
4. From the Entity type ield, select the type of record that you would like to link to. In 
our recipe it will be an Item.
5. In the ID ield, select the record that you want to link to:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
142
How it works...
If you open up the record that you have just associated your case to, you will be able to see 
it by going to the General tab on the ribbon bar, and clicking on the All cases button in the 
Maintain Cases group:
This will take you to the All cases view iltered just to that record:
Creating projects from Cases
Sometimes issues and incidents grow to the point that they become a project and need a little 
more management and control than is provided through the Case process. You may want to 
start tracking time and materials, and link purchases to the process. In our example of the New 
Product Request, when the product is approved, and moved into the formulation stage, product 
development may want to track the proitability of the development by tracking their time.
To make this process easier, Dynamics AX Cases provide the ability to create new Billing Projects 
within Project Management directly from the Cases form, which we will show in this recipe.
How to do it...
To create a new billing project from a Case, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Case that you want to create the billing project.

Chapter 5
143
2. From the General tab in the ribbon bar, click on the Project button in the Set up 
group. Select the Create new billing project option:
3. This will open up the Create project form where you can give the general details of 
the project and create it:
 
How it works...
After creating the billing project, you will be able to see it in the Associations tab on the Case:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
144
This will allow you to access the project, and track all of your time and materials, as well as 
create a more detailed work breakdown structure.
Creating collaboration workspaces for Case 
projects
Apart from giving you better tracking of time and materials, billing projects created from Cases 
provide the ability to create Collaboration workspaces within SharePoint that you can use 
to store iles that could be accessed internally, and also accessed externally for collaboration 
with customers and vendors.
In this recipe, we will show you how to do this directly from the project form.
How to do it...
To create a new Collaboration workspace from a project, follow these steps:
1. Open up the billing project that is associated with your Case.
2. From the Project tab on the ribbon bar, click on the Collaboration workspace button 
in the Set up group, and select the Create collaboration workspace item:
3. Give your workspace a title, and click on the OK button to create the workspace:

Chapter 5
145
How it works...
If you now look at the bottom of the Project form, and open up the Collaboration workspace 
tab, you will see that the Internal URL and External URL ields are linked to SharePoint:
Clicking on these links will take you into the SharePoint site that has been created just for  
this project:

Using Cases to Manage Incidents and Requests
146
Summary
Within this chapter we have shown a number of the features that are available within Cases  
that you can use to help you to manage some incidents and requests. Using tools such as tasks, 
appointments, and standard processes for managing Cases will streamline your procedures. 
Also, using Knowledge Base articles and project collaboration workspaces will improve the 
management of information around the cases.
Once you have mastered the basics of how Cases can be used, you may want to try looking at 
some of the other capabilities that are enabled through the Case function within Dynamics AX. 
You may want to try:
 
f
Creating worklows that add alerts and more elaborate routings of tasks within the 
organization
 
f
Using questionnaires that are linked to the Case categories to gather more 
information as the Cases are being generated
 
f
Creating PowerView dashboards to track the status and frequency of cases within  
the organization
Cases give you a great tool for creating tracking events and issues within Dynamics AX without 
having to write a single line of code. Some other areas that you could use Cases for include:
 
f
Tracking customer and consumer complaints
 
f
Reporting vendor quality and delivery issues
 
f
Recording internal quality issues with products
 
f
Tracking simple maintenance and service orders

6
Organizing Your 
Worklows
In this chapter, we will show you how to take advantage of the in built worklow capabilities 
in Dynamics AX 2012 to manage common business processes, and also how to develop your 
own worklows to manage the not so common processes. You will also learn the following:
 
f
Creating a new worklow design from a template
 
f
Adding task steps to worklows
 
f
Saving and activating worklows
 
f
Setting the default worklows
 
f
Submitting and using worklows
 
f
Adding conditional decisions to a worklow
 
f
Adding manual decisions to a worklow
 
f
Adding worklow status notiications
 
f
Adding text placeholders to worklow messages
Introduction
There are two types of processes that you probably want to manage more effectively: business 
and people. The irst one is the easiest because you can generally control how a program or 
system is going to work. Making sure that the people processes are working correctly is a  
little trickier.

Organizing Your Worklows
148
You would want to:
 
f
Assign the right people to tasks, some of whom may not use Dynamics AX on a  
daily basis
 
f
Have different processes based on business rules
 
f
Make sure that steps are not skipped
 
f
Ensure that tasks are done within a reasonable amount of time
Fortunately, Dynamics AX 2012 comes preconigured with a worklow engine and standard 
worklow templates that you can use to help wrangle people. All you need to do is create the 
worklow design and activate it. Don't worry if you are not a programmer, this will all be a zero 
coding experience.
In this chapter, we will show you how you can design worklows by adding a worklow to 
manage the case management process within Dynamics AX.
Creating a new worklow design from a 
template
If you look through the area pages of the different modules in AX, within the Setup group on 
most of these you will notice forms for designing and managing that module's worklows. But if 
you open these forms, there may not be a lot of worklows showing up. Don't worry, Dynamics 
AX 2012 comes preloaded with a number of standard worklow templates. All you need to do 
is create your worklow designs from them.
In this recipe, we will show you how you can create a new worklow design from the standard 
worklow templates that are delivered.
How to do it...
To create a new worklow template, follow these steps:
1. From the Organization administration area page, click on the Case worklow menu 
item in the Cases folder of the Setup group to view all the worklows associated  
with cases.
2. To start a new worklow design, click on the New button in the New group of the 
Worklow ribbon bar. This will open up a dialog box with all the available worklow 
templates that are available from that area of Dynamics AX.

Chapter 6
149
3. Click on the Case management worklow template to create a new instance of the 
worklow design.

Organizing Your Worklows
150
Anywhere that a red exclamation bullet shows on the workflow 
designer is an indication that there is some information that 
needs to be added or configured on the workflow.
If you click on the Error pane button on the Show group of the 
Workflow ribbon bar, the workflow designer will show you all the 
messages and warnings, and clicking on the messages will take 
you to the workflow element that needs to be fixed.
4. Click on the Properties button on the Show group of the Worklow ribbon bar to  
open up the general worklow properties. Here you can give your worklow design a 
name, and also instructions that will show up when the users ask for information 
about this worklow.

Chapter 6
151
Adding task steps to worklows
Once you have a design started, you can add steps in the worklow that will allow you to assign 
tasks to users, which we will show in the following recipe.
How to do it...
To add a new task step in a worklow, follow these steps:
1. On the left-hand side of the worklow designer form, you will see all the worklow 
elements that you are able to use within your worklow. These will differ slightly 
depending on the worklow template you choose.
2. Click on the Complete case task and drag it onto your worklow canvas.
3. Hover your mouse over the Start node, and you will see connector points appearing 
around the node. Click on one of them and drag the connector line that appears 
down to the Complete case node that you just added to the form. This will link the 
two worklow steps.
4. Do the same for the Complete case and End nodes as well to make a  
continuous worklow.

Organizing Your Worklows
152
5. Notice that there is an alert in the Complete case 1 step in the worklow showing 
that you have some coniguration information required before this is a valid  
worklow. Select the worklow element, and in the ribbon bar, a Modify element  
group will appear.
6. Click on the Basic Settings button to open up the element properties.
7. 
In the Basic Settings panel, give your step a better name, subject, and work 
instructions. When notiications are delivered to the users, this is the information  
that will show up in the message or alert.

Chapter 6
153
8. Now, we need to assign the task to someone within the organization. To do this, click 
on the Assignment item. From the Assignment type tab, select the User option so 
that we can assign this task by the username.

Organizing Your Worklows
154
9. Then from the User tab, select the user to whom you would like to assign this task 
and click on the > button to move them to the task.
10. Close the element settings form and you should have a worklow with no errors.
Saving and activating worklows
Once you have inished designing your worklow, you can save it and activate it for use within 
Dynamics AX.

Chapter 6
155
How to do it...
To save and activate a worklow, follow these steps:
1. Click on the Save and close button on the worklow designer. Each time you make 
a change to the worklow and save it, you will create a new version that you will be 
asked to add notes to, so that you can track what changes have been made.
2. If your worklow is valid and has no errors, you will also be asked if you want to 
activate the worklow on the forms that it is associated with. In this example,  
we will activate it.

Organizing Your Worklows
156
Setting the default worklows
You can create any number of worklow designs based on a worklow template, but Dynamics 
AX needs to know which one to use. To do this, you need to select a default worklow design.
How to do it...
To mark a worklow as the default worklow, follow these steps:
1. Select the worklow that you want to use as the default worklow. In the Manage 
group of the Worklow ribbon bar, click on the Set as default button.
How it works...
When you set a worklow as the default one, it becomes the default worklow for all future 
worklows that are generated by the system. If you have used another version of a worklow 
already, those worklows will still continue to run using the other worklow as a template.
Once you have a default valid and activated worklow, a Submit button will start showing up 
on the forms that the worklow is associated with. In this example, our worklow is associated 
with cases; so when we create a new case, we see it on the Case form.

Chapter 6
157
Submitting and using worklows
Once you have your worklows designed and activated, you can start submitting worklows and 
then using it to perform approvals and send notiications related to your business processes.
Getting ready
In order to have the system process your worklows, you will need to turn on the worklow 
processor. This is a process that runs in the background that coordinates all the worklow 
steps, and also creates all the notiications and e-mails related to the worklow steps.
When you are using this within your live system, you will want to conigure the worklow 
processor as a batch process through the Worklow Infrastructure Coniguration 
wizard, which you can ind in the Workflow folder of the Common group of the System 
administration area page. But while you are just testing, you may just want to use the 
Worklow Processor tool that is hidden within AOT. To enable this option, follow these steps:
1. Open up the AOT explorer and expand the Forms group.
2. Find the Tutorial_WorklowProcessor form, right-click on it, and select the  
Open option.
3. When the Worklow Processor dialog box is displayed, click on the Start button.

Organizing Your Worklows
158
How to do it...
To submit and use a worklow, follow these steps:
1. Clicking on the Submit button will allow you to start a worklow that is associated 
with this record. As part of the worklow submission process, you will be able  to add 
personal instructions that will be associated with the worklow.
How it works...
As users are assigned tasks, they will be notiied in a number of different ways. If they are 
using the Dynamics AX Windows client, they will receive a pop-up notiication in their task  
tray, and the task will be shown in their Notiications list form.

Chapter 6
159
From the Home area, all the active worklow tasks that are assigned to the  user can be 
accessed by opening up the Worklow items assigned to me form in the Work Items  
folder of the Common group.

Organizing Your Worklows
160
Additionally, if you are using the Employee self-service portal, the users are able to access 
all their assigned  worklow tasks through a web browser by opening the My Approvals page 
within the Approvals group.
Adding conditional decisions to a worklow
Sometimes you want to have a worklow act one way, sometimes in another way. Usually, this 
is because of the value of a ield in the record. Maybe you want one person to approve a step, 
unless the dollar value is above a certain amount, in which case it goes to another.
You can do this by using the Conditional decision element to create routes through  
the worklow.
In this recipe, we will show how you can use this element to create multiple worklow 
processes within one.

Chapter 6
161
How to do it...
To add a conditional decision to a worklow, follow these steps:
1. Open your worklow in design mode, and from the Worklow elements palette, select 
the Conditional decision element and drop it onto your worklow.
2. Re-link the worklow process so that the Conditional decision 1 element is a step in 
the worklow process.
3. Select the Conditional decision 1 node so that the Basic Settings button shows 
up in the Worklow ribbon bar within the Modify elements group. Then, click on the 
Properties button to open up the settings form.

Organizing Your Worklows
162
4. The Conditions tab that is displayed allows you to build a condition that you want to 
check. Beside the Where statement, you can select the ield that you want to use in 
the condition from the dropdown. You can select any ield that is linked to the table 
record that created the worklow. In this case, we want a route based on the case 
category, so that we don't have to change anything.

Chapter 6
163
5. The next ield that you can choose within your condition is the comparison type that 
you want to use. Examples of the types of comparisons that you can use include is,  
is not, is greater than, and is between.
6. The next ield in the condition is the value that we want to check. Click on the … 
button, and you will be able to get a list of possible ield values to compare against.

Organizing Your Worklows
164
7. 
After creating the condition, you can close the Properties window and return to the 
worklow designer canvas. The condition has True and False branches based on the 
condition, so we just have to create two possible routes for the worklow.
How it works...
Now when the worklow is submitted, it will check to see if the case is a new product case 
category and run two separate approval processes.
Adding manual decisions to a worklow
Many times in a worklow process people need to make decisions that will affect the path that 
the process will take. Most of the time these are approvals that need to be obtained, reviews 
that need to be performed, or tests that need to be taken.
You can build this into your worklow by adding Manual decision worklow elements,  
which can be assigned to a single person, or multiple people. If you assign a decision to 
multiple people, the approval step could require one, a majority, or all the people in order  
to complete successfully.

Chapter 6
165
In this recipe, we will show how you can add a Manual decision worklow element to allow 
users to control the worklow process.
How to do it...
To add a Manual decision worklow element to a worklow, follow these steps:
1. Open your worklow in design mode, and from the Worklow elements palette  
select the Manual decision element and drop it onto your worklow.
2. Re-link the worklow process so that the Manual decision element is a step in  
the worklow process.

Organizing Your Worklows
166
3. Select the Manual decision node so that the buttons show up in the Worklow ribbon 
bar within the Modify elements group, and then click on the Properties button to 
open up the settings form.
4. In the Basic Settings group, you can change the Name: ield of the step to  
something a little less generic, and also update the Work item subject: and Work 
item instructions: ields. The last two ields will be the descriptions used when 
sending messages to the users who have been assigned the tasks, so it's important 
to make these as useful as possible.

Chapter 6
167
5. Now click on the Outcomes tab. Here, you will see two ields Outcome 1: and 
Outcome 2:, which you can give descriptions for. When the user is asked to  
make a decision, these are the options that they will be presented with.
6. Now, you need to assign the worklow task to a user or a group of users. Click on the 
Assignment group on the left of the form, and then select the user(s) whom you want 
to perform this decision.

Organizing Your Worklows
168
7. 
After creating the decision, you can close down the Properties window and return to 
the worklow designer canvas. The decision has True and False branches based on 
the condition, so we just have to create two possible routes for the worklow.

Chapter 6
169
How it works...
You can nest as many of these decisions as you like within the worklow to create more 
elaborate decision trees to model your business process. In our worklow example, if it  
is a new product request, it will be routed to an approver. If the request is approved,  
the administrator will be able to complete the case, otherwise they will reject it.
Adding worklow status notiications
There is nothing more frustrating than having to follow a process, but never being notiied 
when the process has been completed, or even worse, rejected. In our example of the new 
product request, the person who initiated the request will probably want to know when the 
approvals have been processed, so that they can contact the customer to tell them if they  
are able to develop the product.
You can build this into your worklows through the notiications option on any of the worklow 
steps or on the whole worklow; so when a step is completed, you will automatically receive a 
status update, and when the process is inished, you will be alerted immediately.
In this recipe, we will show how you can add a notiication to a step in the worklow, and also 
how to send it to the person who started off the worklow rather than to a speciic person, 
making the notiication a little more dynamic.
How to do it...
To add a user notiication to a worklow, follow these steps:
1. Open your worklow in design mode and select the worklow element that you want 
to associate the notiication with. When the Modify element group shows up in the 
Worklow ribbon bar, click on the Notiications button.

Organizing Your Worklows
170
2. This will open up the notiication options with a list of notiication events that are 
available, which will vary by worklow element. To add a notiication when the step 
has been completed, check the Complete event, and in the Notiication text memo 
ield, add a subject that you want to use when the user is notiied.

Chapter 6
171
3. To select the person to be notiied, click on the Recipient tab. If you want a certain 
user to be notiied, you can select the User option from the assignment list box, but in 
this example we want to notify the person who submitted the worklow; so select the 
Worklow user option.

Organizing Your Worklows
172
4. This will enable a tab for the Worklow user selection. To send the notiication to 
the user who initiated the worklow, select the Worklow originator option from the 
Worklow user combobox.
5. Now click on Close to inish updating the worklow element and to save the worklow.

Chapter 6
173
How it works...
You can conigure these notiications at any stage in the worklow process and also against 
the worklow itself, so that users are notiied of status changes and also when the worklows 
are completed.
Adding text placeholders to worklow 
messages
When users receive notiications or are assigned tasks through the worklow process, the 
more information that they are given, the quicker they should be able to act. A subject line 
that says Approve NPD – 72632: New Summer Pale Ale for Angel's BBQ is much more useful 
than something that says Approval Required.
In this recipe, we will show you how you can embed text from your worklow record into the 
messages that you send to the users, so that you can help your users help themselves.

Organizing Your Worklows
174
How to do it...
To embed text placeholders into notiication messages, follow these steps:
1. Open your worklow in design mode and select the worklow element that you want 
to include record-speciic text within the notiication messages. On all the message 
ields where you can add text from the worklow record, you will be able to see an 
Insert placeholder button.
2. When you click on Insert placeholder, a list of valid text placeholders will be shown. 
Some of these will be from the source table of the worklow and some will be related 
to the worklow. In this example, we want to add a hyperlink from the notiication to 
the worklow, so that the user is able to click on the link from the e-mail notiication 
and open up the worklow. To do this, scroll to the bottom of the list, select the 
%Worklow.Link to web% element and click on Insert to add it to your  
worklow message.

Chapter 6
175
How it works...
You can add as many of these text placeholders to the subject and also the body of the 
worklow messages and notiications to make them as descriptive as you like.

Organizing Your Worklows
176
When these messages are sent out by the worklow engine, it simply replaces the placeholder 
with proper values.

Chapter 6
177
Summary
In this chapter, we showed a simple example of how to design and enable a simple worklow 
with conditional branches, and also approval steps that are delivered out to the appropriate 
users. For many business cases, this is all that you need to use.
As you work with the worklow designer more though, you will notice other features that you 
may want to take advantage of, including:
 
f
Assigning decisions and steps to multiple users, and then requiring one, some, or all 
of them to complete the step before allowing the worklow to continue
 
f
Creating parallel processes allowing multiple decisions and tasks to be performed at 
once within the worklow
 
f
Implementing escalation rules to make sure that tasks are performed within a certain 
amount of time, otherwise they get assigned to a superior within the company
Additionally, if you feel like writing some code, you can try developing additional worklow 
templates and even new worklow steps for the existing worklow templates.


7
Reporting in Ofice
In this chapter, we will focus on how you can use the Microsoft Dynamics AX Ofice Add-Ins to 
create report and form templates in Word that are then accessed through Dynamics AX. You 
will also learn the following:
 
f
Creating a document data source
 
f
Creating a Dynamics AX document template within Word
 
f
Creating document template libraries
 
f
Registering documents to template libraries
Introduction
Microsoft Dynamics AX is delivered with integration to many of the Ofice applications, 
including Word, which allows users to create their own reports in an application that they are 
familiar with and have probably used for years. From an IT point of view, this is a great way to 
allow the users to create their own reports because the data is secure and ties back to the 
user's proile and security rights. From the user's point of view, this is great because they can 
format their reports themselves without having to be technically oriented.
As an added beneit, these Word templates can be saved to a template library in SharePoint 
that Dynamics AX will be able to access, which will link to the Attachments functionality, 
allowing the users to create iltered Word documents on the ly.
In this chapter, we will show you how to set up document data sources that you can then build 
reports off from within Word, and then save them to a template library so that everyone is able 
to take advantage of them.

Reporting in Ofice
180
Creating a document data source
Before you are able to use data from Dynamics AX in a Word report template, you need to 
register it as a document data source.
In this recipe, we will show how you register a query as a document data source so that you 
will be able to use it in Word.
How to do it...
To create a new document data source, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Document data sources form from the Document Management folder 
of the Setup group on the Organization administration area page.
2. This will show you a list of available document data sources that have already been 
registered with your version of Dynamics AX. Click on the New button on the menu 
bar to create a new document data source.
3. Select the module that you want the service to be related to.
4. Word will only read the Query reference data source types; so from the Data source 
type dropdown, select Query reference.

Chapter 7
181
5. You can now select any of the queries that have been registered within Dynamics 
AX from the Data source name drop-down box. In this case, we will select the 
InventOnHand query.
6. Finally, check the Activated checkbox and you are done.
Creating a Dynamics AX document template 
within Word
Once you have a document data source registered with Dynamics AX, you can start using it as 
a data source within Word documents and templates. This process is similar to creating a mail 
merge document using Outlook, and only then you can use all of the data in Dynamics AX.
In this recipe, we will show how you can use a document data source within Word to create a 
custom template report.
Getting ready
Before you start, make sure that you have installed the Ofice Add-Ins that are part of the 
standard Dynamics AX 2012 setup. If you don't have this already installed, you will need 
to run the Microsoft Dynamics AX Setup and install the Ofice Add-ins feature from within 
the Microsoft Dynamics AX components group. You may need to get help from your system 
administrator for this.
How to do it...
To create a new document template in Word, follow these steps:
1. When you open up Word, you will notice that you have a Dynamics AX ribbon bar, in 
addition to the standard ones. To add data from Dynamics AX to your Word document, 
all you need to do is click on the Add Data button in the Design group of the 
Dynamics AX ribbon bar.

Reporting in Ofice
182
2. This will open up a list of all of the queries that you have deined in your document 
data sources. You can select as many of these as you like to be data source 
references within your Word document.
3. After selecting your data source, a new Microsoft Dynamics AX ield explorer panel 
will show up within your document. You will be able to see all the related tables and 
ields used in the query that you can use in your document template.

Chapter 7
183
4. To add a ield, all you need to do is drag it from the ield explorer panel over to  
your document.
5. If you have repeating data, you can add that to the report as well by creating a table 
in your report.

Reporting in Ofice
184
6. If you drag a ield onto the second row of the table, it will automatically add the title of 
the ield for you in the irst row of the table. You can add as many ields as you like to 
the table.
7. 
Now select Save As from the File menu, give your document a name, and then save it 
so that you can re-use this template.
How it works...
To view the report with data in it, all you need to do is click on the Merge button from the Data 
group of the Dynamics AX ribbon bar.

Chapter 7
185
This will create a new Word document for you with all the data coming from Dynamics AX.
If you want to change the company that you are running the report against, you can click 
on the Options button within the Conigure group of the Dynamics AX ribbon bar. This will 
open up a form allowing you to change the legal entity, and even the AOS server that you are 
connecting to.

Reporting in Ofice
186
If you click on the Filter button within the Data group of the Dynamics AX ribbon bar, you will 
be able to add user ilters to the report as well.
Rerunning the merge function will now just return the records that match your ilter.
Since this is Word, you can take advantage of all the formatting features that you are used to, 
and turn your bland report into something that is a little bit more appealing.

Chapter 7
187
Creating document template libraries
Once you have created a Word template that is connected to a document data source, you can 
save it to a template library within SharePoint and register it with Dynamics AX. This enables 
Dynamics AX to see your Word template, and use it within the Attachments feature to create 
merged documents on the ly.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create a new template library within SharePoint and 
then link it to Dynamics AX as a template document type.
How to do it...
To create a new document template library in SharePoint, follow these steps:
1. To create a template library, start by opening up SharePoint in a browser.
2. To show all the document libraries that you have on your site, click on the  
View: All Site Content from the Site Actions menu.

Reporting in Ofice
188
3. From the Site Actions menu, select the New Document Library menu item.
4. Give your template library a name and description, select Microsoft Word document 
from the Document Templates drop-down box, and then click on the Create button.
5. This will create a new document library for you. To register this template library in 
Dynamics AX, you need to create a new template document type.
6. From within Dynamics AX, click on the Document types menu item within 
the Document management folder of the Setup group on the Organization 
administration area page.
7. 
To create a new template document type, click on the New button on the menu bar.
8. Give your document type a type and name.
9. In the Class: ield select Template library.
10. Specify a path in the Archive directory: ield and add a path for where you want the 
real-generated Word documents to be stored.

Chapter 7
189
11. In the SharePoint site: ield, paste in the base site URL where you created your 
document template library within SharePoint.
12. After specifying the correct SharePoint URL, you will now be able to ind your library in 
the Document library: dropdown.
13. Click on the Close button and you are now done with the creation of a document 
template library.
Registering documents to template libraries
Once you have a SharePoint document template library registered within Dynamics AX,  
you can start adding your Word templates to it and enabling them to be used by the 
Attachments functions.
In this recipe, we will show you how to add your templates and then synchronize SharePoint 
with Dynamics AX.

Reporting in Ofice
190
How to do it...
To register a document with the document template library, follow these steps:
1. Open up your document template library within SharePoint and click on the  
Add document link.
2. Click on the Browse button to ind your Word template.
3. Within the ile explorer, navigate to your Word template ile and click on Open.
4. To upload your document to SharePoint, click on OK.
5. There is one inal step required, and that is to synchronize Dynamics AX with the 
SharePoint template libraries so that it discovers the new template that you added. To 
do this, click on the Document types menu item within the Document management 
folder of the Setup group on the Organization administration area page, and select 
your template document type. In the Document Templates section of the form, click 
on the Synchronize button.

Chapter 7
191
6. This will search through the SharePoint library for any documents that it is able to use 
and add them to the templates list.

Reporting in Ofice
192
7. 
To enable the document for use, make sure you select the Activated checkbox.
How it works...
Once your templates are registered with Dynamics AX, something happens that is pretty cool. 
The Attachments function will look to see if there are any document templates that have the 
same primary table Id as the current record. If it inds any, they will show up as a document 
attachment type. When you create the document attachment, it will merge the template into a 
Word document that will be automatically iltered to the current record that you are looking at.
As a quick note, if you look at your template document type record, each of the templates 
that you have registered will have a primary table. In this case, it is the InventTable table. So 
anywhere that we are looking at products, the template will show up in the Attachments as a 
document type.

Chapter 7
193
To create a Word document from a registered template, open up a form where the primary 
table is the same as your template and click on the Attachments button. Usually, this is in  
the irst ribbon bar of the form.
Click on the New drop-down button on the menu bar to see all of the available document 
types that you can attach.
If the current record's primary table is the same as that of any of the templates, they will  
show up as a document type.

Reporting in Ofice
194
Selecting the document type will automatically create a merged version of the Word template, 
and also save the ile right away and associate it with your document record to reference  
later on.

Chapter 7
195
Summary
This feature of Dynamics AX is so useful because you don't need to be a reporting expert in 
order to take advantage of it. Almost everyone within the organization should be able to work 
with Microsoft Word and Excel, so they are not learning a new tool. Chances are that you are 
already scavenging information from the database and creating your own reports; this just 
makes the task a lot easier, and also up-to-date.
You can use this feature to create simple ad hoc reports, and also for creating standard forms 
and documents that you may use over and over again. For example, you could create:
 
f
Customer and vendor summary sheets
 
f
Sales price lists
 
f
Standard form letters such as collection notices
In this chapter, we only covered using Word to create templates. You can do exactly the same 
within Excel, so you may want to try that as well.


8
Talking to the  
Outside World
In this chapter, we will show how you can use the Customer and Vendor portals that are 
delivered with Dynamics AX to share information with people outside the organization.  
You will also learn the following:
 
f
Adding login accounts for customers in Active Directory
 
f
Coniguring customer accounts in Dynamics AX
 
f
Associating customer logins with customer accounts
 
f
Coniguring a product catalog
 
f
Adding images and presentation information to product catalogs
Introduction
The Enterprise portal templates that are delivered with Dynamics AX 2012 include three  
self-service portals, which allow you to reach out to users who would not normally have  
access to the system. You can allow:
 
f
Employees to make requests and update their information through the Employee  
self-service portal
 
f
Customers to access their sales orders, receipts and invoices, update their contact 
information, and also use the shopping cart to place new orders through the 
Customer self-service portal
 
f
Vendors to update contact information, and respond to bids through the Vendor  
self-service portal

Talking to the Outside World
198
All the hard work has been done for you. All that you need to do is set them up and start  
using them.
In this chapter, we will show how you can conigure one of these portals: the Customer  
self-service portal.
Adding login accounts for customers in 
Active Directory
In order for an external user to log in and access the Dynamics AX self-service portals, they 
need to have a username and password. This Active Directory account is used to authenticate 
the user in SharePoint and can be linked to a Dynamics AX user account, so that we are able 
to conigure them as a valid external user.
In this recipe, we will walk you through the steps required to create the Active Directory  
user account.
Getting ready
Before you start this recipe, you will want to make sure that you have access to the server 
that manages your Active Directory coniguration. If you don't have access, you may want to 
contact your system administrator to get access, or have them help you with this step.
How to do it...
To add a new login account for a customer in Active Directory, follow these steps:
1. From within the server that manages your Active Directory accounts, open up 
the Active Directory Users and Computers administration console from the 
Administrative Tools menu group within the Start menu.
2. Rather than mingle all the customer and vendor logins with all your user logins,  
you may want to create a new organizational unit for each of them. To do this,  
just right-click on your domain and select Organizational Unit from the New  
menu item.

Chapter 8
199
3. Give your organizational unit a name in the Name: ield and then click OK.

Talking to the Outside World
200
4. Next, create a user account for your customer by right-clicking on the Customers 
organizational unit and selecting User from the New menu item.
5. In the Full name: ield, type in the customer's name and give your user a unique 
username to log in with, and click on Next.

Chapter 8
201
In this example, we just use the customer number prefixed 
with "C". Using just the customer number by itself may 
create conflicts with vendors having the same ID.
6. Assign your customer a new password and then click on Next.
7. 
On the conirmation screen, just click on Finish to end the process.
You can repeat this process for each of your customers.
Coniguring customer accounts in  
Dynamics AX
In order for the user to be able to access the self-service portals within the Enterprise portal, 
they need to be registered in Dynamics AX as a valid user with the correct roles and proiles.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create an external user account within Dynamics AX.
How to do it...
To conigure a new customer account in Dynamics AX, follow these steps:
1. Select the Users menu item from the Users folder of the Common group within the 
System administration area page.
2. You can create the user the hard way or the easy way. The easy way is to create the 
user account from Active Directory by clicking on the Import button within the New 
group of the Users ribbon bar.
3. When the Active Directory Import Wizard starts up, click on the Next button.

Talking to the Outside World
202
4. Select your domain from the Domain name: drop-down box, and then select a  
search ilter for the criteria ields. Click on Next.
5. This should show you a list of all the user accounts within Active Directory that match 
your search criteria, and you can select the user(s) who you want to import into 
Dynamics AX. Once you have selected the users, click on Next.
6. On the conirmation screen, click on Next again.

Chapter 8
203
7. 
When the Select roles dialog box is shown, ind the Customer (external) role and 
then click on the < button to move it to the Selected Roles list. Then click on Next.
8. On the Select proile dialog box, assign your customer a proile and then click on the 
Next button. Without a proile, they may not be able to see any of their data within 
Dynamics AX.
9. To complete the process, just click on Finish.
Associating customer logins with customer 
accounts
In order for an external user to see their account information and just their account 
information, you need to create a relationship between the user account within  
Dynamics AX and the customer account. This is done through the user relationships.
In this recipe, we will show how to create a relationship between a user account and a 
customer account.

Talking to the Outside World
204
Getting ready
In order to create a user-to-customer relationship, you need to have a contact for the customer 
account. If you don't have a contact, you may want to quickly create one.
How to do it...
To associate a customer login with a customer in Dynamics AX, follow these steps:
1. Select the Users menu item from the Users folder of the Common group within the 
System administration area page.
2. Select the user account that you want to link to a customer account, and then click 
on the Relations button within the Setup group of the Users ribbon bar.
3. In the User relations form, click on the New button in the menu bar.
4. From within the Person: drop-down ield, select the contact for the customer account 
that you want to link to the customer.
5. This should automatically populate the user IDs. Now, click on the Add button from 
the menu bar of the External relations group.

Chapter 8
205
6. From the Name: dropdown, select the customer account that you want to associate 
with the customer, and then click on the Close button.
How it works...
This will now allow the user to log in to the Customer self-service portal, and the information 
that will be displayed will be only for the related customer account.
The user will be able to access all their information such as address and contact information. 
If the user creates new contacts or addresses, this information will be immediately changed 
within Dynamics AX.

Talking to the Outside World
206
Coniguring a product catalog
The Customer self-service portal has a simple e-commerce feature that allows customers 
to enter orders. To do this, though, you need to publish the products that you want to allow 
customers to order, and this is done by deining a product catalog for the Customer self-
service portal.
In this example we will show how you can create a product catalog and link it with the  
self-service portal.
How to do it...
To conigure a new product catalog, follow these steps:
1. Select the Product groups menu item from the Product catalogs folder of the 
Setup group on the Product Information Management area page.
2. To create a parent group for our product catalog, click on the New button.
3. Give your product group a name and make sure that the Type ield is set to Group node.

Chapter 8
207
4. Continue and create subgroups in exactly the same way.

Talking to the Outside World
208
5. Link your parent group to the subgroup by selecting the parent group and then 
clicking on the New menu button in the subitems group. From the Component  
group dropdown, select the subgroup.

Chapter 8
209
6. You can create subgroups that are linked to items rather than other groups. To do 
this, click on the New menu button and create a new group node, but set the type 
to Item node. Link the Item node group to a parent group. Then in the child nodes 
list, click on the New button and within the Item number drop-down box, select the 
products that you want to include in the group.

Talking to the Outside World
210
7. 
After you have created the product hierarchy that you want publish to the Customer 
self-service portal, click on the Update button in the menu bar of the Product group 
structure form. Then, check the Update product group structure ield and click on 
the OK button.
8. Now, we need to link the product catalog to the Enterprise portal. To do this, select 
the Customer self-service parameters menu item from the Customer self-
service folder of the Setup group within the Sales and Marketing area page.
9. Finally, choose the Product structures tab, select the parent product group that  
you deined from the Product group ield, and then click on the Close button.

Chapter 8
211
How it works...
Now when the customer logs in to the Customer self-service portal and selects the Product 
catalog option, they will see the product catalog that you have deined.
They will be able to drill down to the base product, see the product details and price 
information directly from Dynamics AX, and add it to their cart.

Talking to the Outside World
212
From this point on, the user can add products to their shopping cart, update the quantities, 
and place their orders just as you would expect within a web product catalog. The default 
information from their customer account will be populated at checkout, and they will be able 
to conirm their orders.
Once orders are placed through the Customer self-service portal, they are immediately 
created within Dynamics AX.
Adding images and presentation information 
to product catalogs
You can make your product catalog look a lot better by adding pictures and detailed 
information to your products through the presentation options available within the  
product groups.
In this recipe, we will show you how to add product images and details.

Chapter 8
213
How to do it...
To add presentation details to your product catalog, follow these steps:
1. Select the Product groups menu item from the Product catalogs folder of the 
Setup group on the Product Information Management area page.
2. Select the item node from your item groups that you want to add more detailed 
information to, and click on the Presentations menu button.
3. From the Presentations dialog box, select the Description tab and click on the  
Edit button to add a more detailed customer facing description.

Talking to the Outside World
214
4. Type in the detailed description that you want to show on the self-service portal and 
then click on the Save button.
5. To add a thumbnail image to the product, click on the Image tab and then click on 
the Add image button.

Chapter 8
215
6. A dialog box will show up asking if you want to update all of the languages. If you  
have a system with multiple languages in use, you may want to check this option. 
Then, click on the OK button.
7. 
Now select the image ile that you want to use as the product thumbnail and click  
on Open.

Talking to the Outside World
216
8. The inal step in this process is to synchronize all the images that you have 
associated with the product catalog with your Enterprise portal. To do this, click on 
the Publish images menu item in the Enterprise Portal folder of the Setup 
group within the System administration area page.
9. To sync the images, click on the OK button in the publishing dialog box:
How it works...
Now when the user browses the catalog, they will see an image associated with the product.
And when they drill into the detail for the product, they will see more information coming from 
the detailed description that was created for the product.

Chapter 8
217
Summary
You may have thought that to allow others to access information within the ERP system is a 
lot of work to build and set up. Through this chapter, you have seen that the Customer self-
service portal that you get with Dynamics AX is not that hard to conigure, and you can quickly 
set it up and let customers use it.
In addition to what we showed in this chapter, there are other features within the  
Customer self-service portal that you may want to try taking advantage of. If you want  
to dig in deeper, try:
 
f
Formatting your descriptions through the HTML designer within the product groups 
presentation editor
 
f
Adding images and descriptions to the group nodes as well as the item nodes in the 
product catalog
 
f
Creating other root product catalogs for the highlighted campaigns and start pages of 
the self-service portal

Talking to the Outside World
218
Also, you may want to look at the other self-service portals that are delivered with Dynamics 
AX. You can:
 
f
Create logins for vendors much the same way as you do for customers, allowing them 
to log in to the Vendor self-service portal. From there, they will be able to access all  
of their POs, invoices, and so on, and also respond to quotation requests that you 
send them.
 
f
Allow more casual users to access the Employee self-service portal to update their HR 
contact information, request training, submit requisitions, and also enter timesheets 
and expense reports online.
All the portals are built and delivered out of the box with Dynamics AX. Why not take 
advantage of them?

9
Creating Help
In this chapter, we will introduce the help authoring system that is built into the Dynamics AX 
framework, and show you how you can take advantage of it to build your own integrated help 
system and knowledgebase. You will also learn the following:
 
f
Creating a new help publisher ID
 
f
Creating a new help publisher content folder
 
f
Creating your help content
 
f
Creating a Task Recorder walkthrough
 
f
Turning a task recording document into a help topic
Introduction
Dynamics AX has a help engine that is installed along with the base installation that is used 
for searching and displaying all of the standard help iles, and the help iles are also indexed  
and searchable through the Enterprise Search feature. If you want to, you can have full 
access to all the default help source iles, and you can easily add your own twists to the 
standard documentation.
This becomes even more useful to you because it not only provides a way for you to edit the 
default help to add your own nuances to the documentation, but it also allows you to create 
your very own help topics that the users are able to search for alongside the standard help.

Creating Help
220
In this chapter, we will show you how you can create your own help documents for reference 
information, and also how to use the Task Recorder that is built into Dynamics AX to document 
and publish business procedures for the users to reference directly from the Dynamics AX 
help service.
Creating a new help publisher ID
Help iles are separated within the help service by publisher, allowing the user to further 
reine their help searches if they want, and also allowing publishers to update their help 
independently. In the following examples we will be creating new help content, so it's probably 
a good idea to register a new publisher within the help service before continuing.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create a new publisher within the help service.
Getting ready
All the help service iles should be located in the following directory on the Dynamics AX 
server: c:\inetpub\wwwroot\DynamicsHelpServer\DynamicsAXHelpServer.
How to do it...
To create a new help publisher ID, follow these steps:
1. Find the web.config ile and open it up in an editor such as Notepad or  
Visual Studio.
2. Within the dynamicsHelpConfig section of the web.config ile will be  
a publishers section. There may be multiple entries here if there are  
add-ons installed for Dynamics AX, but in the base image, there should  
just be one publisherId for Microsoft.

Chapter 9
221
3. Make a copy of the Microsoft publisherId entry and paste it below. Then change 
publisherId and name to be a unique publisher.
4. Then, save your web.config ile.

Creating Help
222
How it works...
Now when you open up the Dynamics AX help, if you click on the Options button, you will see 
your new publisher as a ilter option.
Creating a new help publisher content folder
Once you have a publisher ID deined, you need to create a folder structure to store all your 
help content.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create the publisher folder structure.
Getting ready
Each publisher should have their own Content folder located in the following directory 
on the Dynamics AX server: c:\inetpub\wwwroot\DynamicsHelpServer\
DynamicsAXHelpServer\Content\.

Chapter 9
223
How to do it...
To create a new help publisher Content folder, follow these steps:
1. Create a new folder in the Content folder with the same name as your publisherID.
2. Within the new publisher directory, create a subdirectory for each language that you 
want your documentation published in using the language code naming convention. 
In this case, we will just publish in US English (EN-US).
3. Then, create a subfolder within the Language folder called UserDocResources.
4. Within the UserDocResources folder, create a new XML ile called 
TableOfContents.xml. This will store your table of contents' deinition  
for your help iles.
If you want, you can also look in the same folder for the 
Microsoft help publisher and just copy that file over to 
your publisher's folder.
5. Open the TableOfContents.xml ile in a text editor (Notepad or Visual Studio) and 
add the following XML using your own publisher ID.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<tableOfContents xmlns="http://schemas.microsoft.com/
dynamicsHelp/2008/11" xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-
instance">
  <publisher>MurrayFife</publisher>
  <documentSet>UserDocumentation</documentSet>

Creating Help
224
  <ms.locale>EN-US</ms.locale>
  <entries>
  </entries>
</tableOfContents>
  <entries>
    <entry>
      <text>Brewerpedia</text>
      <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
    </entry>
  </entries>
</tableOfContents>
6. Add a new base folder to your help TOC by adding an entry node to the  
entries group.
  <entries>
    <entry>
      <text>Brewerpedia</text>
      <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
    </entry>
  </entries>
7. 
To add child topics to that folder, just add more entries with the children nodes 
under your base entry node. You can embed as many levels of child nodes this  
way within your TOC.
<entries>
    <entry>
      <text>Brewerpedia</text>
      <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
      <children>
        <entry>
          <text>About Beer</text>
          <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
        </entry>
      </children>
    </entry>
  </entries>

Chapter 9
225
8. Each help topic that you create needs to have a Microsoft.Help.F1 GUID value. 
A quick and simple way to create a unique GUID is to go to http://createguid.
com. Every time you refresh this page it will show you a new GUID.
9. Create a new GUID for each entry that you have in your TOC.
10. Finally, save your table of contents.

Creating Help
226
How it works...
Now when you open up the Dynamics AX help, you should see a new entry for the help that 
you added to your table of contents, including the subfolders.
Creating your help content
Creating your own help is a pretty simple exercise and doesn't require any special applications 
or tools. All you need is a copy of Microsoft Word and directions on where to ind the help 
template that is embedded in the Dynamics AX help system.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create and publish your own help topics.

Chapter 9
227
How to do it...
To create new help content, follow these steps:
1. To ind the help template that you can use to publish your own help, just open up the 
Dynamics AX help and type in template for help documentation.
2. When the search results are returned, select the Templates for Help Documentation 
help topic.
3. Scroll down through the help topic and there will be a link to a Dynamics Help 
Content Template.docm. Click on this link to download the help content template.
4. This will open up the help template. Since this is just a Word document, you 
can create your help content by hand or just cut and paste from any existing 
documentation that you may have.

Creating Help
228
5. On the Word ribbon bar, you will see an additional tab for the Microsoft Dynamics 
Help metadata. In that ribbon bar, update the Title and Publisher ID, and set the 
Topic ID to match the GUID for the topic in the publisher table of content's XML ile.
6. From the File menu, select the Save As option and navigate to the Content folder 
for your publisher and save the ile. The name of the ile does not matter, but for this 
example, we will use the GUID to identify the document. Also, to separate out each 
chapter in the help documentation, we created a subdirectory for the chapter.

Chapter 9
229
7. 
To inish the publication process, click on the Save as HTML button within the Save 
group of the Microsoft Dynamics Help ribbon bar.
How it works...
If we look into our Content folder, there will now be three iles for the help topic: .docm, .htm, 
and .mhtml.
When you open up help and select your new topic, you will be able to see the content that you 
just created.

Creating Help
230
Additionally, since the help server is watched by the Enterprise Search service, searching for 
any keyword that is embedded in the help documentation will return your help content.
Creating a Task Recorder walkthrough
Dynamics AX has an in-built tool called the Task Recorder. This is a tool that allows you to 
record exactly what you are doing within Dynamics AX. The recordings can then be turned into 
Word, Visio, and/or PowerPoint documents that play back your recorded steps. This makes it a 
great way to create user guides and process documentation, which could then be embedded 
within the Dynamics AX help.
In this recipe, we will show you how to use the Task Recorder to create process documentation.
How to do it...
To create a new Task Recorder recording, follow these steps:
1. Access the Task Recorder from the Tools submenu of the File menu in the Dynamics 
AX Rich Client.

Chapter 9
231
2. This will open up the Task recorder dialog box. To start recording, just click on the 
Record button (in red).

Creating Help
232
3. After performing the task that you want to record, click on the Stop button (in blue) 
in the Task Recorder and save the task. Give your task recording a name, a brief 
description for reference, and then click on the Save button.
4. You will then be taken to a list of all your recordings. Select your new recording and 
click on the Generate document... button.

Chapter 9
233
5. When the Generate document dialog box is displayed, you can select the format  
of the document. Choose the Microsoft Word document type and click on the  
OK button.
How it works...
This will then open up Word, along with the narrative and screenshots, replaying the steps 
that were recorded.

Creating Help
234
Turning a task recording document into a 
help topic
Once you have a task recording document, you can turn this into a help entry very quickly;  
you just need to cut and paste the task recording details into the help template.
In this recipe, we will show how to create procedural help documentation.
How to do it...
To convert a task recording into a help topic, follow these steps:
1. Find the Dynamics Help template through the help system.
2. When the template opens, click on the Save As option.
3. Save the help template document to your publisher content folder, with a unique 
GUID as the document name.
4. Change the title in the Word document, and on the Microsoft Dynamics Help ribbon 
bar, update the Title and Publisher ID, and set the Topic ID to match the GUID for the 
topic in the publisher table of contents' XML ile.
5. Copy the content from the document generated by Task Recorder into the help 
template ile.
6. Tidy up the detailed task description by removing sections that you are not interested 
in showing.

Chapter 9
235
7. 
Then click on the Save as HTML button within the Save group of the Microsoft 
Dynamics Help tab to publish the HTML iles.
8. Now open up your publisher table of contents' XML ile, and add an entry for your user 
documentation using the GUID that matches the GUID deined in the Word document.
    <entry>
      <text>Walkthroughs</text>
      <Microsoft.Help.F1></Microsoft.Help.F1>
      <children>
        <entry>
          <text>Released Product Inventory Lookup</text>
          <Microsoft.Help.F1>108B0027-6EF1-4F3F-80A4-
5A5A416FDC2C</Microsoft.Help.F1>
        </entry>
      </children>
    </entry>
9. Finally, save your table of contents ile.

Creating Help
236
How it works...
When you open up Dynamics AX help, the users will now be able to ind documentation 
speciic to your business processes.

Chapter 9
237
Summary
Although the standard help that is delivered with Dynamics AX is good, your own help iles 
with your own examples is better. Making it almost impossible for users to avoid inding it by 
integrating it with Dynamics AX is the best of all.
The help service has a number of other more advanced features that you can take advantage 
of if you want to delve into it further. You can:
 
f
Create links from your help documentation to other websites by embedding hyperlinks
 
f
Create links to Dynamics AX data through Dynamics AX speciic hyperlinks that are 
enabled when you install Rich Client
 
f
Embed other media iles such as videos for more dynamic help content
 
f
Add keywords for context-sensitive searches
Other types of help content that you might want to publish through the help could include:
 
f
Standard operating procedures
 
f
Terminology and glossaries
 
f
A detailed product documentation
All of this information will then be linked into the Help and Enterprise Search allowing users to 
ind it quickly and directly from the application, without a lot of technical work.


10
Web Services  
and Forms
In this chapter, we will show you how you can use Microsoft InfoPath in conjunction with web 
services linked to Dynamics AX to create smarter forms. You will also learn the following:
 
f
Creating a Dynamics AX web service
 
f
Creating a web service wrapper
 
f
Using a Dynamics AX web service in an InfoPath form
 
f
Creating custom OData queries to retrieve Dynamics AX data
 
f
Building InfoPath lookups using OData queries
Introduction
Web services are a great way for other applications to connect with Dynamics AX, and are also 
very easy to create and use through the tools that are delivered with Dynamics AX. You can 
create new web services that you can use to perform updates in the system, and you can also 
use the standard query services to get data from the database, all through a secure method.
InfoPath is a great Ofice application that you may already have installed, but not know what 
you can use it for. It allows you to create forms and documents that can read and update 
databases, and also use web services to grab and update data. When you combine these two, 
you will be able to create simpler forms very quickly that the users can use for Dynamics AX 
without having to be an expert programmer.
In this chapter, we will show you how you can use web services and InfoPath to create a 
simple update form for Dynamics AX.

Web Services and Forms
240
Creating a Dynamics AX web service
There are a number of web services that have already been created and deployed with the 
standard Dynamics AX install. There are a lot more services that you can publish as web 
services through the AOT in just a matter of minutes, allowing you to access and update 
almost any area of Dynamics AX from other applications.
In this recipe, we will show you how you can create new web services from within the 
Dynamics AX development environment.
How to do it...
To create a new web service within Dynamics AX, follow these steps:
1. From within the AOT explorer, create a new project for the web service.

Chapter 10
241
2. From inside the project, right-click on the project name and from the New submenu, 
select Service Group to create a new web service group.
3. Rename your service group to be something a little more appropriate. In 
this case, we are creating a sales order web service; so we will rename it as 
SalesOrderService.
4. From the AOT browser, open up the Services group, ind the service that you want to 
publish as a web service, and then drag it over onto your new project service group. 
In this recipe, we selected the SalesSalesOrderService, which has all of the logic to 
create sales orders.
You can continue adding as many services into your service 
group as you like.

Web Services and Forms
242
5. When you have inished adding services, right-click on the service group that you 
created and select the Deploy Service Group menu item. This will process the  
service group and create a web service for you.
How it works...
To see the web service that was created, open the Inbound ports option from the Services 
and Application Integration Framework folder of the Setup group in the System 
administration area page.
Your new service should show up there. If you look at the WSDL URI: ield for the inbound 
port, you will ind the URL for the web service itself.

Chapter 10
243
If you browse to that location, you will see the schema for the web service that you will use  
for other applications to call, in order to update Dynamics AX. For us it's not that user-friendly,  
but for applications, this is all they need to know.

Web Services and Forms
244
Creating a web service wrapper
The web services that Dynamics AX creates seem to work best for programming interfaces, 
and sometimes programs have problems with the format of the web service call. InfoPath is 
one of these programs. So, we need to wrap the Dynamics AX service within a web service 
wrapper that InfoPath is able to use. This is not as complicated as it sounds though, and you 
can quickly do this with Visual Studio.
In this recipe, we will show how you can create a web service wrapper through Microsoft 
Visual Studio that we can use from within InfoPath.
Getting ready
In order to do this you need to have a copy of Visual Studio. We will be using Visual Studio 
2010 in our example, but you should be able to create similar web service wrappers using 
earlier versions as well.
How to do it...
To create a web service wrapper, follow these steps:
1. From within Visual Studio, create a new web project and from the template library, 
select the ASP.NET Web Service Application template.

Chapter 10
245
2. This will create your web service shell that will be modiied to call the Dynamics AX 
web service. To link the Dynamics AX web service to our project so that we are able to 
call it, right-click on the References folder in Solution Explorer and select the Add 
Service Reference... menu item.
3. From within the Add Service Reference dialog box, paste the URL for your Dynamics 
AX web service and click on the Go button. This will allow Visual Studio to discover the 
web service, and you will be able to see all of the operations that are exposed.
4. Change the name in the Namespace: ield to match the web service name so that it 
will be easier to remember in the later steps, and then click on the OK button.

Web Services and Forms
246
When you return to your web service project, you will be able to see the web service 
reference in the Service References group within Solution Explorer.
5. Within the header of the web service code, add an entry for your service reference  
as follows:
        using AXSalesOrderService.SalesOrderServiceReference;

Chapter 10
247
6. Now, replace the HelloWorld web method code that is added to the web service  
by default with the following code that will use the web service to create a new  
sales order:
        [WebMethod]
        public string NewSalesOrder(
                string company,
                string language,
                string custAccount,
                string PONumber,
                string itemID,
                decimal salesQty,
                string salesUnit
                )
        {
            SalesOrderServiceClient client = new 
SalesOrderServiceClient();
            AxdSalesOrder salesOrder = new AxdSalesOrder();
            AxdEntity_SalesTable salesTable = new AxdEntity_
SalesTable();
            AxdEntity_SalesLine salesLine = new AxdEntity_
SalesLine();
            CallContext callContext = new CallContext();
            EntityKey[] keys;
            EntityKey key;
            KeyField fld;
            salesTable.CustAccount = custAccount;
            salesTable.ReceiptDateRequested = new DateTime(2013, 
03, 20);
            salesLine.ItemId = itemID;
            salesLine.SalesQty = salesQty;
            salesLine.SalesUnit = salesUnit;
            salesTable.SalesLine = new AxdEntity_SalesLine[] { 
salesLine };
            salesTable.PurchOrderFormNum = PONumber;
            salesTable.SalesType = AxdEnum_SalesType.Sales;
            salesOrder.SalesTable = new AxdEntity_SalesTable[] { 
salesTable };
            callContext.Company = company;
            callContext.Language = language;
            keys = client.create(callContext, salesOrder);
            key = keys[0];
            fld = key.KeyData[0];
            return fld.ToString();
        }

Web Services and Forms
248
You can see this in the following screenshot:
7. 
Then, compile your web service.

Chapter 10
249
How it works...
When you compile your program and run it, you will be taken to the web interface for the new 
web service showing all of the methods that you've exposed.

Web Services and Forms
250
If you click on the NewSalesOrder web service call, you will be able to see all the parameters 
that are required to perform the web service.
You can test your web service by illing in the parameters and then clicking on Invoke. This will 
perform the web service and return with the results of the call.
With a little bit of extra code, you can have the web service return back the 
order number as well.

Chapter 10
251
To double-check if that everything worked, you can open up Dynamics AX and you should be 
able to see the new sales order.
Using a Dynamics AX web service in an 
InfoPath form
InfoPath allows you to quickly create data entry forms that can be saved locally, to SharePoint, 
and also update data in databases. Additionally, it is able to connect to web services and send 
and receive data through that channel as well. So once we have a web service wrapper built 
that links to Dynamics AX, we can create a form that will send information to it in order to add 
and update data.
In this recipe, we will show how you can create an InfoPath form that uses a Dynamics AX web 
service wrapper to publish information.

Web Services and Forms
252
Getting ready
For this recipe, you need to make sure that you have InfoPath installed, since it is usually 
part of Ofice Professional Plus or Ofice 365. Just check that it shows up within the Microsoft 
Ofice program group.
How to do it...
To use a web service within an InfoPath form, follow these steps:
1. Within the InfoPath designer, create a new form and select the Web Service template.

Chapter 10
253
2. This will automatically open up the Data Connection Wizard. Select the Submit data 
option, since our example will be sending information to the web service to update 
Dynamics AX, and then click on Next.

Web Services and Forms
254
3. When asked for the web service, type in the URL for the WSDL (Web Services 
Description Language) of your web service wrapper and click on Next.
If you don't know how to find the WSDL, just open up the web 
service that you are calling from InfoPath, and at the top of the 
page will be a link for Service Description. If you click on that, 
it will take you to the WSDL page.
The URL for this page is the one that you will want to paste into 
the Web Service: field on the Data Connection Wizard.
4. If your web service has multiple operations published against it, you will see all of 
them listed in the next step in the wizard. Select the web service operation that you 
want your InfoPath form to use when submitting data and click on Next.
5. Finally, give your data connection a name and click on the Finish button.
6. Once the data connection is created, the web service parameters will show up as 
ields within the Fields browser. You can add them to the form individually by dragging 
and dropping them over, or you can just grab the whole group of ields and drag them 
onto the form.

Chapter 10
255
7. 
To default values in particular ields so that the user doesn't have to type in the 
values every time, select the Properties menu item after right-clicking on the ield in 
the Fields browser. This will open up the Field or Group Properties window and you 
can specify the default value in the Value: ield.
In our example, we will default the Company: and 
Language: fields.

Web Services and Forms
256
How it works...
To see the form in action, click on the Preview button on the Home ribbon bar.
This will open up the form in edit mode and you can ill in the remaining ields. To send the 
data to Dynamics AX, click on the Submit button in the Home ribbon bar.
Now, you should be able to see a new order within Dynamics AX that was created by your new 
InfoPath form.

Chapter 10
257
Creating custom OData queries to retrieve 
Dynamics AX data
Dynamics AX has a more generic web service call feature called OData Query that allows you 
to query tables and return them through a URL. This is useful because they can be used as 
read-only data sources for other programs such as InfoPath.
In this recipe, we will show how you can register your own custom query within Dynamics AX, 
and then access it through the OData Query web service.

Web Services and Forms
258
How to do it...
To create an OData query, follow these steps:
1. To access a query through the OData Query feature, we open the Document data 
sources form from the Organization Administration area page within the Document 
Management folder of the Setup group.
2. To create a new query, click on the New button in the menu bar.
3. The Document data sources reference the queries that are built within AOT. Usually, 
you don't have to build a whole new query because you can use one of the existing 
ones as a basis. Select a module that you would like the data source to be associated 
with, and then select Custom Query for the data source type. If you just want to query 
the table with no ilter, you could select the Query Reference option, but we want to 
ilter the data before it's sent to us.

Chapter 10
259
4. In the Data source name ield, select the query that you want to publish as an OData 
Query. In this recipe we want a list of customers; so the CustTableListPage works  
for us.
5. On selecting the data source name, AX will open up a query panel, where we can add 
whatever ilters we want, and then we can click on OK to save.
6. You may want to change the data source name to help you recognize what it is 
associated with, and then maybe add a description.

Web Services and Forms
260
7. 
Finally, to enable the document data source to be used in the queries, select the 
Activated checkbox.
For the following example, we also need to create a second document 
data source that queries the EcoResProductListPage, to return back all 
of the products in the database.

Chapter 10
261
How it works...
Now that the query is published as a document data source, you can access it through 
a URL with this format: http://localhost:8101/DynamicsAx/Services/
ODataQueryService/CustTableListPage_US01.
It will return back all of the data.
Building InfoPath lookups using OData 
queries
A feature of InfoPath that makes forms even more useful is the ability to allow ields to be 
populated with dynamic data coming from static lists, databases, and also web data sources, 
so that users do not have to remember ield values such as part codes and customer 
numbers. Since you are able to query Dynamics AX data through web queries, we can  
use these queries to create dynamic lookups in our forms.
In this recipe, we will show how you can turn text ields into drop-down lists that use OData 
queries as a data source.

Web Services and Forms
262
How to do it...
To use an OData query as a data source for a ield, follow these steps:
1. We need to irst deine the data source. To do this, select the From XML File option in 
the From Other Sources menu in the Get External Data group of the Data ribbon bar 
in the form designer.
2. When the Data Connection Wizard pops up, paste the URL for the OData query that 
you want to use as a data source and click on Next.
3. To store the data source with the form, select the Include… option from the data 
source location section and click on Next.

Chapter 10
263
4. Finally, give your data source a name and click on Finish.
5. To use the data source within a ield, irst you need to change the ield's control  
type to one that will show the data. To do this, right-click on the ield and select  
the Drop-Down List Box option from the Change Control submenu.
6. Once the control has been changed, right-click on the ield again and select the  
Drop-Down List Properties option.
7. 
Change the List box choice from Enter choice manually to Get choice from an 
external data source and from the Data source dropdown, you will be able to  
ind the XML data source that you just created.

Web Services and Forms
264
8. To specify what data is shown in the drop-down box, click on the tree navigation icon 
to the right of the Entries ield. When the XML tree navigator is displayed, ind the 
content node and select it. Selecting the content node will make our drop-down  
box ilter out the metadata information in the XML ile that is returned from the  
OData query, so that we can see all the real records.
9. Next, click on the tree navigation icon to the right of the Value: and Display name: 
ields and select the ields that you want to store in the form, and also to be displayed 
in the dropdown. This will open up the XML tree navigator again and you can select 
any of the ields from the query.

Chapter 10
265
10. Finally, you may want to select the Show only entries with unique display names 
checkbox to ilter out any duplicates, and then click on OK.

Web Services and Forms
266
How it works...
Now when you preview the form, all the customer information will be populated for you to  
pick from.
By changing the layout of the InfoPath form to have a little bit of a larger font, adding some 
formatting columns to the body of the form, changing the drop-down ields to list selections, 
and adding a submit image, we can create a kiosk form that is populated from Dynamics AX, 
and also create sales orders based on the selections.

Chapter 10
267
Summary
InfoPath is an incredibly useful tool for creating forms and gathering information. When you 
use it in conjunction with Dynamics AX and just a little bit of coding, it becomes even more 
useful because you are able to create forms that feed back into the database.
In addition to what we showed you in this chapter, you can also:
 
f
Publish your forms to a SharePoint Forms repository allowing users to access the 
latest form templates from a centralized location. If you change the template on 
SharePoint, the users' local copies will also be upgraded ensuring that they always 
have the latest version.
 
f
Host the InfoPath forms on a SharePoint site, allowing users to ill in the forms 
without even having InfoPath installed. This allows you to create forms that 
customers, vendors, or employees could ill out that could update Dynamics AX.

Web Services and Forms
268
 
f
Capture signatures through pen-based input devices such as tablets and Surface 
devices. The signatures can be stored as JPEG iles and even posted to the Dynamics 
AX attachments if you are clever enough.
 
f
Publish the InfoPath forms to SharePoint rather than Dynamics AX, while still indexing 
the document against the key Dynamics AX ields. These document libraries could be 
linked to records just like the traditional ile document libraries that were shown in 
the earlier chapters.
Other ideas on where you may want to capture information through InfoPath forms  
could include:
 
f
Sales people using them to capture store survey information. Pictures from Surface 
devices could be added to the InfoPath form data as image attachments.
 
f
Logging of quality issues as Cases within Dynamics AX by mobile users without having 
to log in to be tethered to a normal PC.
 
f
Capturing lead and prospect information through a simple table-based form.
 
f
Simple inquires such as customer details through web-based forms.
Who would have guessed that such an overlooked product could be so useful!

11
Role Center 
Personalization and 
Customization
In this chapter, we will show some of the ways that you can extend out Role Centers by 
creating new templates, and also how to use some of the in-built web parts to add more 
information for the users. You will also learn the following:
 
f
Creating a new Role Center template
 
f
Creating a new Dynamics AX user proile
 
f
Adding cues to Role Center proiles
 
f
Adding cues through the Advanced Filter editor
 
f
Adding RSS feeds to Role Centers
 
f
Removing the ribbon bar from Role Centers
 
f
Removing the navigation bar from Role Centers
 
f
Embedding Role Centers into Outlook
Introduction
Role Centers give users a single dashboard where they can see all the information that is 
relevant to them, and it is usually the irst thing that they see when they open up Dynamics AX. 
The lexibility of Role Centers also makes them a very powerful business tool, since the users 
are able to tweak what they see themselves, and also administrators are able to tweak default 
Role Center views to deliver the correct information to the users.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
270
In this chapter, we will look at some of the ways that you can extend the Role Centers to better 
match your business, show how you can tweak the information displayed on Role Centers, 
and also show some alternative ways that the Role Centers can be used outside the normal 
Dynamics AX client.
Creating a new Role Center template
Dynamics AX comes prepackaged with over 40 standard Role Centers for a lot of the normal 
user types that you would expect to see within an organization—CFO, Salesperson, AP Clerk, 
and so forth. But if you have unique roles within your organization that don't it the standard 
roles, Dynamics AX allows you to create your own Role Center template.
In this recipe we will show you how to do just that.
Getting ready
In order to create a Role Center template, you will need to have designer rights to SharePoint. 
If you don't have these rights, talk to your SharePoint administrator and they should be able to 
help you.
How to do it...
To create a new Role Center template, follow these steps:
1. Open up the Enterprise portal and from the Site Actions menu, click on the View All 
Site Content menu item.

Chapter 11
271
2. This will show you all the site content. All Role Center templates are stored in the 
Enterprise Portal document library. Click on that to open up the library. If you browse 
through the iles there, you will be able to ind all the Role Centers. They are easy to 
spot and all begin with RoleCenter.
3. From the Documents tab on the ribbon bar, click on the New Document menu item 
to create a new template.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
272
4. Give your Role Center template a name. You can change the layout of the template, 
but it is best just to use the default one.
5. After the new Role Center template is created, you will be taken to the edit mode for 
the page.
6. If you click on the Add a Web Part link on any of the columns, you will be taken to 
the web part catalog, where you can select any of the standard web parts delivered 
with SharePoint and also Dynamics AX. Select the Cues web part from within the 
Microsoft Dynamics AX category and click on the Add button.

Chapter 11
273
7. 
You can continue adding web parts until you are satisied with the template.  
Then, click on the Stop Editing button on the ribbon bar.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
274
How it works...
This process will create a new template site for you that users are able to access.
Creating a new Dynamics AX user proile
The Role Center template that is used as the default for a user is associated with the user's 
proile. For a user to take advantage of the new Role Center that you build, you need to create 
a new user proile.
In this recipe, we will show you the steps that you need to perform to create a new user proile 
that is linked to a new Role Center template.
How to do it...
To create a new user proile, follow these steps:
1. First, you need to create a menu item for the Role Center within AOT. To do this, 
create a new development project for the menu item.
2. Within the project, add a new URL object from the Web group.

Chapter 11
275
3. Give the object a name, label, and help text.
4. Within the URL ield, type in the relative path for the Role Center that you 
created. It will probably be similar to the following: /Enterprise Portal/
RoleCenterName.aspx.
5. Also, make sure that you set the HomePage ield to Yes.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
276
6. Now we need to create a new user proile. From the System administration area 
page, click on the User proile menu item in the Common group in the Users folder. 
This will open up a list of all the user proiles in the system.
7. 
Click on the New button to create a new record.
8. You can give your new proile an ID and description. Then from the drop-down box in 
the Role center ield, you should be able to ind the new Role Center menu that you 
just created.
9. If you click on the Users tab, you will be able to see the users are assigned to the 
selected role. In this case it will be blank. Click on the Add user button.

Chapter 11
277
10. Now, you can select the users who you want to assign to the role.
11. Then, click on the Close button to inish.
How it works...
The next time your user logs in, their Role Center will be the new template that you created.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
278
Adding cues to Role Center proiles
Cues are a great way to create your own personal reminders on your Role Centers. Cues allow 
you to turn the physical stacks of paper, which you probably have sitting on your desk right 
now that remind you of the amount of work that you have to do, into virtual stacks of records 
within your Role Center. Any list page that you work in within Dynamics AX may be turned into 
a cue, but you get to select the records you are interested in working on, so you are in control 
of what goes into that list.
As you create cues, you can also choose to assign them to everybody within the organization 
as an informational metric, you can assign them to everyone who has a certain proile, or you 
can just assign them to your own personal Role Center.
In this recipe, we will show you how to create cues and assign them to user proiles.
Getting ready
Cues are displayed on the Role Centers through the Cues web part. If you don't currently have 
that web part, you may want to add it by entering personalization mode and adding the Cues 
web part.
How to do it...
To add a cue to a user proile, follow these steps:
1. Open up the list page that you would like to publish to your Role Center as a cue.
2. If you don't want to include every record in your cue, ilter out the records to just the 
ones that you are interested in.

Chapter 11
279
3. Select the Filter dropdown from the header of the list, and select the Save As Cue… 
menu item.
4. Give your cue a name and select the Speciied proiles option from the Visibility 
group to add a cue to a particular proile. Within the list of proiles, select all of the 
proile IDs that you want the cue to be added to and then click on the OK button.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
280
How it works...
When the user opens up their Role Center, they will now automatically have a cue there. 
Clicking on the cue will take them straight to the list page that it is associated with, with  
the list iltered just to show the particular records.
Adding cues through the Advanced Filter 
editor
Unfortunately, not all forms have the new Filter drop-down menu that was introduced with 
Dynamics AX 2012; although that doesn't mean that you cannot create cues from their data, 
because the Advanced Filter editor also has the ability to publish iltered data as cues.
In this recipe, we will show how to create a cue from the Advanced Filter editor.
How to do it...
To add a cue through the Advanced Filter editor, follow these steps:
1. First, start off with the list that you want to ilter and turn it into a cue. Apply the  
ilter that you want on the data, so that you just see the records that you want to  
be included.

Chapter 11
281
2. Then, from the File menu select the Edit menu item, and from within the Filter 
submenu select the Advanced Filter/Sort menu item.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
282
3. This will open up the Advanced Filter dialog. Click on the Modify button and select 
the option called Save as cue....
4. Now, you can give your cue a name and choose where you want to send it.

Chapter 11
283
How it works...
The next time you refresh your Role Center, you will see the new cue and it will take you to  
the iltered data within the form, even if it doesn't have the new AX 2012 style drop-down 
Filter menu.
Adding RSS feeds to Role Centers
Most people just use Role Centers to consolidate Dynamics AX information into one  
simple dashboard. However, since the Role Centers are built upon SharePoint, you can  
take advantage of all the other SharePoint web parts that are available to incorporate  
non-Dynamics AX information that is still important to the business. One such web part is  
the RSS Feed Reader that allows you to display information from other websites that publish 
their information as feeds. Sources for RSS feeds could include blogs, search engines, and 
also social media tools.
In this recipe, we will show how you can add an RSS feed from Bing into your Role Center,  
so that you don't have to manually search to ind what is currently new on the Web.
Getting ready
Bing has a search feature that will output the most current searches that match as an RSS 
feed. The format is:
http://www.bing.com/search?q=Query&go=&qb=y&format=rss

Role Center Personalization and Customization
284
Before you start adding the RSS feed to the Role Center, it's always a good idea to run the 
query within a web browser just to check that the format is correct. The result should look 
something like this:
How to do it...
To add an RSS feed to a Role Center, follow these steps:
1. The irst step in the process is to add a web part to your Role Center that will return 
back the RSS information in a human-readable format. To do this, go to your Role 
Center page, and click on the Personalize this page option on the top right hand 
corner of the Role Center.
2. Now, click on the Add a Web Part link in the column that you want to show your feed 
information in.

Chapter 11
285
3. Within the Web Parts browser select the RSS Viewer web part from the Content 
Rollup category, and then click on the Add button to insert it into your Role Center.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
286
4. You should now see the RSS Viewer web part, but there is no information being 
returned because the feed has not been conigured. Click on the Open the feed  
pane link within the body of the web part to open up the options panel.
5. When the Properties panel shows up, paste the URL for the Bing RSS search into the 
RSS Feed URL ield in the RSS Properties group.
6. Also, open up the Appearance properties group and give your feed a more 
appropriate name.
7. 
Then, click on the OK button on the RSS Viewer properties panel to save  
your changes.
8. To return to the view mode, click on the Stop Editing button in the Edit group of the 
Page ribbon bar.

Chapter 11
287
How it works...
When the user opens up their Role Center, they will now have a link to the latest items  
from the RSS feed, which in this case are the latest happenings from Bing that they may  
be interested in.
Removing the ribbon bar from Role Centers
A beneit of Role Centers is that they are a lightweight version of Dynamics AX that the users 
can operate from a browser, without having to install the Rich Client. You may not want to let 
the users know that they are able to edit the page, or access any of the SharePoint ribbon 
bar that appears when you run the form in the default web mode. You can easily hide this 
information with a simple qualiier on the Role Center URL.
In this recipe, we will show how you can open up Role Centers without the SharePoint  
ribbon bar.
How to do it...
To remove the ribbon bar from Role Centers, follow this step:
1. While navigating to the Enterprise portal, add a RUNONCLIENT=1 parameter to 
the end of the URL shortcut; for example: http://dynamicsax.contoso.com/
sites/DynamicsAx/Enterprise%20Portal/?RUNONCLIENT=1.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
288
How it works...
If you update the default links that the users access to open the Role Centers, the next time 
they use them, they will see that the ribbon bar is removed.
Removing the navigation bar from Role 
Centers
SharePoint has a URL parameter that will simplify the pages so that you don't see the left 
navigation panel. This is useful because you may want to open up the Role Center on a tablet 
or Surface device, and all you want to see is the Role Center dashboard area since you are 
more constrained for space.
In this recipe, we will show how you can open up Role Centers without the SharePoint 
navigation panel on the left.
How to do it...
To remove the navigation bar from Role Centers, follow this step:
1. While navigating to the Enterprise portal, add a IsDlg=1 parameter to the end of 
the URL; for example: http://dynamicsax.contoso.com/sites/DynamicsAx/
Enterprise%20Portal/?RUNONCLIENT=1&IsDlg=1.

Chapter 11
289
How it works...
When the Role Center is opened up with the IsDlg=1 qualiier, the navigation bar is removed.
Embedding Role Centers into Outlook
Another beneit of the dialog mode for the Role Centers is that you can embed them in other 
applications as pure dashboards. Outlook may be one of the most used applications within a 
business, so why not embed the Role Centers in there making it unavoidable that they cannot 
miss events within Dynamics AX.
In this recipe, we will show how you can add Role Centers as homepages within Outlook.
How to do it...
To embed the Role Center as a homepage within Outlook, follow these steps:
1. Within the Outlook folder tree, right-click on the parent node, and select the  
New Folder menu item.
2. Give the new folder the name Enterprise Portal.
3. Right-click on the new folder and select the Properties menu item.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
290
4. Within the folder properties, switch to the Home Page tab, check the option Show 
home page by default for this folder, and paste the URL for the Enterprise portal  
into the Address: ield. Then, click on OK to save the changes.
5. Now go to Options within the Outlook File menu.
6. Select the Advanced group within the options and in the Outlook start and exit 
group,  click on the Browse... button for the Start Outlook in this folder: ield.

Chapter 11
291
7. 
Select the Enterprise Portal folder that you just created and close the  
options forms.
How it works...
Now whenever the user opens up Outlook, they will see their Dynamics AX Role Center.

Role Center Personalization and Customization
292
Summary
Role Centers that are delivered with Dynamics AX are a great starting point that you can 
then extend out to match your business. This could be by creating entirely new Role Centers, 
adding more content to use them as a central place to view everything that is important 
to you, or by taking Role Centers out of Dynamics AX and using them either as standalone 
portals or embedded portals in other applications.
Since Role Centers are based on SharePoint technologies, there is so much more that you can 
do to customize the information that is delivered through them. Other examples that you may 
want to try include:
 
f
Adding document libraries
 
f
Adding links to external websites
 
f
Adding internal navigation links to Dynamics AX applications
Also, if you want to do some development in Visual Studio, you can take advantage of Role 
Center project templates that get installed with Dynamics AX. They will allow you to create  
your own Enterprise portal web parts to display custom data views within Role Centers.

Index
A
Activated checkbox  192
Active Directory user account
creating  198-200
Add a Web Part link  272
Add document link  190
Add Service Reference dialog box  245
ad-hoc report
creating, from Dynamics AX  34-36
Advanced Filter editor
cues, adding through  280-282
analytical chart
adding, to user's Role Center  88
creating, in PerformancePoint  84-86
drilling, Decomposition Trees used  91-94
appointments
creating, through Cases  132-134
Attachments button  193
Attachments functionality  179
B
Browse... button  290
Browse for a location option  59
business entities
associating, to Cases  141
Business Intelligence (BI)  
about  69
site, creating  70-72
C
Case categories
about  126
creating, steps for  126, 127
working  128, 129
Case process
about  134
creating  134-136
using, within cases  134, 136
working  137
case projects
collaboration workspaces, creating for   
144-145
Cases
about  125, 126
appointments, creating through  132-134
business entities, associating  141
knowledge articles, assigning  138-141
projects, creating from  142, 143
tasks, assigning through  130-132
Change stage option  137
clicked method  66
Close button  189
collaboration workspaces
about  144
creating, for case projects  144
Conditional decision element  160
Conditions tab  162
contacts, Dynamics AX
communicating with  117, 118
lagging, for synchronization  108, 109
researching, Outlook Social Connector used  
111-115
synchronizing, with Outlook  110, 111
content folder, new help publisher ID
creating  222-225
Content Rollup category  285
Create a new IIS web site option  54
Create Power View Report option  39
cues
adding, through Advanced Filter editor   
280-282

294
customer accounts
associating, with customer logins  203-205
customer logins
associating, with customer accounts  203-205
Customers tab  67
custom OData queries 
creating, to retrieve Dynamics AX data   
257-260
D
Decomposition Trees
 used, for analytical charts drilling  91-93
default worklows
setting  156
Deploy option  98
Design tab  40
document data source
about  180
creating  180, 181
document libraries
linking, to Dynamics AX records  26-31
documents
registering, to template libraries  189-194
document template libraries
about  187
creating  187-189
Drop-Down List Properties option  263
Dynamics AX
about  104
contacts, communicating from  117, 118
contacts, lagging for synchronization   
108, 109
contacts, synchronizing with Outlook   
110, 111
customer accounts, coniguring  201-203
Lync, using to collaborate with other users  
119-122
Outlook, linking with  104-108
Task Recorder  230
used, for ad-hoc report creating  34-36
Dynamics AX document template
creating, within Word  181-186
Dynamics AX forms
Power View reports, linking to  63-67
Dynamics AX records
document libraries, linking  26-31
Dynamics AX ribbon bar  184-186
Dynamics AX user proile
creating  274-277
Dynamics AX web service
creating  240-243
using, in InfoPath form  251-256
E
Edit My Web Part option  46
Enterprise Portal folder  291
Enterprise portal templates  197
Enterprise Search feature  219
Error pane button  150
Export to PowerPoint feature  50
Export to PowerPoint option  50
F
Filter editor  280
From SQL Server option  57
G
General Category type  127
Generate document... button  232
H
help content
creating  227, 228
working  229, 230
Hide from Client Tools  58
Home ribbon bar   256
I
IgnoreAxFilters option  62
images
adding, in product catalog  212-216
InfoPath lookups 
building, OData queries used  261-266
Insert placeholder button  174
instant message (IM)  119

295
Interact button  52
InventTable table  192
K
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)  76
knowledge articles
assigning, to Cases  138-141
L
Library/Manage Views tab  24
Lync
IM conversation, starting  121
using, to collaborate with users  119-122
M
Maintain Cases group  142
manual decision
adding, to worklow  164-168
Merge button  184
Microsoft Dynamics AX  179
My Site host site
coniguring  8-14
My Site option  13
My Site proile links
adding, to Role Center  16-19
N
navigation bar
removing, from Role Centers  288
New drop-down button  193
new help publisher ID
content folder, creating  222
creating  220-222
note boards
using, to microblog from Role Centers  14-16
O
OData queries
about  257
custom OData queries creating, to retrieve 
Dynamics AX data  257-260
used, for building InfoPath lookups  261-266
Outlook
linking, with Dynamics AX  104-108
Role Centers, embedding into  289-291
Outlook Social Connector
about  104
using, to research Dynamics AX contacts   
111-114
P
PerformancePoint
analytical chart, creating  84-86
scorecard, creating  76-80
PerformancePoint Dashboard Designer  70
PerformancePoint Dashboards
creating, in SharePoint  94-100
PerformancePoint workspace
coniguring, for Dynamics AX cubes  
connection  73-76
Personalize this page option  284
Pick task Microsoft Outlook folder button  
107
PowerPivot data source
creating, for Power View  56-60
PowerPivot gallery
creating, in SharePoint  52-55
Power View report, creating from  60-62
PowerPoint
Power View report, exporting to  49-52
Power View
about  33, 34
PowerPivot data source, creating for  56-59
Power View cubes
used, for Power View report creating  37-42
Power View dashboards
saving  43, 44
Power View report
adding, to Role Center  45-48
creating, from Power View cubes  37-42
creating, via PowerPivot gallery  60, 61
exporting, to PowerPoint  49-52
linking, to Dynamics AX forms  63-67
presentation information
adding, in product catalog  212-216
product catalog
coniguring  206-212

296
images, adding  212-216
presentation information, adding  212-216
Product name dimension  92
projects
creating, from Cases  142, 143
Properties window  168
Q
Query Reference data source types  180
Query Reference option  258
R
RelativeReportURL  67
reports
saving  43-45
ribbon bar
removing, from Role Centers  287
Role Center proiles
cues, adding to  278, 279
Role Centers
about  269
embedding, into Outlook  289, 290
My Site proile links, adding  16-19
navigation bar, removing  288
Power View report, adding to  45-48
ribbon bar, removing from  287
RSS feeds, adding to  283-286
Role Center template
creating  270-274
RSS Feed Reader  283
RSS feeds
adding, to Role Centers  283-286
RSS Properties group  286
Run Dashboard Designer button  72
S
Sales cube  37
Save As option  62, 228
scorecard
adding, to a user's Role Center  80-83
creating, PerformancePoint used  76-80
shared document libraries
creating  20-25
SharePoint
PerformancePoint Dashboards,creating   
94-100
PowerPivot gallery, creating in  52-55
Speciied proiles option  279
Stop Editing button  15, 47, 90
Synchronize button  190
T
table list option  57
Task Recorder
creating  230-232
task recording document
converting, to help topic  234, 235
tasks
assigning, through Cases  130-132
template
worklow design, creating from  148-150
template library
documents, registering to  189-194
text placeholders
adding, to worklow messages  173-175
U
Upload Documents button  24
user's Role Center
analytical chart, adding  88-90
scorecard, adding to  80-84
User tab  154
W
Web group  274
web services  
about  239
wrapper, creating  244-250
worklow
about  147
activating  155
conditional decisions, adding  160-164

297
manual decision, adding  164-169
saving  154
status notiications, adding  169-173
submitting  157-160
tasks, adding to  151-154
using  157-160
worklow design
creating, from template  148-150
worklow messages
text placeholders, adding  173-175
worklow status notiications
adding  169-173
Worklow user combobox  172
WSDL (Web Services Description Language)  
254


Thank you for buying  
Extending Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 Cookbook
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL 
Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused 
books on speciic technologies and solutions.  
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and 
customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution-based books give you the 
knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done. 
Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past. Our 
unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what 
you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality,  
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike.  
For more information, please visit our website: www.PacktPub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order  
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home 
to books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should be 
sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to 
discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors 
will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
Development Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-464-4            Paperback: 372 pages
Solve real-world Microsoft Dynamics AX development 
problems with over 80 practical recipes
1. 
Develop powerful, successful Dynamics AX 
projects with eficient X++ code
2. 
Proven recipes that can be reused in numerous 
successful Dynamics AX projects
3. 
Covers the general functionality of Dynamics AX
Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
Services
ISBN: 978-1-84968-754-6            Paperback: 196 pages
Effectively use services with Dynamics AX 2012 and 
create your own services
1. 
Learn about the Dynamics AX 2012 service 
architecture
2. 
Create your own services using wizards or  
X++ code
3. 
Consume existing web services and those you've 
created yourself
 
 
 
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Microsoft Dynamics AX 2012 
Reporting Cookbook 
ISBN: 9978-1-84968-772-0          Paperback: 300 pages
Over 50 recipes to help you build Dynamics AX  
reports faster by simplifying your understanding  
of the report model
1. 
Practical recipes for creating and managing 
reports
2. 
Illustrated step-by-step examples that can be 
adopted in real time
3. 
Complete explanations of the report model and 
program model for reports
Implementing Microsoft 
Dynamics AX 2012 with Sure 
Step 2012
ISBN: 978-1-84968-704-1            Paperback: 234 pages
Get to grips with AX 2012 and learn a whole host of tips 
and tricks to ensure project success
1. 
Get the conidence to implement AX 2012 projects 
effectively using the Sure Step 2012 Methodology
2. 
Packed with practical real-world examples as 
well as helpful diagrams and images that make 
learning easier for you
3. 
Dive deep into AX 2012 to learn key technical 
concepts to implement and manage a project
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

