Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10642

Ekkard Brinksmeier, Oltmann Riemer,
and Ralf Gläbe (Eds.)
Fabrication of Complex
Optical Components
From Mold Design to Product
ABC

Editors
Ekkard Brinksmeier
Laboratory for Precision
Machining LFM
University of Bremen
Bremen
Germany
Oltmann Riemer
Laboratory for Precision
Machining LFM
University of Bremen
Bremen
Germany
Ralf Gläbe
Laboratory for Precision
Machining LFM
University of Bremen
Bremen
Germany
ISSN 2194-0525
e-ISSN 2194-0533
ISBN 978-3-642-33000-1
e-ISBN 978-3-642-33001-8
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-33001-8
Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012947589
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of
this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer.
Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations
are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of pub-
lication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any
errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect
to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
Within the past decades, optics has emerged as a key engineering technology. In the
beginning, the development of optics and optical systems was limited to the ma-
chining of continuous surfaces. Due to the high demand for components with an
extended functionality, over the last years, structured and freeform surfaces have
become increasingly important. Their ﬁeld of application is broad, e.g., reﬂective or
refractive structures are used for automotive illumination systems, light distribution
in TFT panels or as reﬂective foils for trafﬁc signs or safety garments, while diffrac-
tive structures are used, for example, for the correction of chromatic aberration or
for security applications. Especially in consumer optics, there is a strong demand
for large volumes of highly functional but inexpensive components. These parts can
only be economically produced by glass or plastic replication. In order to meet the
required quality levels though, it is not sufﬁcient to solely optimize the manufac-
turing processes. It is essential to take into consideration the overall sequence of
processes, or in other words, the process chain.
In the late 1990’s, this demand was evident to my esteemed colleagues Prof.
Manfred Weck from the Technical University of Aachen, Prof. Don A. Lucca from
Oklahoma State University in Stillwater and myself. The idea was born to start col-
laborations between the Universities of Aachen, Bremen and Stillwater. While there
had been a frequent exchange of scientiﬁc information through the German Aca-
demic Society for Production Engineering (WGP) and the International Academy
for Production Engineering (CIRP) already, this collaboration was aimed at di-
rectly bringing together scientists from the three universities to pursue focused re-
search on the manufacture of complex optics. It was mere coincidence, that the
German Research Foundation (DFG) just had released a new type of collaborative
research funding: the Transregional Collaborative Research Center (SFB/TR), aim-
ing at funding just this kind of cooperation. On this basis, a proposal was launched
by the three universities on the topic of “Process Chains for the Replication of Com-
plex Optical Elements”.
The goal was to combine the emerging technologies of optical mold making and
glass or plastic replication processes on a broad basis. On the machining side, fo-
cus was laid on processes for generating optical freeform surfaces, like diamond

VI
Preface
milling, ultraprecision grinding or CNC-controlled polishing. On the other side,
replication processes such as blank pressing of glass optics and injection or injection-
compression molding were considered. For obtaining a holistic view of the produc-
tion process, these technologies were connected with an integral optics design and a
comprehensive metrology frame and quality management. In total, 16 sub-projects
were deﬁned on this basis within the ﬁelds of design, hard coatings, mold making,
replication and metrology. The initial proposers were Professors Klocke, Michaeli,
Pfeifer and Weck from the Technical University of Aachen, Professor Lucca from
Oklahoma State University in Stillwater and Professors Brinksmeier, Goch, Mayr
and Drs. Mehner, Preuß, Riemer and Stock from the University of Bremen.
After a positive evaluation, we were notiﬁed by the DFG in 2001 that the proposal
was funded. This research grant became the ﬁrst engineering SFB/TR in Germany.
The research work of the SFB/TR4 ﬁnally started on June 1st, 2001 with Dr. Olt-
mann Riemer as the general manager. Later this task was taken over by Dr. Ralf
Gl¨abe, who kept this position until the end of the SFB/TR4 on June 30th, 2012.
After eleven years of mutual work, it is safe to say that during this time, the
three sites have been connected in a way that would not have been possible by
other funding instruments. Furthermore, the SFB/TR4 allowed us to reach profound
knowledge in the ﬁeld of optics that would not have been achieved within indi-
vidual projects. The various publications, such as dissertations, conference papers
and original journal papers originating from the SFB/TR4 have been acknowledged
both nationally and internationally by research facilities and industry alike. In total
more than ... scientists have worked in the SFB/TR4, and they have written more
than 300 publications including 17 dissertations. A detailed overview on the most
important publications resulting from the SFB/TR4 is given in the ﬁrst chapter of
this book. Another proof for the success is evident by the seven so-called transfer
projects, which were initiated in the ﬁnal phase of the SFB/TR4 to disseminate the
most promising ﬁndings into prototype industrial applications.
As the coordinator of the SFB/TR4 I would like to express my sincere gratitude
on behalf of all my SFB colleagues and funded staff to the DFG in general, and par-
ticularly to Dr. Hollmann for his technical advice, and Dr. Effertz, for her ﬁnancial
advice in the ﬁnal funding phase. Also I would like to thank the administrations of
the involved universities for their ongoing support over the years.
Bremen, August 2012
Prof. Dr.-Ing. habil. Dr.-Ing. E.h. Ekkard Brinksmeier

Contents
Total Quality Management in the Replication Process of Sophisticated
Optical Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Robert Schmitt, Peter Becker
Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Walter Michaeli, Maximilian Sch¨ongart
Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Walter Michaeli, Paul Walach
Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics . . . . . . . .
41
Christian Brecher, Dominik Lindemann, Michael Merz, Christian Wenzel,
Werner Preuß
Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Lars Sch¨onemann, Werner Preuß
Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes . . . . . . . .
67
Ekkard Brinksmeier, Franz Hoffmann, Ralf Gl¨abe, Juan Dong, Jens Osmer
Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass
Molding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
Fritz Klocke, Ekkard Brinksmeier, Oltmann Riemer, Max Schwade,
Heiko Schulte, Andreas Klink
Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Fritz Klocke, Christian Brecher, Ekkard Brinksmeier, Barbara Behrens,
Olaf Dambon, Oltmann Riemer, Heiko Schulte, Roland Tuecks,
Daniel Waechter, Christian Wenzel, Richard Zunke

VIII
Contents
Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
Fritz Klocke, Olaf Dambon, Allen Y. Yi, Fei Wang, Martin H¨unten,
Kyriakos Georgiadis, Daniel Hollstegge, Julia Dukwen
Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings . . . . . . . .
133
Gert Goch, Don Lucca, Andreas Mehner, Helmut Prekel, Heinz-Rolf Stock,
Hans-Werner Zoch
In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161
Gert Goch, Robert Schmitt, Stefan Patzelt, Stephan St¨urwald,
Andreas Tausendfreund
Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics
and Manufacture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179
David Whitehouse
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207

Introduction
Ekkard Brinksmeier, Oltmann Riemer, and Ralf Gl¨abe
Photonics is a key enabling technology for a large amount of high-tech products. The
largest market volume belongs to consumer products like optics in video projectors,
in digital cameras and in illumination optics. Most of these optics are fabricated by
replication processes, as this is the most cost-effective way to produce complex op-
tical components in large quantities. Demands for higher precision at lower costs,
shorter time to market and ﬁnally a hard competition lead to fabrication processes of
these components that are even more effective. The fabrication builds on a combina-
tion of several process steps, starting with the design and ending with the replication
process itself. The development of these processes and, moreover, the interaction of
consecutive process steps opens a large potential for industrial improvements, but
still require scientiﬁc research.
In 2001 the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 “Process
Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements” started with 18 closely
cooperating projects aiming at the same goal: to increase the accuracy of replicated
complex optical glass and plastic parts and to reduce the number of the required
iterations within the applied process chain. The sub-projects were are carried out at
eight institutions located at Bremen University, RWTH Aachen at Oklahoma State
University in the USA.
In general, this joint research was focused on replicated optics like lenses for dig-
ital cameras, laser beam shaping optics, and illumination optics. All these consumer
products are fabricated in medium to large series of a few thousand up to millions.
It is well known that product costs are decreasing while the demanded performance
is increasing. For instance, the performance of mobile phone cameras has increased
from less than 1MPixel to more than 5MPixel in less than 5 years whereas at the
same time the price went down considerably. In consequence, from year to year
the fabrication of such optical components as mass products has to be less expensive
and faster at higher precision. Technologies for direct machining of these optical
components are well developed; however, they will not always meet the demands
for the large series production of complex optics for current consumer products.
Thus, for large product numbers replication is inevitable.

X
Introduction
In optics fabrication fully automated replication technologies were developed in
the 1990ies and are now a key technology for all consumer products. Today the
replication of glass and plastic components for imaging and illumination optics is
highly developed. Drivers for the current developments are LED illumination, optics
for digital cameras with even higher resolution and video projector optics. The chal-
lenging demands for these novel optical systems like compact design and reduced
weight for enhanced performance have shifted the optical design of lenses from
simple spherical geometry to aspherical lenses as well as free form and structured
lenses. These types of optical components come up with new challenges in design-
ing and describing optical surfaces, machining of molds, replicating components,
metrology and quality chain management.
It is evident that the fabrication of optical components with complex shapes at
high quality requires a number of process steps. The sequence of required steps
for the deterministic fabrication of optical components is referred to as ‘process
chain’, which is deﬁned as ‘The complete series of production steps required to
manufacture a component from design to fabrication including all relevant aspects
of metrology and quality control.’ ‘Deterministic fabrication’ will imply a holistic
view on the complete process chain. Therefore, consecutive process steps have to
take into account the deviations of all following and preceding steps. In other words,
a number of well developed highly productive process steps in a process chain will
not necessarily meet the demands for a highly productive fabrication of high quality
optical components. If form accuracy or surface quality suffers from one or more
process steps, the replication process and often the complete chain has to be adapted.
This iteration is not straightforward and therefore time consuming and expensive.
For this reason solutions have to be found to decrease the number of iteration steps.
This can be either done by optimizing each step of the process chain separately or by
dealing with the deviations and boundary conditions of the complete process chain,
or, preferably, by a combination of both.
A standard process chain for replicating optical components typically consists of
the following steps: optical design, design of mold and mold insert, mold machining,
possibly hard coatings and the replication process itself. Moreover, the metrology of
form and roughness of the mold insert and of the replicated component is essential
to determine the quality of the whole process chain. In order to reduce the number
of iterations it is also necessary to provide an organized communication and data
exchange between all steps of the process chain. From a technological as well as
a practical point of view glass and plastic replication process chains have to be
treated in an entirely different manner, and a distinction between process chains for
continuous and structured optics must also be made.
This book is organized according to this framework of process chains, process
steps, technologies, and classiﬁcation of optical surfaces. Since the SFB/TR4 is a
highly interdisciplinary research center, most articles are focused on key issues ded-
icated to plastic and glass replication of continuous and structured optical compo-
nents. This book presents the major achievements gained within the SFB/TR4 over
11 years. In addition several hundred publications and many doctoral theses where

Introduction
XI
published, providing the full range of knowledge. The most relevant ones are listed
at the end of each chapter. In addition, the results have been presented on numer-
ous national and international conferences, workshops and seminars. For a focused
discussion with industry and academia six national and three international confer-
ences have been successfully conducted by the SFB/TR4, all conferences attended
by participants from industry and academia.
In 2007 the ﬁrst ﬁndings of the SFB/TR4 found their way from fundamental
research to industry. Up to now seven transfer projects in cooperation with industry
have emerged from the SFB/TR4. They are dealing with major aspects of the process
chain covering mold design, mold making processes, new mold materials and novel
metrology devices.
The general mission of all academic research, i.e. transfering new knowledge by
teaching and lecturing, also applies for the SFB/TR4. In this context a web-based
e-learning lecture has been set up with nine lecturers from all three locations. The
lectures were given in English and are accessible via a web-based student portal.
This book covers selected aspects of the process chains. Chapter 2 deals with
the question how to organize a process chain for optics replication, especially if
located at different sites. The presented solution will combine technological and
organizational challenges. The chapters 3 to 7 are dedicated to plastic replication
technologies. The focus on mold design that has to consider criteria like tempera-
ture management, pressing cycles and the alignment accuracy of the mold inserts.
The latter criteria are getting more important for optical components with deﬁned
optical axes on front and rear side, where alignment is crucial. For reducing the
form deviation caused by shrinkage, intensive research on simulation and exper-
imental investigation has been done. Chapter 4 elucidates the replication process
itself including injection molding and injection-compression molding. However, in
plastic replication a perfect form of the molded part does not guarantee a high op-
tical quality since a non uniform density of the optical material leads to changes in
the refraction index. A detailed investigation of the mold ﬁlling process shows the
major challenges of plastic molding.
The next chapter covers mold insert manufacturing technologies. Diamond ma-
chining is the state-of-the-art process for machining the optical surface of mold in-
serts for plastic replication. Today optical design often addresses aspherical and free
form optical surfaces that are not machinable with traditional turning and milling
operation. Customized ﬂy-cutting, ball-end milling and non-circular turning op-
erations like Fast-Tool-Machining processes will be presented for enlarging the
spectrum of machinable geometries. This chapter includes material aspects and the
selection of machining parameters as well as programming and data handling as-
pects. These are closely bound to the machining strategy and the achievable surface
quality.
While the machining technology described above addresses the manufacturing of
continuous surfaces, the generation of structured surfaces has to be handled in a dif-
ferent way. In the beginning of chapter 6 a classiﬁcation of the most important types
of structures is carried out. After that, state-of-the-art and new innovative structur-
ing technologies are discussed. Finally, a new technology called diamond micro

XII
Introduction
chiseling is presented. It is developed in the SFB/TR4 for machining of arrays of
small pyramidal cavities without the need of a galvanic replica. Consequently, it can
be used for machining of structures like retroreﬂective cube corner arrays with a
structure size between 50 and 500 µm.
Diamond machining technologies mentioned above are restricted with respect
to the spectrum of materials still limited to aluminum, copper, nickel phosphorus
and nickel silver; diamond machining of steel is still a challenge. In the SFB/TR4
a new technology for diamond machining of steel has been developed and is under
investigation. Chapter 7 describes the underlying basic idea. The iron of the surface
layer of the workpiece is transformed to a nitride in order to get a compound layer
which is machinable with diamond tools. By using this technology the chemical
reactivity has been reduced by several orders of magnitude. This chapter discusses
the requirements in contrast to traditional diamond machining operations.
The following chapters focus on glass replication. In chapter 8 novel processes
for the machining of tool inserts for precision molding of optical glass components
are addressed in detail. For meeting the demands of glass molding processes the
mold insert material is much harder and temperature resistant than for plastic mold-
ing processes. These materials are machined by grinding and polishing operations.
This chapter presents a novel Wire-EDM process for pre-dressing and proﬁling
grinding wheels that can be used to machine complex shapes like cylindrical lens ar-
rays. However, to achieve a surface roughness of the proﬁled mold in optical quality
a subsequent polishing process is necessary. For this reason, novel proﬁle polishing
is introduced. Low surface roughness and high form accuracy can be achieved by
this process combination.
In chapter 9 the developed polishing technologies are introduced, focusing on
fully automated polishing processes. Despite the fact that steel has been polished
for decades, the question how to assess material defects after polishing is still a
challenge. Further algorithms for computer controlled polishing of free forms and
their implementation into a custom machine tool are discussed. Structuring of dis-
continuous structures, especially cavities, is typically still a domain of manual pol-
ishing. To fully automize this process, customized and adapted tool motions have
been developed.
Chapter 10 discusses the major aspects of glass molding with tungsten carbide
molds, i.e. mold design, mold manufacturing, mold coating and ﬁnally the molding
process itself. The chapter will close by proposing a strategy for the reduction of the
required iteration steps for the fast fabrication of optical glass components. A major
aspect is the introduction of a developed simulation tool.
During the glass and plastic replication process the surface of the mold insert suf-
fers from high mechanical, chemical and thermal load. Some mold materials with-
stand this load, but hard coatings will help to increase tool life. The development
of PVD and sol-gel coating is described in chapter 11. By sol-gel technology thick
and crack-free hybrid organic-inorganic coatings are produced, which can be used

Introduction
XIII
with continuous and structured optical mold inserts. Moreover, the coating process
can be modiﬁed in a way that the sol-gel layers are diamond machinable. These
ﬁlms can be further hardened and provide outstanding mechanical properties by a
novel subsequent ion radiation, that has been introduced by the SFB/TR4.
Apart from the design and manufacturing steps in a process chain measuring
the geometry and the roughness of the mold insert and the replicated components
are essential. In chapter 12 technologies for in-situ and in-process measurement of
form and roughness are presented. A newly developed Speckle based roughness
measurement system provides fast measurement and distinct robustness. Therefore,
it can beneﬁcially be applied for in-process roughness measurement. The precise
measurement of the lens shape is typically achieved by interferometry. Accordingly,
this chapter demonstrates a setup and custom algorithms for fully automatic inter-
ferometric measurement, which can be adapted to a lens replication process for
automatic in-situ measurement.
The book ends with contribution provided by Prof. David Whitehouse who was
a visiting guest scientist of the SFB. He gives an extensive view on metrology for
optical components. He concludes by stating that the greatest potential of metrology
can be found in mathematical procedures and algorithms because these will improve
the performance of state-of-the-art instruments and will also enable fully automated
measurements.
Over a period of eleven years the SFB/TR4 has gathered a large number of lead-
ing scientists to perform leading edge research in the challenging and prosperous
ﬁeld of prominent technology in close cooperation with industry.
All sub-projects have been developed new technologies and improved known pro-
cesses to signiﬁcant advantage to the state-of-the-art. A super-ordinate coordinated
conversation - especially for process chains performed off-site - and a standardized
usage of chain relevant data have been developed to encourage an unambiguously
process chain wide communication. The SFB/TR4 focused its work on machining of
free-form surfaces. This type of optical component fulﬁls the demands of the current
and future market. Moreover, this technology is also evident for the deterministic
fabrication of high precision optical components like high precision spherical and
aspherical lenses since it allows taking into account the shrinkage during the replica-
tion process. In other words, for machining high precision spherical and aspherical
lenses free-form mold geometries and/or highly developed technologies for each
process step are essential. The ﬁnal step to a leading-edge process chain is a fast
in-process or in-situ measurement of form, roughness, and sub-surface properties.
Even here, the SFB/TR4 has developed techniques with industrial signiﬁcance.
The sum of all developed and investigated methods and processes as well as the
holistic view on all process chain relevant impacts provides a fundamental step to a
deterministic process chain.

XIV
Introduction
Acknowledgement
All authors of this book and all other current and former members and principle
investigators want to express their sincere thanks to the German Research Founda-
tion (DFG) for funding the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 1–11. 
springerlink.com                                                   © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Total Quality Management in the Replication 
Process of Sophisticated Optical Elements 
Robert Schmitt and Peter Becker* 
Abstract. Total Quality Management (TQM) is a long term business strategy. It is 
based on the three principles Customer, Associate and Process-Orientation. All 
activities within TQM focus on the continuous improvement of the company’s 
performance. Such a holistic approach is especially auspicious for cross-sited 
production chains producing sophisticated components such as highly complex 
optical elements. Within the sub project M5 Quality Chain Management, the TQM 
approach was used to develop an internet based software tool. The so called 
Process Chain Manager (PCM) supports the coordination of the process chains. 
Especially the aspect of Process-Orientation represents a crucial element within 
the PCM. The PCM helps to manage the different process steps as well as to 
coordinate their interfaces within a single process chain. Additionally, it represents 
the aspects Associates, who are responsible for a smooth process flow as well as 
Customers, who are located at the end of each process chain and are demanding 
high quality standards. 
1   Introduction 
Specialization in key competences and decentralization are a major element of 
competitiveness for manufacturing industries. Fabrication is nowadays an 
interaction of different suppliers, sub suppliers and the actual manufacturer. Cost 
and resource efficiency as well as coincidental quality leadership force enterprises 
to coordinate and manage their cross-sited production chains in a smooth and 
clever way. Thus, it is very crucial to establish well working cross-sited or cross-
enterprise production chains in so called collaborative production networks to 
combine all necessary technical qualifications for the final products [Sch03]. 
Such cross-sited collaborations are not easy to handle and likely to fail because 
of issues such as general misunderstandings, missing respectively not shared 
information, unprecise specifications as well as cultural differences between the 
participating companies. Several studies reveal, that between 50 and 90 percent of 
cross-sited or cross-enterprise cooperation fail or do not meet the expected results 
                                                           
Robert Schmitt · Peter Becker  
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT, Steinbachstraße 17,  
52074, Aachen, Germany 

2 
R. Schmitt and P. Becker
 
of the involved enterprises [Fon95]. Furthermore is the complexity of such cross-
sited process chains increasing, with an increase of the complexity of the product. 
This results in highly complex process chains for sophisticated products such  
as optical free-form components or aspherical lenses as produced in the 
Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4. 
In this context, the Total Quality Management idea is a suitable approach for 
creating a framework around this whole issue by focusing on a continuous 
improvement of the company’s performance as well as by fulfilling customers’ 
expectations [Eng96]. As a long term business strategy, TQM is based on the three 
principles Customer, Associate and Process-Orientation. Besides the main target 
to ensure high quality products, TQM helps in addition to improve the whole 
process quality. This leads to less failures, a reduction of unproductive process 
steps, less waste production and less rework. All these negative aspects represent 
costs and waste of time that are of no use for the customer and thus have to be 
prevented. [Pfe01] 
2   Total Quality Management 
Total Quality Management is based on the Company Wide Quality Control 
(CWQC) idea by Ishikawa. Because of the remarkable successes mainly Japanese 
companies achieved with the CWQC, this approach was getting improved and 
extended by consideration of the companies surroundings and philosophies [Sch10]. 
Until now, there does not exist a uniform, international agreed on definition of TQM 
and thus, opinions concerning this term do vary [Zol06]. Nevertheless, the 
implementation of TQM leads, scientifically proved by various studies, to an 
improvement of a company’s performance. [War04, Exb02, Efq05, Tan05]. 
 
Fig. 1 Total Quality Management 
As in Figure 1 visualized, TQM consists of the three main elements: Total, in 
terms of an holistic company consideration including processes, customers and 
associates as well as quality and management that are all connected through a 
continuous improvement process.  

Total Quality Management in the Replication Process 
3
 
Intern and extern customer satisfaction, respectively the ideal compliance of 
customer preferences can be considered as the main objective of TQM according 
to the principle: “Quality is represented by a returning customer, not by a 
returning product”. Hence, for implementing TQM a company has to focus on its 
customers and their contentment. [Sch10] 
As a consequence, TQM cannot be implemented in a single department of a 
company but has to permeate the whole company from top management to each 
single associate. For a successful implementation this fact results in two crucial 
demands. The first demand consists of a systematic enterprise strategy [Seg07; 
Zol06]. Of course, this strategy has to be enforced by the top management with 
involvement of all associates. It is of high importance, that the management is 
aware and convinced of the possibilities and benefits TQM offers. But, TQM may 
not appear as an ordinary method. Rather needs the top management to establish 
the basic conditions for TQM and hence promote suitable programs to enforce 
TQM throughout the company. Besides this strategy aspect, for a complete 
implementation of TQM, there has to be also a functional implementation. 
Whereas in the first step, the strategy implementation, mainly the management is 
involved to appoint a global strategy, the second step, the functional 
implementation, requires clearly defined measures of qualification for the single 
specifications within the strategy as well as a regular assessment of the status quo. 
In this context, it is very crucial, that the employee sees his tasks as a contribution 
to the overall target. To achieve such an understanding, the company’s overall 
target and strategy has to be openly communicated to each associate. [Sch10] 
Because the process orientation within the TQM concept is, besides the already 
mentioned aspects of associates and customers, of high importance and 
additionally combines all three aspects, process orientation will get highlighted in 
the following. 
The reason for stressing process orientation is due to the awareness that 
organizations work more effectively, if connected activities within such an 
organization are well understood. This fact demands an overall approach to 
analyze and to evaluate all relevant process chains. 
For a systematic evaluation it is first of all necessary to define a process. Each 
activity that receives an input and subsequently transforms this input into an 
output can be considered as a process. A systematic regulation and conduction of 
such processes as well as their interfaces between the single process steps can be 
described as process orientation. In this context, intern and extern client 
specification do play a crucial role. Thus, each downstream process step is 
considered as client whose wishes, targets and issues have to be taken seriously 
care of. This leads to the request, that for a profound analysis, a total consideration 
of the complete process chain has to take place. Commencing at its end, the 
customer and going, in a so called back flow stream, all the way to the process 
chains origin. By this, each process step and each associate in charge of one 
process step is going to be considered. [Sch10] 
The major advantage after a successful implementation of process orientation 
implies a management that can make decisions based on facts and concentrate on 
targets which are relevant for a surpassing enterprise performance. [Sch10] 

4 
R. Schmitt and P. Becker
 
In the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4, the end 
customer is the optical components using industry. This industry sector has a very 
wide cross section from production technology and metrology, over life science to 
energy technology and information technology. [May07] 
The market for optical components is steadily growing, especially for consumer 
goods with electro optical systems. This is due to extreme short product cycles, 
constantly declining prices and coeval growing effectiveness. 
Cell phones with integrated cameras represent a vivid example of the 
application area of optical components and the development of these products are 
exemplary for the whole sector. There is a constantly high demand of cell phones 
due to a relatively short service life and a high amount of consumers. The quality 
of the integrated cameras is a key aspect of the cell phone and thus has to meet the 
customers expectations. To these belong among others a high image resolution, 
minimal size of the cell phone and thus of the embedded optical elements, simple 
and competitive replication as well as highly complex geometries. [Tra07] 
For TQM this means, to see to it that these customers’ expectations are getting 
fulfilled. This is a key aspect that leads to enthusiastic customers as shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
Fig. 2 Causal connections within TQM 
However, predominate products can only be produced if all necessary processes 
are capable and well working. Therefore are motivated associates inevitable. 
Figure 2 shows in a well-arranged way all causal connections within the TQM 
approach and highlights the importance of well working process chains that lead 
to predominate products.  
In the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4, the main target 
consists of producing highly complex optical components such as aspherical 
lenses or free-form components. Certainly, process chains for these products are 
equally complex and their organization a challenging task. To support and 
facilitate this task the so called Process Chain Manager (PCM) has been developed 
in the sub project M5 Quality Chain Management. The basic idea of the PCM 
emanates from the sub domain process orientation of the TQM approach and will 
be next described in detail. 

Total Quality Management in the Replication Process 
5
 
3   Process Chain Manager 
In general, collaborative engineering processes can be characterised as 
unstructured and information centred by nature [Men03]. Thus, a systematic 
approach is needed to guarantee a smooth work flow. 
A process chain usually contains several process steps with extensive 
dependencies at the organisational as well as technological interfaces between the 
individual process elements. The real or perceived complexity of a cross-sited 
process chain can be put in relation to the information that is needed for a 
successful production as well as to the geographical distance between the single 
process steps. [Sch08] For this issue, a systematic approach has been developed 
and can be seen in Figure 3. 
 
Fig. 3 Six steps of process chain planning and control 
For the production of optical components such an approach means, that in the 
first step the specifications of a technological prototype in form of a special lens 
type has to take place. As specifications, aspects such as geometrical dimensions, 
optical function, surface quality, shape accuracy and the lens material have to be 
listed. To guarantee that all needed information about the product is mentioned, a 
generic parameter model is used for the specification set up. 
The second step compiles all relevant process steps for the production of the 
defined lens consecutively, as visualized in Figure 4. In each process step only one 
technology is described and there has to be one person who is directly in charge of 
this step. 

6 
R. Schmitt and P. Becker
 
 
Fig. 4 Typical Process Chain for Optical Elements 
After having visualized the complete process chain in detail, the exchange of 
deliverables between the single process steps has to be coordinated to prevent that 
the responsible process step operators are missing information and thus the 
complete process chain might fail. According to analyses of well established 
process chains, informational relationships exist not only between sequential 
process step interfaces, but also within the whole process chain, whether directly 
linked or not [Pet01]. A visualization of all informational relationships between 
the single process steps can be seen in Figure 5, the so called Process Structure 
Matrix (PSM). 
 
Fig. 5 Process structure matrix for documentation of dependencies 

Total Quality Management in the Replication Process 
7
 
The third step of the process planning approach consists of the development of 
a PSM as shown in Figure 5. The initial process steps from Figure 4 will be 
arranged on the main diagonal of the matrix. Each remaining cell in the matrix 
illustrates an interface between two process steps where information or materials 
are exchanged. The required information to previous and following process steps 
is documented for each interface between the process steps. The deliverables’ 
characteristics and the delivery date are agreed upon in special meetings and 
transferred into an action list, so that the participants involved in a process chain 
have every time a clear overview about the whole process. 
In step four, the “Process Step Description”, each single step has to be 
described very precisely. The intention of this step is to get a clear idea about 
where exactly the demanded deliverables will be applied in the process steps and 
to achieve an output of the process step that meets the requested demands of the 
respective process steps. 
In step five, the evaluation of the complete process chain begins. The process 
chain participants take part in an assessment workshop to discuss the process 
chain results. The lens specification will be compared with the actual 
manufactured lenses and measures to improve the process chain will be derived. 
These are essential proceedings to improve the process chain and to achieve 
constantly better results. 
The last step is a continuation of step five. Gained experiences are evaluated 
and afterwards categorized in a database. Thus, information is stored and available 
for future coordination and improvement of new and already existing process 
chains. The database is part of the internet based management tool that will be 
described and introduced in the following. 
4   Internet Based Process Chain Control 
The described method of a systematic approach for coordinating cross-sited or 
cross-enterprise process chains has to be transformed into an easy to apply tool. 
Additionally, it is necessary to find a way of managing all customer-supplier-
relations in a decentralized way [Lut01]. An internet based and thus location 
independent management tool seemed for this concern most suitable. 
The development of the so called Process Chain Manager (PCM) is the 
transformation of a theoretical approach into an actual tool. It enables a cross-sited 
project team to map and coordinate all customer-supplier-dependencies and to 
control the project progress by generating action lists and time schedules. The 
software tool is built up on a mySQL data base. 
The PCM is a Web 2.0 interactive platform. Each project team member has a 
private access to this tool. Being logged in, the software automatically recognises 
the user. Each user has his or her own profile which he or she has to create in 
order to present other project team members all relevant information about his or 
her responsibilities concerning different process steps as well as chains. 
Additionally, individual information such as name, contact address, subproject in 
charge, institute respectively company and the running as well as finished process 
chains are listed for each member profile. Besides the member profiles, there is an 

8 
R. Schmitt and P. Becker
 
e-mail service which enables immediate communication between the members 
and a general overview of all existing running and finished process chains within 
the project. 
When setting up a new process chain, the product has to be first described in 
regard of its specifications. These information get listed in a special product 
template and additionally, documents like technical drawings or photographs can 
be uploaded. This enables all project member to have direct access to all relevant 
information concerning the product. 
 
Fig. 6 A systematic approach for the Process Structure Matrix 

Total Quality Management in the Replication Process 
9
 
However, the major application of the PCM is the usage of the Process 
Structure Matrix (PSM) for coordinating demands and deliverables between the 
single process steps. After the definition of the process chain and the single 
process steps with their technologies and employee in charge of, the PSM has to 
get filled in with all demands and deliverables. Therefore, a systematic approach 
was developed as shown in Figure 6. 
The software allows each member by means of the assigned access 
authorisation to place demands only at the interfaces assigned to the process steps 
he or she is responsible for. After all demands are placed, a process like visualized 
in the flow chart of Figure 6 follows. The colours used in the flow chart are also 
used in the PSM with the same meaning so that every project member knows just 
by seeing the colour of an interface between two steps at which level the process 
of demand and deliverables negotiation is. 
Next, all users are requested to confirm the demands they were asked for. If a 
demand is accepted (green colour), the supplier of the deliverable must define 
actions which are suitable to fulfill the requests. Furthermore, the supplier 
indicates the time needed to carry out the actions. If the demand cannot be 
fulfilled in the way proposed (red colour), a communication process is launched in 
which the demands and deliverables between the demanding and the supplying 
participant are coordinated gradually along the process chain. On the basis of the 
indicated time needed to carry out the actions, the software generates the target 
project schedule. 
Once all demands are mapped and coordinated, the next phase of the workflow 
is launched. The project schedule is transferred from the target schedule into the 
current schedule. The type of representation of the process matrix remains 
unchanged, the only difference is that the coordinated demands are transferred into 
deliverables that should be generated. If a deliverable in the form of a defined 
action is generated, the supplier marks the action as finished (blue colour). The 
customer is now requested to confirm the correct supply of the demanded 
deliverable. Only if the deliverable is classified as fulfilled, the entry in the actual 
project plan is updated. All process participants have full access to the target and 
current schedule, so that the current process progress is transparent and available 
at any time. 
The last and decisive step is the acquisition of process knowledge. The 
development of this knowledge is considered highly important [Roz02]. 
Production processes for optical components are extremely individual and 
complicated and thus, each process chain has to be used to gain experiences. 
Using theses experiences as a knowledge base, the quality of future process chains 
will increase. Each process member is therefore requested to document and assess 
the experiences made during the cycle of the process chain. The assessment takes 
place in a workshop with all involved process chain participants. All electronically 
available documents, such as designs, parts lists, work instructions, metrology 
records etc. can be listed in the product template which is stored on the server and 
thus available for all process chain participants. Hereby, time expenditure for 
searching available information can be reduced immensely. 

10 
R. Schmitt and P. Becker
 
5   Conclusion 
Cross-sited or cross-enterprise production chains often fail to achieve the 
predefined targets due to an insufficient information flow and because of too many 
undefined interfaces between the single process steps within the whole process 
chain. 
Total Quality Management stands for a holistic approach to coordinate a 
company always trying to meet customers expectations according to the principle: 
“Quality is represented by a returning customer, not by a returning product”. 
The introduced approach, using TQM as basis for developing a software tool 
for process organization, shows a suitable set of methods for a structured planning 
and managing of cross-sited production process chains. The key to efficient 
process chains is the coordination of the relevant customer-supplier-relationships 
at the process interfaces. This can only be achieved by a very precise definition of 
the product and all its specifications. Additionally, there has to be a clear and 
profound analyse of asked and technical possible demands and deliverables at the 
interfaces in advanced. Thus, the introduced PCM supports cross-sited project 
teams on the basis of TQM. 
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation 
(DFG) for funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research 
Center SFB/TR4 “Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical 
Elements”.  
References 
[Efq05] EFQM, BQF: Organizational Excellence Strategies & Improved Financial 
Performance. London BQF (2005)  
[Eng96] English, L.P.: Data Quality Improvement: Maximizing Data Value Through 
Metrics and Management. In: Seminar 3rd Information Impact International, pp. 
1–2 (1996) 
[Exb02] VDI, forum! GmbH marketing + communications: Excellence Barometer (ExBa) 
Deutschland (2002), http://www.tqmcenter.com/CFDOCS/cms3/admin/ 
cms/download.cfm?FileID=294&GroupID=91  
(visisted on October 3, 2010) 
[Fon95] Fontanari, M.-L.: Voraussetzung für den Kooperationserfolg -eine empirische 
Analyse. In: Schertler, W. (ed.) Management von Unternehmenskooperationen, 
Ueberreuther, Wien (1995) 
[Lut01] Lutters, D., Mentink, R.J., van Houten, F.J.A.M.: Workflow management based 
on Information Management. Annals of CIRP 50(1), 309–312 (2001) 
[May07] Mayer, A.: Optische Technologien. Wirtschaftliche Bedeutung in Deutschland. 
Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (2007)  
[Men03] Mentink, R.J., van Houten, F.J.A.M., Kals, H.J.J.: Dynamic process management 
for engineering environments. Annals of CIRP 52(1), 351–354 (2003) 
 

Total Quality Management in the Replication Process 
11
 
[Pet01] Petridis, K.D., Pfeifer, T., Scheermesser, S.: Business Process Improvement: 
Development of an Quality-Characteristics-Library as Controlling Instrument for 
Business Processes. In: Proceedings of the 45th EOQ Congress, vol. 45, pp. 313–
323 (2001) 
[Pfe01] Pfeifer, T.: Qualitätsmanagement Stratgien Methoden Techniken. Hanser (2001) 
[Roz02] Rozenfeld, H.: An Architecture for Shared Management of Explicit Knowledge 
Applied to Development Processes. Annals of CIRP 51(1), 413–416 (2002) 
[Sch03] Schuh, G., Bergholz, M.: Collaborative Production on the Basis of Object 
Oriented Software Engineering Principles. Annals of CIRP 52(1), 393–396 (2003) 
[Sch08] Schmitt, R., Scharrenberg, C.: Approach for the Systematic Implementation of 
Quality Gates for the Planning and Control of Complex Production Chains. 
Vimation Journal (1), 40–45 (2008)  
[Sch10] Schmitt, R., Pfeifer, T.: Qualitätsmanagement Strategien Methoden Techniken. 
Hanser (2010) 
[Seg07] Seghezzi, H.D.: Konzepte – Modelle – Systeme. In: Schmitt, R., Pfeifer, T. (hrsg.) 
Masing – Handbuch Qualtiätsmanagement, 5th edn., pp. 155–171. Hanser (2007) 
[Tan05] Tanner, S.J.: Is Business Excellence of any Value?. West Yorkshire. Oakland 
Consulting (2005)  
[Tra07] Transregionaler 
Sonderforschungsbereich 
SFB/TR4. 
Prozessketten 
zur 
Replikation komplexer Optikkomponenten. Finanzierungsantrag, 9–14 (2007)  
[War04] Warwood, S.J., Roberts, P.A.B.: A Survey of TQM Success Factors in the UK. 
Total Qualtiy Management 15(8), 1109–1117 (2004) 
[Zol06] Zollondz, H.-D.: Grundlagen Qualitätsmanagement. Einführung in Geschichte, 
Begriffe, Systeme und Konzepte, 2nd edn., Oldenburg (2006)  

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 13–24. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics 
Components 
Walter Michaeli and Maximilian Schöngart* 
Abstract. A key condition for the successful manufacturing of optical plastics 
parts and a major challenge at the same time is to develop high-performance 
injection and injection-compression molds. Particularly in the field of optics, the 
stringent requirements placed on part dimensions and the homogeneity of the 
internal properties lead to a large number of requirements in terms of the mold 
concept.  
In order to meet these requirements, a modularly-designed injection-
compression mold has been developed. The mold features a cone-alignment to 
ensure a precise centering of the two mold inserts to each other. In injection-
compression molding processes, it is necessary to seal the cavity before the 
polymer is injected. Therefore, a spring-supported sealing ring is implemented that 
seals the cavity after the two mold inserts are aligned. In this position, the mold is 
not closed completely and it is possible to mold polymer optics using both 
injection molding and injection-compression molding. 
A second mold has been designed with two cavities to ensure symmetrical 
forces and hence to increase the reproduction accuracy. Injection-compression 
molding can be performed either via the closing movement of the injection 
molding machine or the movement of internal hydraulic pistons. Using this 
concept it is possible to compare the two compression techniques. During the 
compression process a gate closure prevents the melt from flowing back into the 
plasticizing unit. Furthermore, the mold features a parting line locker, which is 
needed when the compression cores are moved by the machine movement. 
1   Introduction  
Optical systems made of transparent polymers compete economically with glass 
optics [Cha04]. Technological advantages in polymer processing allow increasing 
substitution of glass optics. The great freedom of plastics in the design of optical 
functional surfaces, the integration of several functional parts, the good 
moldability, a low specific weight and not at least low material costs prove the 
                                                           
Walter Michaeli · Maximilian Schöngart 
Institut für Kunststoffverarbeitung IKV, Pontstraße 55, 52062, RWTH Aachen, Germany 

14 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
substitution potential. Injection molding and injection-compression molding allow 
a comparatively cheap one-step-manufacturing of high precision plastics parts 
[Kun07, May07]. 
The optical quality of plastic lenses is significantly influenced by both the 
geometrical accuracy of the optical shape and inner properties. A key condition 
for the successful manufacturing of optical plastics parts and a major challenge at 
the same time is to develop high-performance injection and injection-compression 
molds.  
In preliminary investigations it could be shown that injection-compression 
molding is appropriate for manufacturing thick-walled optical lenses [Böl01, 
For06]. Therefore, the replication of optical plastics components by injection-
compression molding techniques should be further investigated. For this purpose, 
two injection-compression molds have been designed and built. These molds and 
their key features are described in this chapter. 
2   Design Guidelines for Optical Plastics Components 
To make successfully use of the advantages of injection and injection-compression 
molding, some restrictions and boundary conditions have to be taken into account. 
These rules apply to the design of injection molded plastics parts in general and 
for optical plastics parts in particular. 
Any forms of undercuts in the part geometry have to be avoided, since they 
work against the demolding of the part and may damage or destroy it. 
Furthermore, any surfaces parallel to the direction of demolding should be 
equipped with a draft angle of 1° to 1.5° for an easy demolding process. If 
possible, any leaps in wall thickness should be avoided or minimized. They lead to 
a non-uniform filling of the cavity, which may cause an air entrapment in the part. 
Furthermore, leaps in wall thickness cause a non-uniform cooling of the part 
resulting in a higher degree of warpage. However, the optical functionality of a 
lens requires different wall thicknesses across the lens. Therefore, the part has to 
be designed in a way that a continuous transition of the wall thickness enables a 
good filling behavior. The gate of injection molded plastics lenses is usually 
located at the side of the lens, since a gate on the optical surface would cause a 
mark that cannot be tolerated. 
3   Development of a One-Cavity Injection-Compression Mold 
The first key aspect of the mold design is the modularity of the mold, which 
means that the investigations are not limited to a fixed lens geometry. A mold base 
has been designed that can be equipped with interchangeable mold inserts on both 
mold halves. With this mold, the replication of a variety of different lens 
geometries can be investigated. Basic conditions are only the diameter of the 
optical functional area of 50 mm and the thickness of the lens at the edge of 8 mm.   
A concave-convex shaped lens, a so called meniscus lens, was chosen as the 
basic lens geometry. For the convex side, the spherical radius can be varied from 
100 mm to 500 mm. On the concave side it can be varied from 100 mm to 

Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components 
15
 
150 mm. The resulting minimal thickness of the lens in the center is 4.77 mm, the 
maximum thickness is 8.23 mm. In addition to spherical shapes, mold inserts with 
aspherical geometries can also be used. 
3.1   Filling of the Mold Cavity 
For the rheological design of the mold, the shape of the lens and the geometry of 
the gate have to be determined and then tested with regard to the filling behavior 
of the cavity. A focus of the filling simulation is on the edge of the lens. This edge 
is formed by a ring with a constant thickness of 8 mm and an outer diameter of 
80 mm. On the one hand, this ring is required for the demolding of the lens, since 
the ejector pins cannot be placed on the optical surface of the lens. On the other 
hand, this ring is used to fix the molded lenses in various optical measuring 
devices.    
For the filling simulation, the injection molding simulation software 
CADMOULD was used. Figure 1 shows the flow of the melt front during different 
stages in the filling process. The maximum thickness of the lens is located in the 
center, so no running ahead of the melt along the edges can be seen. On the other 
hand, for a lens with the minimum thickness in the center and the maximum 
thickness at the edge, a more critical filling behavior can be expected. The melt 
front will run ahead along the edges, so the simulation has to ensure that no 
binding line will occur. Instead, a continuous melt flow across the optical 
functional area is preferred. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Filling simulation of the mould cavity 
The gate diameter was designed to have the same dimension as the edge of the 
lens. With the gate being the last part of the lens to freeze in the injection molding 
cycle, an effective holding pressure can be applied for a time as long as possible. 
The gate diameter at the lens was calculated to 10 mm with a draft angle of 1.8° 

16 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
for easy demolding during the ejection. With the chosen gate geometry and the 
geometrical boundary conditions of the cavity, a mold filling without binding lines 
and air entrapment can be expected. 
3.2   Centering of the Mold Halves 
The geometries of the lens and the gate system are important for the filling of the 
cavity during the injection phase. For the optical performance of the lens, a precise 
replication of the surface topography is essential. While the surface quality of the 
lens depends on the surface quality of the mold insert, the contour accuracy of the 
lens is determined by the mold base. The replication in the injection molding 
process can only be as precise as the cavity of the closed mold. This requires a 
precise and reproducible centering of the mold inserts to each other during the 
closing of the mold.  
While the mold inserts are centered and fixed in the mold halves via tapered 
guides, the mold halves are opened for demolding and afterwards closed again 
from cycle to cycle. The basic centering of the mold halves during closing is 
usually performed by pillars on the one mold half that are dipped into the other 
mold half. For a much more precise centering, a fine centering system after the 
dipping of the pillars has been designed. With a fine centering of the mold halves 
via tapered guides, an increased abrasive wear of the tapered surfaces was 
expected, since the forces occurring during the centering would have been 
compensated only by the flexibility of the entire mold. For this reason, a new 
concept using a floating mount was developed. The floating mount is placed 
between two mold plates on the moving mold half, so a part of the mold can move 
relatively to the stationary mold half. 
3.3   Sealing Ring for Injection-Compression Molding 
The mold was designed to be used not only in injection molding, but also in 
injection-compression molding. In this type of process, the mold not entirely 
closed before the injection of the polymer. Instead, it is opened by the 
compression gap. After the polymer is injected, the mold is closed, leading to an 
uniform pressure distribution across the part surface. For injection-compression 
molding, it is necessary to seal the cavity when the mold is closed to the 
compression gap. One way to seal the cavity is the integration of shearing edges. 
A disadvantage of shearing edges is that they would be in contact before the 
centering took place. This would limit the moving range of the floating mount to 
the tolerances of the shearing edges (i.e. 0.02 mm). Otherwise, a dipping of the 
shearing edges would be disturbed and abrasive wear would occur. Moreover, the 
entire compression period would happen without the centering, since the tapered 
guides are only functional when the mold is closed completely. For these reasons, 
a concept was developed that decouples the centering of the mould halves from 
the sealing of the cavity using to separate elements (Figure 2). The centering ring 
with tapered surfaces has a resilient mounting in the moving mold half. When the 
mold is open, the centering ring is pushed forward by springs for the distance of 

Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components 
17
 
the compression gap. When the mold is being closed, the centering ring is the first 
to get in contact with the fixed mold half, positioning itself to the fixed mold half. 
The prestressed ball bearing without clearance between the centering ring and the 
mold core with the fixed mold insert causes a centering of the mold insert at the 
same time. At this point, the two mold halves are already centered to each other, 
even though the mold is not closed completely yet. 
 
 
centering ring  
sealing ring        clamping force ring      mold insert 
floating mount    prestressed ball bearing     mold core        cavity 
 
Fig. 2 Schematic cross section view of the injection-compression-mold 
When the mold is further closed, the sealing ring which also has a resilient 
mounting presses against the fixed mold half and seals the cavity. From now on, 
the cavity is sealed and a compression gap can be adjusted by the closing 
movement of the injection molding machine. During the compression period, the 
radial position of the mold inserts to each other persists, since the mold core and 
the mold insert are moved within the centering ring via the ball bearing. The 
compression movement can happen until the so called clamping force ring gets 
into contact with the fixed mold half. At this point of time, the mold is entirely 
closed (Figure 2, right). For conventional injection molding, this position is 
accessed before the injection of the polymer without stopover. 
This mold concept has several advantages. It uses a floating mount to allow a 
lateral moving of the mold halves to each other within a certain range. The 
shearing edges are integrated into the moving mold half between the sealing ring 
and the mold core which contains the interchangeable mold insert. Thus, the 
shearing edges are in permanent contact, which minimizes abrasive wear. 
Furthermore, the two mold halves are centered to each other even before the 
sealing ring gets in contact with the opposite mold half, which means that there is 
now lateral movement between them when the clamping force is applied. 
Moreover, the centering of the mold halves persists during the entire compression 
movement. 
Even after the molding and cooling of the part this mold design exhibits certain 
advantages. When the mold is opened, the mold insert on the moving side is  
 

18 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
moved back. The lens cannot follow this movement, since it is fixed to the sealing 
ring by the draft angle on the edge. In the next step, the sealing ring looses contact 
with the fixed mold half, while the centering of the two halves still persists. Now 
the contact between centering ring and fixed mold half is loosened and the 
centering gets lost. These guided movements during the opening and demolding 
have the advantage, that a lateral movement between the mold insert and the lens 
can be avoided completely. This is of high interest, especially when lenses with a 
microstructured surface are molded. The two halves of the open injection-
compression mold can be seen in Figure 3. On the fixed half, the interchangeable 
mold insert and the gate can be seen. Furthermore, the tapered surfaces can be 
seen that get in contact with the centering ring of the moving mold half when the 
mold is closed. On the moving mold half, the cavity, the centering ring, and the 
sealing ring (dark) can be seen.  
 
Fig. 3 Moving mold half (left) and fixed mold half (right) 
4   Development of a Two-Cavity Injection Compression Mold 
The injection-compression mold described before has only one cavity with a gate 
at the side. This eccentrical position of the cavity leads to an asymmetrical 
pressure distribution which causes a bend up of the parting plane with high cavity 
pressures. Furthermore, this mold can only be used for the injection-compression 
molding variant with a movement via the clamping unit of the injection molding 
machine, where the force acts on the entire area of the molded part. In order to 
further increase the replication accuracy and to investigate the different variants of 
injection-compression molding, a new mold base has been designed [Hes10].   
 
 
 

Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components 
19
 
An important aspect of the new mold design is to ensure a symmetrical flow of 
force. This can be achieved with a two cavity mold where the gate is located 
between the two cavities. As the first mold, this mold is also modular designed for 
examinations of different lens geometries.  
With the developed mold base lenses with a diameter of 70 mm can be 
manufactured (Figure 4). The diameter of the compression core on the moving 
mold half is 60 mm. Inside the compression core it is possible to change mold 
inserts with different surface geometries with a diameter of 50 mm. On the fixed 
mold half mold inserts can be changed with a diameter of 56 mm. The ejector pins 
were integrated in the fixed mold half, due to the complex and modular design of 
the compression technique in the moving mold half. The lenses have a thickness 
of 6 mm on the edges. 
 compression 
core       
changeable 
mold inserts       
moving mold half                            fixed mold half       
gate    
ø 70 mm    
ø 60 mm    
ø 50 mm    
ø 70 mm    
ø 56 mm    
ejector area       
6 mm      
R 150       
 
Fig. 4 Lens geometry of the two-cavity mold 
4.1   Centering of the Mold Halves 
As described before, the centering of the mold inserts to each other is an important 
aspect. The rough centering of the two mold halves is realised by a pillar guide. 
Pillars mounted on the moving side of the mold dip into the fixed mold half while 
the mold is being closed. Furthermore, a fine centering is necessary for a precise 
and reproducible positioning of the mold inserts. For this purpose, trapezoidal 
centering elements next to the mold inserts are used (Figure 5). These elements get 
in contact just before the mold is entirely closed and precisely centre the mold 
inserts to each other. Since the compression core with the mold insert has to be 
moved inside the mold plate, a centering with tapered guides is not possible. 
Instead, a prestressed ball bearing is used. The mold inserts in the compression 
core on the moving half of the mold and also the mold inserts in the fixed half are 
centered using tapered guides. 
 

20 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Centering with trapezoidal elements and tapered surfaces 
4.2   Gate Closure for Injection-Compression Molding 
During the compression period, a back flow of the melt into the plasticizing unit 
of the injection molding machine has to be prevented. This back flow would cause 
orientations and residual stresses inside the part that negatively affect the optical 
quality. Usually, needle-valve nozzles are used to close the gate. However, these 
elements often have dead water (stagnation) zones which lead to extended 
retention times of the material in the channel. This further on may lead to a 
thermal degradation of the material. Therefore, needle-valve nozzles are not 
suitable for optical polymers.  
There are two general demands to a gate closure system: First, it should be as 
close as possible to the cavity to minimize the volume that is being compressed. 
This automatically reduces the flow of material during the compression. Second, 
no material should stick to the closure system or retain in the system. This may 
lead to degradation and a defect on the molded lens.  
A plate slider for each cavity, moved by a hydraulic cylinder was chosen. This 
gate closure can be opened and closed independently of the plasticizing unit. The 
slider is designed as a plate with a hole in it. Instead of squeezing the material to 
close the gate, this slider transfers the material completely out of the gate channel. 
This ensures that no material can stick to the slider or retain inside the channel.  
The use of grease lubrication is not possible in molds for the replication of 
optical components, since the lubricant may contaminate the molded parts. To 
reduce friction and abrasive wear, a DLC-coating (diamond-like-carbon) was 
applied to all moving elements of the gate closure.  
 
 
 
moving mold 
half 
 
prestressed 
ball bearing 
 
compression 
core 
 
mold insert 
fixed mold 
half  
 
trapezoidal 
centering 
element 
 
tapered 
guides 
 
mold insert 
 
cavity 

Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components 
21
 
4.3   Injection-Compression Molding via Mold-Integrated 
Compression Cores 
Figure 6 compares the conventional injection-compression molding (left) to the so 
called core-compression molding (right). In the conventional process, the 
compression force acts on the entire area of the part. For the production of plastics 
lenses it can be advantageous to only compress the optical area of the lens. 
Therefore, the core-compression molding uses cores that only compress certain 
areas of the cavity. Already frozen parts of the melt at the edge of the part are not 
compressed, which significantly decreases the stresses induced in this area.  
 
Moving of the entire mold half  
(conventional compression) 
Moving of single mold parts 
(core compression) 
compression gap 
compression core 
fixed mold half 
stationary mold half 
 
Fig. 6. Comparison of different compression techniques 
The movement in the compression-phase can be either performed by the 
clamping unit of the injection molding machine (moving of the entire mold half) 
or by integrated hydraulic pistons (moving of single mold parts). The use of 
hydraulic pistons inside the mold has the advantage that less mass has to be 
moved, which increases the overall accuracy of the movement. The mold base was 
designed to be used for core-compression molding, either with the moving of the 
mold half by the injection molding machine or with a movement by integrated 
hydraulic pistons. This is realized by a change-over of the moving mold half, 
exchanging the hydraulic pistons and a mold plate. A cross section view of the 
mold equipped with integrated hydraulic pistons is shown in Figure 7. In the lower 
half of the picture, the hydraulic piston is moved back, so the compression core is 
moved back by the amount of the desired compression gap. The upper part of the 
picture shows the mold at the end of the compression period. The hydraulic piston 
has pushed the compression core all the way to the front. This position is also used 
for injection molding without compression. 
 
 

22 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Injection mold with integrated hydraulic pistons 
 
 
To investigate core-compression molding with the movement of the clamping 
unit of the machine, the back part of the mold base containing the hydraulic 
pistons is replaced by a simple mold plate (Figure 8). This mold plate is directly 
connected to the compression cores, leading the compression force from the 
injection molding machine directly to the cavity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Injection mold for compression movement by the injection molding machine 
closed 
cavity 
cavity with 
compression 
gap 
mold plate 
with inte- 
grated 
hydraulic 
cylinders 
hydraulic 
pistons 
cavity with 
compression 
gap 
transfer of  
compression 
force 
compression  
gap 
parting line 
locker 

Mold Design for Complex Optical Plastics Components 
23
 
4.4   Parting Line Locker 
When the integrated hydraulic pistons are used for compression, the cavity is kept 
closed by the clamping force of the injection molding machine. In the other case, 
the clamping unit is being used for the movement of the compression cores. When 
the inner parts of the lenses are compressed, the melt pressure inside the cavity is 
also transferred on to the edges of the part. This results in a force trying to open 
the mold. For this reason, a lock of the parting plane has been integrated into the 
mold base, to seal the cavities while the compression cores are moved by the 
clamping unit of the injection molding machine. In this variant of the injection-
compression molding process the mold is initially completely closed. Because the 
lock of the parting plane ensures the force closure, the clamping unit of the 
injection molding machine can be moved back to the compression gap and apply 
the compression force after melt injection with the compression cores.  
Figure 9 shows the two halves of the two-cavity injection-compression mold. 
One the moving mold half, the trapezoidal centering elements surrounding the 
cavities (black color) can be seen. On the fixed mold half, the gate closure 
(vertical black sliders) and the parting line locker can be seen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Mold halves of the two-cavity injection-compression mold 
5   Conclusion 
Injection molding and injection-compression molding are the primary forming 
techniques which have a significant potential to produce thick-walled optical parts 
in mass production. The surface geometry of the optical functional area influences 
the optical performance substantially as well as internal properties. High 
requirements concerning the mold design are a result of these demands. 
In order to meet these requirements, two modularly-designed injection-
compression molds have been developed. Key features of these molds are 
sophisticated mechanisms for the centering of the mold halves. Both molds can be 
mold inserts 
 moving mold half                                     fixed mold half 

24 
W. Michaeli and M. Schöngart
 
used for injection molding as well as for injection-compression molding. 
Furthermore, they can be equipped with interchangeable mold inserts. 
Limitations of the first mold, a one-cavity mold, led to the development of the 
two-cavity injection-compression mold. This mold allows the investigation of two 
different injection-compression molding variants, either by integrated hydraulic 
pistons or by the clamping unit of the injection molding machine. Both molds are 
successfully being used for detailed replication processes of plastics lenses.  
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Böl01] Bölinger, S.: Spritzgießen und Spritzprägen von Kunststoffoptiken. RWTH 
Aachen, Dissertation (2001) ISBN 3-89653-956-6 
[Bro98] Brockmann, C.: Spritzprägen technischer Thermoplastformteile, RWTH Aachen, 
Dissertation (1998) ISBN 3-89653-423-8 
[Cha04] Chada, A.: Prozessorientierte Wirtschaftlichkeitsanalyse zur Herstellung optischer 
Komponenten aus Glas oder Kunststoff. Institut für Kunststoffverarbeitung, 
RWTH Aachen, Diploma Thesis (2004); Supervisor: J. Forster, T. Schröder 
[For06] Forster, J.: Vergleich der optischen Leistungsfähigkeit spritzgegossener und 
spritzgeprägter Kunststofflinsen. RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (2006) ISBN 3-
86130-846-0  
[Hes10] Hessner, S.: Spritzprägen sphärischer und asphärischer Kunststofflinsen. RWTH 
Aachen, Dissertation (2010) ISBN 3-86130-973-4 
[Kun07] Kuntze, T.: Plastic Optics Enable LED Lighting Revolution. Optik & Photonik 
2(4), 42–45 (2007) 
[May07] Mayer, R.: Precision Injection Moulding. Optik & Photonik 2(4), 46–48 (2007) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 25–40. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Optical Plastics Components:  
Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
Walter Michaeli and Paul Walach* 
Abstract. Over the past years, more and more polymers have been applied for 
manufacturing optical components and have won an increasing market share for 
spectacle glasses, cameras, or other lens, or light guide applications. The 
manufacturing of optical components in plastics competes functionally and 
economically to the material “glass”. For optical applications the technological 
advantages of plastics enable an increasing substitution of glass. 
Injection molding and injection-compression molding allow a comparatively 
cheap one-step-manufacturing of high precision optical plastics components. Both 
processes are primary forming techniques which have a significant potential to 
produce optical plastics parts in mass production. 
Using injection-compression molding, a combination of the injection molding 
and pressing process, a high molding accuracy combined with uniform inner 
properties of the molded parts can be obtained. Excellent process knowledge is a 
prerequisite to achieve and meet the required tolerances of high-precision plastics 
parts for imaging optics in the micron range. 
1   Introduction 
Future topical areas of research like information and communication technology, 
pharmaceutical technology, medical engineering and life science, material 
engineering but also the automotive industry and the industrial manufacturing as 
well as measuring technique are affected by optics and laser technology. In all 
these fields the optical technologies generate new products and processes and 
contribute increasingly to industry and science as well as to lifestyle of people. 
Over the past years, more and more polymers have been applied for manufacturing 
optical components and have won an increasing market share for e. g. glasses or 
cameras. Up to a resolution of 5 mega pixels of cameras in mobile phones, plastic 
lenses are used [Alb10]. The wide range of surface design, the integration of 
several functional components, good moldability, low material costs and low 
specific weight prove the substitution potential [Alb10, Lan03, Mic05, Pas78].  
                                                           
Walter Michaeli · Paul Walach 
Institut für Kunststoffverarbeitung IKV, Pontstraße 55, 52062, RWTH Aachen, Germany 

26 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
In the manufacture of optical components plastics compete economically to the 
material glass [Lan03, Pas78, Zöl08]. For optical applications the technological 
advantages of plastics enables an increasing substitution of glass. For 
manufacturing of optical components mainly two processes are suitable. Injection 
molding and injection-compression molding allow a comparatively cheap one-
step-manufacturing of high precision plastics parts [Kun07, May07]. High 
demands are placed on optical components to achieve the required optical 
function. Besides these advantages, the disadvantages of this material also have to 
be considered. Polymer lenses show a significant lower scratch and temperature 
resistance. The refraction index depends on temperature and on the content of 
moisture [Mic07]. The obtainable optical part quality is significantly depending on 
the specific material, the specific production process and the processing 
parameters. Therefore it is necessary to examine the whole value creation chain 
for each application to obtain a high precision optical component. 
By classifying the optical applications in accordance with its requirements in 
three quality sections, the largest substitution potential of polymer optical parts is 
located in the area of low and medium quality requirements for medium and large 
quantities. To increase the substitution potential in the area of higher demands the 
cause-effect relationships during the manufacturing process have to be developed 
by fundamental research work. 
The geometry of optical components is often contrary to common design 
guidelines for the manufacture of plastic parts by injection molding. The potential 
of shrinkage rises with increasing wall thickness of the molded parts. Especially 
the geometrical accuracy of thick-walled plastic lenses is negatively influenced 
during the molding process [Böl01]. The optical quality of plastics lenses is 
significantly influenced by both the geometrical accuracy of the optical shape and 
inner properties. Thus, the molding of optical components poses a serious 
challenge for mould, machine, and process.  
2   Replication Processes for Optical Components 
For the replication of optical plastics components mainly two processes are used. 
Injection molding and the resultant advancement injection-compression molding 
can obtain the required high-precision in a fully automated manufacturing [Kun07, 
May07]. Several studies have shown that in particular injection-compression 
molding is suitable for the production of thick-walled optical components. By the 
combination of the injection molding and the pressing process, a high molding 
accuracy with uniform inner properties can be obtained. The injection-
compression molding allows a fully automated production of high precision 
plastic lenses [Böl01, For06]. 
2.1   Injection Molding Process 
Injection molding, as it is known from the 1950s, is a wide-spread and highly 
developed manufacturing process paired with many advantages [Joh04]. The main 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
27
 
advantages of the injection molding process are the short cycle time, the 
possibility of automated mass production and especially for optical components 
the freedom of design in the layout of the manufactured parts. In contradiction to 
the manufacturing of glass components it is possible to produce complex 
geometries like aspheric lenses, light guides or products with free form surfaces. 
More integrated products can be realised using the multi-component injection 
molding. Functional components of the optical system that cannot be covered by 
the optical plastics material, e.g. a mechanical fitting or sealing against 
surrounding media can be added in an additional shot using an appropriate plastics 
material. 
The short cycle times compared to glass processing and the possibility to 
realise a highly automated process, make the injection molding process attractive 
from an economic point of view. To use the plastics optics for a growing number 
of applications and to replace inorganic glass, it is still necessary to improve the 
quality of the plastics optics. 
The optical properties of a lens depend besides the geometry of the surface on 
the inner properties. The dimensional accuracy of the surface is depending on the 
plastics material used, the accuracy of the mold and the injection molding process. 
This leads to very high requirements on the manufacturing process itself. 
At the beginning of the injection molding process a homogeneous melt is 
provided by the plasticizing unit. Before the plasticizing process, the material 
conditioning is very important, because foreign particles are the major source of 
defects while producing optical components. The material for optical application 
has usually strict restrictions on dust and dirt content. These enclosures lead to 
black specks and defects and with it to scrap [Böl01]. Black specks are partially 
degraded material at the screw surface, barrel or back-flow valves that detach 
from the surface and get into the part. The material and surface choice of screw 
and barrel are therefore very important. 
The used materials have to be dried to avoid streaks because of humidity. 
Optical materials have the inclination of yellowing when they get overheated, so 
an overdrying has to be avoided. Besides drying conditions optical materials are 
thermal and shear sensitive. Therefore the materials are plasticized with a low 
screw speed and low back pressure.  
The properties of the injection molded lenses are mainly influenced by the 
filling and cooling process. The characteristic factors for the cavity filling are the 
mold temperature, the melt temperature and the injection speed [Kle87]. For 
optical components it is very important to obtain very homogeneous inner 
properties [Böl01]. 
The packing and cooling phase have besides the injection phase high 
importance for the quality of the injection molded lenses. Therefore, the main 
factors are packing pressure and cooling time. In this phase important quality 
criteria like inner properties and geometrical accuracy are influenced. The cooling 
time has also an influence on the geometrical accuracy, since uncontrolled 
shrinkage occurs with too low cooling time [Böl01]. 
Because of the parameter’s choice for obtaining a high part quality when 
injection molding is used for optical components, longer cycle times than in 

28 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
common thermoplastic injection molding are the result. In dependency on the part 
geometry cycle times between 2 and 25 minutes can be necessary. 
Using the described injection molding process with long packing pressure times 
causes highly oriented parts with non-uniform inner properties. A limitation of the 
optical performance is the result. Therefore the injection-compression molding 
process can be advantageous. 
2.2   Injection-Compression Molding Process 
Since the 1960s the injection-compression molding process has been used to 
achieve high precision plastics parts [Wal61]. Uniform inner properties of the 
produced parts are the reason why the injection-compression molding process is 
often used for optical components.  
The injection compression molding process can be divided into two separate 
process steps: melt injection and compression. During the injection phase, a 
specific volume of polymer melt is injected into the cavity. During this process 
step, the volume of the cavity is extended by the compression gap. Thus, the melt 
forms a melt accumulation in front of the gate. A mold design with shear edges 
avoids a melt flow in to the parting plane. During the compression phase the melt 
accumulation is compressed and distributed in the cavity. The part geometry is 
finally molded by the closing movement of the two mold halves. A mechanical or 
thermal sealing of the gate avoids the backward flow of the melt into the screw 
antechamber. The application of packing pressure from the plasticizing unit is not 
necessary in this case [Mic00].  
Injection-compression molding as a combination of injection molding and 
compression molding unifies the advantages of both manufacturing processes. The 
molded parts stand out due to high geometrical accuracy, narrow tolerances, high 
class surfaces, low residual stresses and excellent mechanical properties [Hab99, 
Mic98, Tra73]. The advantages of automation and varied options of intervention 
result from the injection molding, the advantages of uniform material density and 
homogeneous pressure distribution result from the compression molding [Ber00]. 
Derived from these characteristics, the injection-compression molding has two 
fields of application: 
The production of thick-walled parts because of an enhanced shrinkage 
compensation, a lower distortion and less shrink marks. Mainly for producing 
optical lenses (viewfinder lens, condenser lens, lenses for imaging optics, 
magnifiers, lenses, Fresnel lenses and prisms) with very high requirements 
concerning accuracy the injection-compression molding was established and 
developed [Wal61, Mat85, Kle87, Böl01]. 
Another field is the production of thin-walled parts with large dimensions. With 
the same filling pressure higher flow path/wall-thickness ratios are possible with 
injection-compression molding than with injection molding [Men68, Mic98]. As 
an example, a protective cover for a triangle could be realized with a wall-
thickness of 0.4 mm and a flow path/wall-thickness ratio of 270 [Bro98]. Further 
examples of parts are optical storages (DVD) and car glazing [Bür99, Hei00, 
Mic98]. 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
29
 
The injection-compression molding process can be classified in different 
variants shown in Figure 1. The procedure with partial fill of the cavity and the 
realization of the movement of the compression core with the moved mould half 
has the highest relevance [Fri90, Fri93]. This mode of the injection-compression 
molding process is called “injection-compression molding with the moved mold 
half” [Kna82, Kna84]. The mold is opened to the compression gap and can be 
closed either sequentially or simultaneously to the injection process. 
 
 
Fig. 1 Overview of injection-compression molded process variants 
While the injection-compression molding with volumetrical fill is used, the 
movement of the compression core is not used for forming the melt, but for the 
compensation of the thermal volume shrinkage of the part while cooling. The 
volume of the cavity is therefore only enlarged by the amount of the volume 
shrinkage. 
Whereas at the common injection-compression molding with partial fill the 
moving mold half is pulled back to a wider compression gap than used for the 
compensation of the thermal volume contraction. Furthermore, the compression 
process can be realized by compression cores, which are moved when the mold is 
sealed. The compression cores can take effect either on the whole cross-sectional 
area or only on a partial area [Wal61, Bro98]. This variant of injection-
compression molding makes more complex geometries possible than injection-
compression molding with the whole mold half [Kud99]. 
Besides these variants of active compression molding the inactive compression 
molding represents a process in which the mold is closed with reduced clamping 
force. While filling the cavity the mold opens because of an adjustable resilience 
up to the preset compression gap. Due to an increase of the clamping force the 
compression process takes place afterwards [Kna84]. This so called “expansion 
compression” process can be combined with a variothermal process control, a 
heating of the cavity surface by radiation or electromagnetic induction, for the 
replication of optical components or optical microstructures [Bür01]. This process 

30 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
control has the advantage that the hot cavity surface is overflowed in the 
beginning of the injection process, which leads to a good surface replication of the 
molded parts. The final part thickness is set by the injection-compression phase. 
The thermal contraction can be controlled by applying a compression pressure. 
3   Measuring Techniques 
Because each individual process and also the process parameters have a high 
influence on the optical properties of a manufactured lens, a 100 %-quality check 
is often needed in the production of optical components. To characterize the 
molded optical plastics parts regarding their quality, several criteria have to be 
defined. These quality criteria can be classified into the following domains. 
First of all the optical function of a lens is depending on the surface geometry. 
The geometrical accuracy can be determined by tactile or contactless measurement 
methods. For optical components the contactless method is the common one, a 
chromatic sensor or an interferometer can be used. 
Moreover the quality is also depending on the inner properties. Internal stress 
and orientations can be detected by polarization optics. The optical properties like 
distortion and the resolving power can be determined directly by an optical bench 
or a wavefront-sensor. 
For a quality characterisation of a molded plastics lens it is necessary to 
determine both the geometrical accuracy and the optical performance of the lens. 
3.1   Geometrical Accuracy 
To determine the geometrical accuracy of the injection-compression molded 
optical lenses, the surface geometries of both cavity and lens are measured by a 
chromatic sensor. This so-called MicroGlider, Fries Research & Technology 
GmbH, Bergisch Gladbach, is based on the chromatic aberration of optical lenses 
caused by the wave-length dependent refraction index and allows a non-contact 
and non-destructive measurement. 
Focused white light is used to irradiate the lenses surface. Varying focal points 
of blue and red light are a consequence of the chromatic aberration of the sensor. 
These focal points are located on different levels. Depending on the surface 
topography and with it the distance between sensor and surface, the varying focal 
points are reflected by the surface with different intensity. The measured wave 
length of the reflected light gives information about the distance between sensor 
and surface and with it about the surface topography (Figure 2). 
In an area of 60 mm x 60 mm 200 lines with 200 measuring points each are 
acquired. This results in a resolution of one point each 0.3 mm. The test set-up has 
a measurement uncertainty of 2 µm. The measurement range amounts up to 
3000 µm, the accuracy of measurement is down to about 2 µm.  

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
31
 
 
Fig. 2 Measuring principle of a chromatic sensor 
To analyze the surface accuracy, the surface data are passed on to the 
evaluation program AIX-Comp, which has been developed at IKV Aachen. The 
three-dimensional surface data of the molded lens and the mold insert are 
subtracted and the peak-to-valley-value (PV-value) is calculated (Figure 3). With 
this program a characteristic value for the maximum difference between mold and 
lens surface can be calculated for both sides of the lens. A high PV-value 
represents a lower geometrical accuracy because of a high difference between 
cavity and molded lens, a PV-value at a lower level represents higher geometrical 
accuracy. 
 
Fig. 3 Determination of the PV-value 
3.2   Optical Performance 
A wavefront-sensor, the so-called Shack-Hartmann-sensor (SHS), is an 
established tool to characterize optical properties of lenses by transmitted light. 
The SHS determines the local wave front gradient simultaneously at several 

32 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
positions. It is possible to reconstruct the shape of the wave front by mathematical 
integration. Further optical quality functions (PSF, MTF) and criterions (Strehl 
value, Zernike coefficients) can be evaluated by knowing the shape of wave front 
[Are00]. 
 
Fig. 4 Set-up for Shack-Hartmann aberrometry 
A SHS is based on a lens array and a CCD chip. The lens array subdivides the 
optical aperture into subapertures and images the analyzed light beam as focal 
points onto the CCD chip (Figure 5) [Are00].  
 
Fig. 5 Principal of the Shack-Hartmann sensor 
Physically the SHS is based on measuring the displacement of the focal points. 
From the displacement the local inclination of the wave front can be evaluated. 
The divergent light from a fibre-coupled laser diode (tested wave length λ = 635 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
33
 
nm) is collimated and imaged onto the SHS which determines the wave front 
aberration caused by the tested lens. 
One determined quality function is the point spread function (PSF), which can 
be calculated from the wave front aberration. This function describes the luminous 
intensity distribution in the image plane of an ideal point which is imaged with a 
lens. With the PSF the Strehl value can be calculated, which is used as a quality 
criterion for optical lenses. The Strehl value is the ratio of the maximum luminous 
intensity in the image plane of a tested lens and the image of an ideal diffractively 
limited lens with the same aperture. The resolving capacity of an optical lens is 
characterized by the modulation transfer function (MTF). The MTF describes the 
contrast depending on the spatial frequency. 
4   Comparison of the Replication Processes 
The precision of the molded parts is crucial for a good functionality of the optical 
components. In order to achieve a distortion-free image, the geometry of the 
polymer lens has to meet the surface contour given by the optical design as good 
as possible. On the other hand the sharpness of the image is depending mainly on 
the surface roughness. While the surface roughness is mainly depending on the 
manufacturing of the cavity, the geometry of the injection molded part is 
determined by the molding process itself. 
To analyze the inner properties of the plastics parts, a polarizing optical system 
can be used. The polarizing optics shows the birefringence of light passing 
through the part. The effect of double refraction results from the molecular 
orientation inside the part as well as from the state of internal stresses. Using 
polarized white light, the double refraction effect can be observed as a coloured 
pattern, with monochromatic light, the polarised image shows dark and bright 
areas. Figure 6 shows an exemplary monochromatic polarised image of an 
injection molded and an injection-compression molded polycarbonate lens. It is 
 
 
                   Injection molding                    Injection-compression molding 
 
Fig. 6 Birefringences in comparison for different injection molding techniques 

34 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
obvious, that the manufacturing process has an influence on the inner properties of 
an optical part, so that the decision for a production method is always depending 
on the part geometry and the plastics material. 
The difference between mold and lens surface is slightly reduced by changing 
from injection molding to the more complex injection-compression molding 
(Figure 7). For the function of a lens in an optical system the geometrical accuracy 
but particularly its optical effect is of importance. The optical effect results of the 
surface geometry and the internal properties of the lens. Contaminations of the 
polymer, molecular orientation or internal stresses can reduce the optical 
performance in spite of best geometrical accuracy. 
 
Fig. 7 Geometrical accuracy of optical lenses 
In which way the wave-front aberrometries effect the imaging performance can 
be seen in the PSF of both specimens, each molded using the best process 
parameters. In Figure 8 the PSF of the best injection molded and the best 
injection-compression molded lens are displayed. 
It is evident that the intensity ten times higher in the centre results in a clearly 
better optical performance of the injection-compression molded lens. In the PSF of 
these lenses only two concentric secondary maximums with lower intensity are 
visible. The injection molded lenses has several secondary maxima. Its intensity is 
in the range of the maximum main intensity and deteriorates the contrast. 
The results show that the injection-compression molding process is the 
appropriate process for the production of thick-walled optical components. By the 
combination of the injection molding and pressing process, a high molding 
accuracy with uniform inner properties can be obtained. Besides the process the 
used materials have a high influence on the resulting optical performance of the 
manufactured parts. 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
35
 
 
Fig. 8 Measured point spread functions of injection molded and injection-compression 
molded lenses 
5   Plastic Materials for Optical Components 
For the replication of plastics components with optical functionality only 
amorphous thermoplastic polymers can be used. For the right choice of the 
material a specific list of requirements is needed for each individual application. 
Criteria can be for example the materials transmittance, the refraction index, the 
hardness, or heat resistance. 
The used plastic material has a high influence on the parts characteristic and 
processing properties in the injection molding process. For the design of the optical 
components the optical and thermal properties of the material are important. Table 1 
summarizes the most important physical characteristics of seven common materials 
used for replication of optical components [NN01a, NN01b, NN02, NN04a, NN04b, 
NN06a, NN06b, NN06c, NN06d, NN09a, NN09b, NN09c, Oen05, OM03, Zöl08]. 
5.1   Polymethylmethacrylat (PMMA) 
PMMA is a very often used acrylate polymer with a high transmittance of 92 % in 
the range of the visible light. The refraction index has the lowest value of the 
listed transparent polymers, a low optical refraction power is the result. The most 
important property for many applications is besides good optical properties a high 
hardness and with it a good scratch resistance. Because of an easy processability 
and a relatively low price, the polymer is widely used. PMMA has good flow 
characteristics and is processed in relative low temperature ranges (220 °C-
260 °C). With 100 °C it has a low heat resistance [NN01a, NN04a].  
5.2   Cycloolefin Copolymere (COC) 
In contrast to polyolefins, which are synthesized of one monomer unit, COC is 
typically synthesized out of two different units. TOPAS Advanced Polymers 
 

36 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
Table 1. Properties and processing details of transparent plastics 
Property 
PMMA 
PC 
COC 
PA 
PMMI
PCC 
PES 
MVR 
ISO 1133  
[cm³/10 min] 
3 - 12 
6- 12,5 
4- 48 
204 
1,7 
8 
70 
temperature [°C] 
230 
300 
260 
300 
260 
330 
260 
load [kg] 
3,8 
1,2 
2,16 
10 
10 
2,16 
10 
Property 
PMMA 
PC 
COC 
PA 
PMMI
PCC 
PES 
refraction index nd [-] 
1,49 
1,587 
1,533 
1,51 
1,53 
1,566 
1,65 
transmittance [%] 
92 
88 
91 
90 
91 
89 
80 
tensile modulus of 
elasticity [MPa] 
3200 
2400 
3000 
1400 
4000 
2400 
2700 
Charpy impact strength-
notched (23 °C) [kJ/m²] 
20 
N/A 
13-15 
N/A 
20 
N/A 
N/A 
glass transition 
temperature (10°C/min) 
[°C] 
99 - 117
145 
134 - 
158 
140 
163 
201 
225 
heat resistance  (0,45 
MPa) 
[°C] 
95 - 103
136 
130 - 
150 
135 
158 
191 
218 
coefficient of thermal 
expansion [1/K] 
8⋅10-5 
6,5⋅10-5
6⋅10-5 9⋅10-5
4,5⋅10
-5 
7⋅10-
5 
5,2⋅10-
5 
density [g/cm3] 
1,19 
1,2 
1,02 
1,02 
1,21 
1,14 
1,37 
moisture absorption  
(23 °C, 50 % rel. h.) [%] 
0,6 
0,12 
<0,01 
1,5 
2,25 
0,12 
0,8 
heat conductivity of the 
melt [W/mK] 
0,181 
0,173 
0,193 
0,25 
N/A 
0,165 
0,18 
processing temperature 
[°C] 
220-260
280-310
240-
310 
280-
300 
260-
290 
330 
340-
390 
mold temperature 
[°C] 
60-90 
80-130 
95-
145 
60-80 
130 
100 
120-
170 
 
GmbH, Frankfurt, uses therefore the monomers ethylene and norborene. In this 
combination the typical material properties of COC result. 
Although cycloolefin copolymers are build only from olefinic monomer units, 
they are in contrast to the semi-crystalline polyolefins polyethylene (PE) and 
polypropylene (PP) amorphous and thereby transparent. Because of the olefinic 
monomer units the COC-melts have the typical polyolefinic properties like a good 
acid- and alkali-resistance. While processing COC, an oxidative degradation takes 
place, which leads to a yellowing of the product. This can be avoided by 
processing it with inert gas like nitrogen in the material feed. Concerning optical 
applications the COC-melts have low water absorption, a low density, a high heat 
resistance with a low double refraction and are therefore a good alternative to 
polycarbonate [NN06a, NN06b, NN06c, NN06d, Spa05].  
5.3   Polycarbonate (PC) 
In comparison to PMMA and COC, polycarbonate has a higher impact resistance, 
so the material is used for applications where higher impact load or shock can 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
37
 
occur. Therefore it is used for example in safety glasses and visors and also for car 
glazing, where these loads can appear. PC is in contrary to PMMA a material with 
low flowability, which has to be injected with a high injection speed [NN02]. 
5.4   Polycarbonate Copolymere (PCC) 
Using copolymerization, the properties of polycarbonate like heat resistance can 
be improved and combined with the convenient properties like impact resistance, 
transparency, light stability and flowability. The material can be used in 
applications with even higher requirements on the heat resistance than PC 
[NN09a]. 
5.5   Microcrystalline Polyamide (PA) 
Transparent, microcrystalline polyamide 12 combines the optical properties of an 
amorphous with the mechanical properties of a semi-crystalline polymer. The 
crystallites are so small that visible light is not scattered so the material is 
transparent for human eyes. This combination of properties allows producing 
filigree optical frames as well as lenses for sport- and sunglasses. Furthermore 
frameless glasses can be produced because the necessary screw caps and bondings 
do not cause stress cracks. This combination of good optical and outstanding 
mechanical properties still has a high price [Oen05]. 
5.6   Polymethylmethacrylimide (PMMI) 
PMMI are partially imidized methacrylat polymers. Because of the imidization the 
elastic modulus, the viscosity, the refraction index and the moisture absorption 
rise to higher values. The imidization takes place when PMMA reacts with 
methylamine in a dispersion or in melt in a reactor with methanol as a by-product. 
This leads to structures of imide rings at the branching of the PMMA-molecules, 
which stiffens the macromolecule. The degree of conversion can be controlled, so 
that a tailored molding compound will be obtained for each individual application 
[Buc90]. 
PMMI is a thermoplastic polymer with a high heat resistance (158 °C). Its very 
good optical properties remain stable within temperatures up to 150 °C. Therefore, 
the material can be used in applications with a high thermal load, for example 
headlight-lenses. 
5.7   Polyethersulfone (PES) 
PES is an amorphous high performance plastic, which has an amber transparency 
and belongs to the group of polysulphone (PSU). Polyethersulfone is in its 
chemical and impact resistance superior to polysulphone. PES has an unique heat 
resistance of 220 °C, so it can be used for applications in the pharmaceutical and 
food industry with a superheated steam sterilization. PES has a processing 

38 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
temperature of 390 °C and with it very high requirements concerning the 
plastification [NN04b]. 
5.8   Liquid Silicone Rubber (LSR) 
Liquid silicone rubber has a high transparency up to 95 %, very low haze-values 
and a good physical stability. Therefore, the material is used for the production of 
LED-lenses for the automotive sector. With increasing distribution of so called 
high performance LED for the automotive sector the requirements concerning the 
used materials rise. Besides of the high degree of efficiency of these light sources 
the temperatures rise up to 150 °C together with a high share of ultra-violet 
radiation because of the compact design. The combination of high temperature 
with radiation leads to an accelerated aging while using the common optical 
thermoplastic polymers. LSR is an important alternative for these applications 
[NN08a].  
6   Conclusion 
Injection molding and injection-compression molding are the primary forming 
techniques which have a significant potential to produce optical parts in mass 
production. Especially in the area of imaging optics the geometrical accuracy and 
optical performance have to fulfil high requirements. Injection-compression 
molding features technological advantages in producing optical plastics 
components with uniform inner properties and optimal optical performance. 
To achieve high precision optical parts excellent process knowledge is as 
important as the used material and mold. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the 
whole value creation chain for each individual application to obtain the required 
precision. To get the best results when producing plastics optics, they should not 
be introduced as an afterthought or as a replacement for glass, but just from the 
beginning for the total design. It is essential to bring the optical designer, the 
plastics processor and the production engineer together at the concept stage, to 
ensure that full use is made of the freedom of optical and mechanical design 
offered by plastics. 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”. 
References 
[Alb10] Albrecht, K.: Der Werkstoff PMMA vielseitig und langlebig. Tagungsumdruck 
Transparente Kunststoffe, SKZ, Würzburg, B1–B30 (2010) 
[Are00] Ares, J., Mancebo, T., Bara, S.: Position and displacement sensing with Shack-
Hartmann wave-front sensors. Applied Optics 39(10), 1511–1520 (2000) 

Optical Plastics Components: Replication Processes and Plastic Materials 
39
 
[Ber00] Berthold, 
J.: 
Verarbeitung 
von 
duroplastischen 
Formmassen 
im 
Spritzprägeverfahren. RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (2000) ISBN 3-89653-449-1 
[Bro98] Brockmann, C.: Spritzprägen technischer Thermoplastformteile. RWTH Aachen, 
Dissertation (1998) ISBN 3-89653-423-8 
[Böl01] Bölinger, S.: Spritzgießen und Spritzprägen von Kunststoffoptiken. RWTH 
Aachen, Dissertation (2001) ISBN 3-89653-956-6 
[Buc90] Buck, M.: Polymethylmethacrylate. Kunststoffe 80(10), 1134 (1990) 
[Bür99] Bürkle, E., Wohlrab, W.: Spritzprägen - Präzisionstechnik für Spritzgußteile 
ohne Eigenspannungen. Kunststoffe 89(9), 64–69 (1999) 
[Bür01] Bürkle, E., Klotz, B., Lichtinger, P.: Durchblick im Spritzguss. Das Herstellen 
hochtransparenter 
optischer 
Formteile 
- 
eine 
neue 
Herausforderung. 
Kunststoffe 91(11), 54–60 (2001) 
[Fri90] 
Friedrichs, B., Friesenbichler, W., Gissing, K.: Spritzprägen dünnwandiger 
thermoplastischer Formteile. Kunststoffe 80(5), 583–587 (1990) 
[Fri93] 
Friesenbichler, W., Ebster, M., Langecker, G.: Spritzprägewerkzeuge für 
dünnwandige Formteile richtig auslegen. Kunststoffe 83(6), 445–448 (1993) 
[For06] Forster, J.: Vergleich der optischen Leistungsfähigkeit spritzgegossener und 
spritzgeprägter Kunststofflinsen. RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (2006) ISBN 3-
86130-846-0 
[Hab99] Haberstroh, E., Berthold, J., Jüntgen, T.: Spritzprägen mit prägnanten Vorteilen. 
Spritzprägen 
von 
Duroplasten 
- 
eine 
Alternative 
zum 
Spritzgießen. 
Kunststoffberater 44(10), 42–45 (1999) 
[Hei00] Auf der Heide, K.: Innovative Spritzprägetechnik am Beispiel der CD-
Herstellung. In: Heilbronner Kunststoff-Symposium, Heilbronn (2000) 
[Joh04] Johannaber, F., Michaeli, W.: Handbuch Spritzgießen. Carl Hanser Verlag, 
München (2004) 
[Kle87] Klepek, G.: Herstellung optischer Linsen im Spritzprägeverfahren. Kunststoffe 
77(11), 1147–1151 (1987) 
[Kna82] Knappe, W.: Zum optimalen Zyklusverlauf beim Spritzprägen. Leobener 
Kunststoff-Kolloquium über Spritzgießen und Spritzprägen, Leoben, Österreich 
(1982) 
[Kna84] Knappe, W., Lampl, A.: Zum optimalen Zyklusverlauf beim Spritzprägen. 
Kunststoffe 74(2), 79–83 (1984) 
[Kud99] Kudlik, N.: Dünnwandtechnik. Spritzgießverfahren für geringe Wanddicken. 
Kunststoffe 89(9), 92–96 (1999) 
[Kun07] Kuntze, T.: Plastic Optics Enable LED Lighting Revolution. Optik & Photonik 
2(4), 42–45 (2007) 
[Lan03] Landt, A.: Kunststoffoptik: Von der Entwicklung bis zur Serienfertigung. 
Photonik 35(1) (2003) 
[Mat85] Matsuda, S., Tamura, T.: Plastics Lens by Injection & Compression Molding. 
Japan Plastics Age 1(2), 31–34 (1985) 
[May07] Mayer, R.: Precision Injection Moulding. Optik & Photonik 2(4), 46–48 (2007) 
[Men68] Menges, G., Jürgens, W.: Spritzgießen und Spritzprägen, Vor- und Nachteile. 
Plastverarbeiter 19(11), 863–872 (1968) 
[Mic98] Michaeli, W., Brockmann, C.: Innovative Werkzeugkonzepte für das 
Spritzprägeverfahren. Der Stahlformenbauer 15(3), 22–30 (1998) 
[Mic00] Michaeli, W., Wielpütz, M.: Optimisation of the optical party quality of polymer 
glasses in the injection compression moulding process. Macromolecular Material 
Engenieering, 8–13 (2000) 

40 
W. Michaeli and P. Walach
 
[Mic05] Michaeli, W., Schröder, T.: Wirtschaftliche Bedeutung des Kunststoffs im 
Bereich 
optischer 
Anwendungen, 
Tagungsumdruck 
zum 
Seminar 
zur 
Kunststoffverarbeitung: Optische Bauteile aus Kunststoff, pp. 1–14. IKV, 
Aachen (2005) 
[Mic07] Michaeli, W., Forster, J., Heßner, S., Klaiber, F.: Geometrical Accuracy and 
Optical Performance of Injection Moulded and Injection-compression Moulded 
Plastic Parts. Annals of the CIRP 56(1) (2007) 
[NN01a] N.N.: Produktinformation Plexiglas Formmasse 6N, Plexiglas Formmasse 7N, 
Plexiglas Formmasse 8N. Darmstadt: Röhm GmbH & Co. KG (2001) 
[NN01b] N.N.: Topas - Cyclic Olefin Copolymers, Optics Applications. Frankfurt a.M.: 
Ticona GmbH (2001)  
[NN02] N.N. Anwendungstechnische Informationen (ATI 8013) Makrolon (PC). 
Leverkusen: Bayer AG, Geschäftsbereich Kunststoffe (2002) 
[NN04a] N.N.: Lieferprogramm Formmassen. Darmstadt: Röhm GmbH & Co. KG (2004) 
[NN04b] N.N. Produktinformation Ultrason® E 2010 natur, Ludwigshafen: BASF AG 
(2004)  
[NN06a] N.N.: Processing Conditions for Injection Molding TOPAS® 5013S-04, 
Frankfurt, Topas Advanced Polymers GmbH (2006)  
[NN06b] N.N.: Datenblatt TOPAS® 5013S-04, Frankfurt, Topas Advanced Polymers 
GmbH (2006) 
[NN06c] N.N.: Processing Conditions for Injection Molding TOPAS® 6015S-04, 
Frankfurt, Topas Advanced Polymers GmbH (2006) 
[NN06d] N.N.: Datenblatt TOPAS® 5013S-04, Frankfurt, Topas Advanced Polymers 
GmbH (2006)  
[NN08a] N.N.: Optische Linsen aus LSR. K-Zeitung 39(21) (2008) (November 06, 2008)  
[NN09a] N.N.: Datenblatt APEC 2097, Leverkusen, Bayer MaterialScience AG (2009) 
[NN09b] N.N.: Produktinformation Pleximid® TT70, Darmstadt, Evonik Röhm GmbH 
(2009) 
[NN09c] N.N.: TROGAMID® CX – Transparente Polyamide mit einer einzigartigen 
Kombination an Eigenschaften. Marl, Evonik Degussa GmbH (2009)  
[Oen05] Oenbrink, G.: Innovative Problemlösungen mit transparenten Polyamiden. 
Tagungsumdruck Transparente Kunststoffe, SKZ, Würzburg, pp. D1–D17 (2005)  
[OM03] Osswald, T.A., Menges, G.: Optical Properties of Polymers. In: Materials 
Science of Polymers for Engineers, pp. 545–569. Hanser Verlag, Munich 
[Pas78] Pasco, I.K., Everest, J.H.: Plastics optics for opto-electronics. Optics & Laser 
Technology 10(2), 71–76 (1978) 
[Spa05] Sparenberg, B.: Cycloolefin-Copolymere (COC). Kunststoffe 95(10), 156–160 
(2005) 
[Tra73] Trausch, 
G., 
Schleith, 
O.: 
Spezielle 
Spritzgießverfahren. 
Thermoplastschaumgießen - Spritzprägen. Kunststoffe 63(10), 659–662 (1973) 
[Wal61] Wallner, J.: Spritz-Prägeverfahren für gleichmäßigen Schwundausgleich. 
Herstellung starkwandiger oder in der Wandstärke stark unterschiedlicher 
Spritzgußteile aus Polymethacrylat. Plastverarbeiter 12(6), 229–232 (1961) 
[Zöl08] Zöllner, O., Protte, R., Döbler, M.: Machbarkeit bewiesen – LED-Linsen aus 
Polycarbonat. Plastverarbeiter 59(2), 36–38 (2008) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 41–52. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication  
of Plastic Optics 
Christian Brecher, Dominik Lindemann, Michael Merz,  
Christian Wenzel, and Werner Preuß* 
Abstract. The success of plastic optics relies on the availability of molds needed for 
mass production. This chapter deals with the machining of molds with continuous 
surfaces exhibiting aspheric and free-form shapes, while the machining of molds 
with discontinuous surfaces (prisms, facets, Fresnel structures, etc.) will be 
discussed in Chapter 6. Molds may be classified according to size, shape, and 
tolerance requirements. As a mold material for replication of plastic optics, a nickel-
phosphorous plated steel alloy is frequently chosen, which meets temperature and 
wear resistance requirements and can be machined with monocrystalline diamond 
tools. Basically, there are three methods for machining asymmetric shapes: raster 
milling, ball-end milling, and tool- or slide-servo turning. The discussion of this 
chapter includes material response to diamond machining, selection of machining 
parameters, programming and data handling, machining strategy, and achievable 
surface roughness and figure accuracy. Since the machining of molds is still the 
most cost-effective factor of the production chain, a reduction of set-up and 
machining times remains the biggest challenge for future research.  
1   Introduction  
Plastic lenses with aspheric surfaces have conquered a large market. They are 
found today in video projectors, pocket cameras, mobile phones, computer mice, 
scanners, LED illumination systems, fingerprint waveguide optics, head-up 
displays and many other optical devices [Bäu10].  The size of replicated plastic 
lenses ranges from approx. 1mm diameter (e.g. collimating lenses for DVD 
players) to approx. 200mm (e.g. head-up displays for automobiles), their shapes 
                                                           
Christian Brecher · Dominik Lindemann · Michael Merz · Christian Wenzel 
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering WZL, Steinbachstraße 19, 
52074, RWTH Aachen, Germany 
 
Werner Preuß 
Laboratory for Precision Machining LFM, University of Bremen, Badgasteiner Straße 2, 
28359 Bremen, Germany 

42 
C. Brecher et al.
 
vary from mild aspheres (e.g. pocket camera lenses) to freeform surfaces with 
small local radii of curvature (e.g. f-theta-lenses). Often, datum surfaces defining 
the position and orientation of a lens in the optical system must be included in the 
opto-mechanical design. In some cases (e.g. fingerprint scanners) several optical 
surfaces with well-defined relative orientations are integrated into a single 
monolithic functional unit which is one of the innovative solutions offered by 
molded optics but might be a challenge for mold manufacturing.     
Thermoplastic materials most commonly used for injection, injection-
compression or variothermal molding of plastic lenses are polymethyl-metha crylate 
(PMMA), polycarbonate (PC), and cyclic olefin polymer or copolymer (COP, COC) 
with transition temperatures between 105°C (PMMA) and 145°C (PC). The optical 
mold inserts used for replication must resist process temperatures up to 180°C, i.e. 
the optical surfaces must not wear or oxidize and must maintain figure and 
roughness tolerances for thousands of molding cycles. Commonly, the optical 
surfaces are machined into a steel substrate, which must be ground and polished, or 
into a nickel-phosphorous layer plated onto a steel substrate, which can be diamond 
machined [Osm06a]. Although the deposition of a nickel-phosphorous layer 
introduces additional manufacturing steps (plating and, in case of galvanic 
deposition, a reworking of the contour), the advantages are obvious, since diamond 
machining allows the deterministic generation of aspherical surfaces with optical 
quality.  
2   Fly-Cutting 
The diamond machining process most frequently employed for the generation of 
freeform surfaces is single-edge circumferential milling, commonly referred to as 
fly-cutting [Bri02]. A fly-cutter usually consists of a steel disc holding a radius  
 
 
Fig. 1 Fly-cutting of an electroless nickel plated mold on a Precitech Freeform 3000 ultra-
precision machine 

Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics 
43
 
tool with nose radius ρ rotating on a fly-cut radius r, defined as the distance from 
the spindle axis to the tip of the diamond tool. Thus, the effective envelope surface 
described by the rotating circular cutting edge is a toroid. Typically, ρ is about 
1mm, while r is between 50mm and 70mm (cf. Figure 1). However, both radii 
must not exceed the smallest (concave) radius of curvature (along the relevant 
directions) on the surface to be machined. The spindle speed is usually kept below 
4000min-1 for easier balancing and for avoiding centrifugal distortions. 
There are two different kinematics applied in fly-cutting of freeform surfaces: 
(a) In raster milling the fly-cutter is moved relative to the workpiece along 
(more or less) equally spaced raster lines.    
(b) In spiral milling the fly-cutter is moved relative to the workpiece along a 
(more or less) equally spaced (Archimedean) spiral. 
During machining, cutter normalcy conditions must be maintained (i.e. the 
toroidal envelope surface of the fly-cutter must always be tangential to the 
surface). If the contact point on the cutting edge is allowed to shift during 
machining, the orientation of the fly-cut plane may be kept constant with respect 
to the machine coordinate system, reducing the number of controllable linear axes 
to three. In raster milling, one of the three linear axes may be ‘frozen’ by moving 
the midpoint of the fly-cutter parallel to a major axis of the machine. (In that case, 
the raster lines will not be lines of intersection of a plane surfaces with the 
freeform surface). Likewise, in spiral milling, the number of linear axes may be 
reduced to two, if the spacing of contact points along the spiral is adjusted (by 
changing the rotational speed of the workpiece) such that cutter normalcy 
conditions are maintained. 
Neglecting the local curvature of the freeform surface, the texture of a fly-cut 
surface can be described as a mosaic of tiny rectangular ‘scallops’ with length l, 
width w and depth 
/ (
)
/ (
)
2
2
8
8
kin
R
l
r
w
ρ
=
=
                                                  (1) 
 
Fig. 2 Length l, width w and kinematic roughness Rkin of a rectangular surface element 
created in fly-cutting 
 

44 
C. Brecher et al.
 
Thus, the rate of surface generation s in a fly-cutting process is determined by 
the area l·w of a ‘scallop’ (depending on the desired kinematic roughness Rkin, cf. 
Figure 2) and the rotational frequency ν of the spindle (i.e. the rate at which 
‘scallops’ are generated):  
kin
s
lw ν
νR
ρr
=
⋅
= 8
                                              (2) 
Typically, for a finish cut (Rkin = 10nm, ν = 4000min-1, ρ ≈ 1mm, r ≈ 65mm), s ≈ 
2.5mm2/min, i.e. fly-cutting of a freeform surface may last many hours imposing 
high demands on the stability of the process and on tool life. As is evident from 
(2), cutting time cannot be reduced significantly by increasing the tool nose radius 
or the fly-cut radius (for which there might be geometrical limitations), but only 
by increasing spindle speed. However, centrifugal forces are scaling with the 
square of the rotational frequency making balancing increasingly difficult. Hence, 
high speed diamond milling will only become available, if new balancing concepts 
and / or new milling tools with multiple cutting edges will be developed. 
Unfortunately, there is no generally accepted format in the optics 
manufacturing community for defining a freeform surface. Sometimes an analytic 
expression is used (e.g. a polynomial or a modified sag equation), sometimes the 
surface is expanded in a Fourier or a Zernike series, sometimes a set of surface 
coordinates (called a ‘data cloud’) is generated by a ray-tracing program or 
through the numerical solution of differential or integral equations. However, the 
density of the grit on which coordinates are calculated must be fine enough so that 
coordinates and normal vectors (which are needed for cutter compensation and / or 
for figure evaluation with stylus instruments) at positions between the grit points 
can be interpolated with sufficient accuracy. In order to reduce the amount of data 
needed for defining the freeform surface, coordinates may be interpolated by 
spline functions with common first and second derivatives at the grit points. 
Within the SFB/TR4 the NURBS (Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines) [Pie97] 
concept has been implemented as a common description of freeform surfaces 
throughout the complete production chain from optical design to manufacturing 
and testing [Bre06a]. When converting a data cloud derived from an analytic 
expression or from numerical calculations into NURBS, care must be taken to 
avoid unphysical maxima and minima (‘bumbs’) between grit points by selecting 
an appropriate degree of B-splines and suitable knot vectors.  
 
Fig. 3 Tool path optimized set-point data for off‐axis turning of a demonstrator part 
containing four freeform mirrors 

Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics 
45
 
Figure 3 shows the NURBS‐based set-point data of four freeform mirrors, 
optimized with respect to the machining process. Integrated fill surfaces allow for 
a smooth and efficient tool path generation including critical infeed areas. A data 
format based on NURBS combines properties which quality its use for highly 
precise description of freeforms during design, for the calculation of complex tool 
trajectories, for the calculation of corrective re-machining steps, and for the 
handling in a machine control system [Osm08]. 
Usually, the mesh size of the control points used for programming the machine 
axes must be finer than the grit on which NURBS have been defined, since the 
numerical control of the machine is interpolating linearly between individual 
control points. For avoiding figure errors by linear interpolation, the maximum 
allowed distance dc between control points can be estimated from the smallest 
radius of curvature rc that occurs on the surface and the positional accuracy δ of 
the machine: 
c
c
d
δr
=
8
                                                      (3) 
With a positional accuracy of a state-of-the-art ultra-precision machine of δ = 5nm 
and a minimum radius of curvature rc > r ≈ 65mm, a maximum distance dc ≈ 
50µm is obtained yielding a density of approx. 400 control points / mm2. Since the 
rate of surface generation is about 2.5mm2/min, about 1000 commands / min have 
to be processed by the numerical control when machining a freeform surface in 
optical quality.  
Before machining can begin, the workpiece and the fly-cutter have to be 
aligned with respect to the coordinate frame of the machine. This can only be 
done, if  
(a) there are datum surfaces on the workpiece which can be referenced to the 
machine coordinate system;    
(b) the fly-cut radius, the tool nose radius, the position of the midpoint of the 
fly-cutter and the orientation of the spindle axis with respect to the machine 
coordinate system have been verified.   
Datum surfaces are also needed when the machined surface is inspected; 
otherwise the part coordinate frame would be undefined. Likewise, datum surfaces 
or marks defining the part coordinate frame are needed on the molded optical 
element (for assembly in an optical system and / or for inspection). The necessity 
of incorporating datum surfaces into the design of freeform optical elements is 
obvious when the production chain is seen as a whole.   
The figure accuracy obtained in freeform machining of molds mainly depends 
on the quality of alignment. The volumetric positional accuracy of modern ultra-
precision machines is better than 0.5µm over 100mm of travel, provided care is 
taken to secure safe performance of the machining system. Surface finish, 
however, depends on many factors: quality of balancing, machining parameters, 
machining strategy, chatter, sharpness of the cutting edge, and response of the 
workpiece material to cutting. Due to the importance of surface roughness for the 
replication process and the quality of the final product, the hierarchy of these 
effects has been studied in detail within the SFB/TR4.  

46 
C. Brecher et al.
 
It has been found that the dominating factor is the quality of balancing of the 
fly-cut spindle [Bri07]. As can be seen in Figure 4, the selection of machining 
parameters has a minor influence on surface roughness compared to balancing. 
Thus, precision balancing of the fly-cut spindle is imperative. 
 
Fig. 4 Surface texture obtained in fly-cutting of electroless nickel with an unbalanced 
spindle at different feed rates 
Once a balancing quality < 0.01gmm has been reached, surface roughness is 
determined by the kinematic roughness and the response of the material to cutting. 
This can be demonstrated when cutting an isolated raster line (cylindrical groove) 
into amorphous electroless nickel where surface roughness is not impaired by a 
grain structure. As can be seen in Figure 5, the kinematic milling cups are 
obscured by a number of marks caused by inhomogeneous chip flow within 
individual sweeps of the cutting edge whose number and amplitude decrease with 
decreasing feed per revolution, and hence with uncut chip thickness. 
Generally, down-milling is recommended, but experiments have shown that in 
the case of electroless nickel, the milling mode does not affect surface roughness, 
since nickel-phosphorous alloys are comparatively hard metals. The next 
important factor influencing surface roughness is chatter which might be caused 
by high cutting forces compared to the machine’s stiffness. Cutting forces also 
increase with increasing wear (rounding) of the cutting edge. Chatter and 
vibrations might also be introduced by sudden accelerations, e.g. at turning points 
or when the cutting direction is reversed. This risk must be considered when 
designing tool path and cutting strategy for a particular part. Figure 6 shows an 
example of a state-of-the-art raster fly-cut electroless nickel plated steel mold 
exhibiting a peak-to-valley contour accuracy of 0.3µm and a surface roughness Sa 
of 4nm. 

Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics 
47
 
f = 102µm 
(rough cut) 
f = 72µm 
(pre-finish)
f = 41µm 
(finish cut)
white-light interferometric images          length of profiles: 403µm 
 
Fig. 5 Surface texture of grooves obtained in fly-cutting of electroless nickel at different 
feed rates (machining parameters cf. Fig. 4) 
 
 
Fig. 6 Electroless nickel plated mold for an f-theta lens 
 

48 
C. Brecher et al.
 
3   Ball-End Milling 
Ball-end milling must be used, if the smallest radius of curvature of a convex part 
along the cutting direction is smaller than about 10mm and / or the shaft of the fly-
cutter would collide with the part’s contour during machining [Bri04a]. Typically, 
half arc diamond tools are used for ball-end milling, and the spindle axis is 
inclined by a certain angle with respect to the surface tangent to avoid cutting with 
the extreme edge of the half-arc tool (Figure 7) [Bri03]. The disadvantage of ball-
end milling is the low rate of surface generation obtained from (2) by substituting 
r by ρ yielding 
kin
s
νρR
= 8
                                                             (4) 
which leads to machining times which are about 10 times longer than in fly-
cutting. Moreover, cutting forces may increase, if the local radius of curvature 
approaches ρ, whereby increasing the risk of chatter [Osm06b].      
 
Fig. 7 Ball-end milling. Spindle axis inclined with respect to the normal of the surface. 
4   Non-circular Turning 
An elegant way of reducing machining time for generating freeform surfaces is 
substituting fly-cutting or ball-end milling by non-circular turning [Osm07]. This 
can be accomplished in two ways:   
(a) The tool movement is performed with two of the major axes of the machine. 
This is called ‘slow slide servo’ (SSS) turning.   
(b) The tool movement is performed with two of the major axes of the machine 
and an additional fast moving axis, either a voice coil with a long (millimetre 
range) stroke or a piezo actuator with a short (micrometer range) stroke. This is 
called ‘fast tool servo’ (FTS) turning.  
In both cases the tool movement must be synchronized with the angular position 
of the rotating workpiece. The rotational frequency ν is limited by the following 
error of the slides which must not exceed a maximum preset value when 
oscillating back and forth during machining. Typically, ν is of the order of 1Hz, 
which yields a rate of surface generation roughly 10 times lower than in circular 

Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics 
49
 
turning, but 10 times higher than in raster fly-cutting. Hence, about 1000 
commands / s have to be processed by the numerical control in SSS or FTS 
turning of freeform surfaces [Bre04b]. Since in non-circular turning the slope of 
the surface with respect to the orientation of the diamond tool is not constant, care 
must be taken that sufficient clearance exists between the surface and the tool 
during machining.  
Unfortunately, in commercially available FTS or SSS turning systems the 
direction of the stroke is predefined and usually set to be parallel to the axis of 
rotation (z-stroke) which imposes a limitation to the surface shapes machinable by 
non-circular turning. As shown in Figure 8, it is impossible to turn hemispherical 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Slow slide servo turning modes. (a) Stroke along z-direction. Central area 
machinable only. (b) Stroke along x-direction. Apex area machinable only. (c) Stroke 
normal to surface. Full part machinable. 
 
 
Fig. 9 Slow slide servo turning of an elliptic half-shell (a = 35mm,  b = 25mm) 
 

50 
C. Brecher et al.
 
cavities with a stoke along the z-direction, since the acceleration of the tool would 
become infinite when the apex of the contour is approached. On the other hand, if 
the stroke is perpendicular to the axis of rotation (x-stroke), the apex could be 
machined but the acceleration would become infinite at the center of the part. 
Within the SFB/TR4 an SSS turning technique with a variable stroke direction has 
been developed which is always normal to the surface (n-stroke). This SSS 
technique allows non-circular turning of 180° hemispherical cavities and cups like 
elliptic half-shells (Figure 9).     
5   Control System Design for Highly Dynamic Axes 
Standardized interfaces become more and more important for effective data 
processing through the different process steps for easy combination and 
replacement of algorithms and for providing the data integrity needed for complex 
machining processes [Bri04b]. Methods of data reduction and encapsulation have 
been used successfully for establishing interfaces which connect the initial optical 
design, CAM pre-processes, tool path generation, freeform machining, surface 
metrology, re-design as well as correction of machining processes. Maintaining a 
continuous high level of information, various functionalities, for instance points of 
intersection between rays and the surface, local derivatives or transformations, can 
be used to allocate the data needed in every step of the process chain. 
Furthermore, metadata such as type and unit of data, allocated coordinate system 
or transformation, date and method of compilation, sensor type and principle of 
measurement etc. become an important element to guaranty deterministic data 
processing. By using encapsulated data formats containing mathematical 
descriptions of the designed freeform, set-points for an optimized tool path, point 
clouds of surface measurements and the respective metadata, the high accuracy 
essential for manufacturing of ultra‐precise optical components can be achieved.  
Machine tools designed for ultra‐precision machining such as diamond turning 
are often driven by a very robust servo control to achieve a good disturbance 
rejection. In contrary, the manufacturing of freeform surfaces requires much more 
dynamic movements, since no symmetrical elements exist. Hence, control systems 
have been developed providing fast tool axes with highly dynamic control loops 
and, at the same time, avoiding filters performing numerical differentiations which 
are prone to noises. Making use of a NURBS‐based surface description, analytical 
methods of directional derivatives can be designed, allowing for low‐noise, 
model-based feed-forward controls. Thereby, the maximal achievable bandwidth 
of highly dynamic axes can be enhanced significantly. Additionally, the dynamics 
of fast tool axes can be further increased by using an FPGA‐based control system 
[Bre10]. The control loops strongly benefit from the achievable control clocks of 
up to 250 kHz as well as from a very low latency of the signals processed within 
an FPGA. Due to the possibility of parallelizing algorithms on an FPGA, a very 
effective design of critical control paths can be realized. Hence, a combination of 
both the main advantage of analog controls  - latency can be reduced by a factor of 
ten -  and the advantages of a digital control system can be implemented. Within 
the SFB/TR4 a hybrid control system, consisting of an FPGA‐based low level part 

Freeform Machining of Molds for Replication of Plastic Optics 
51
 
for the control loops and a microprocessor‐based high level part for set-point 
generation, was developed, enhancing the bandwidth of a piezo driven fast tool 
axis by a factor of three. 
6   Conclusion 
During the last ten years, three different methods for the generation of freeform 
surfaces by diamond machining have been developed and investigated in detail 
within the SFB/TR4, i.e. fly-cutting, ball-end milling and non-circular turning. 
Fly-cutting is most frequently used but is limited to convex surfaces and concave 
surfaces with radii of curvature larger than the fly-cut radius. If it is smaller, fly-
cutting must be substituted by ball-end milling. Machining time can be reduced by 
non-circular turning, provided local slopes are moderate so that the surface will 
not interfere with the geometry of the diamond tool. The n-stroke slow slide servo 
turning technique, developed within the SFB/TR4, expands the range of surface 
shapes machinable by non-circular turning. Data handling requires a unique data 
format across the complete production chain from the design stage through 
machining to quality control. This has been realized in the SFB/TR4 by using a 
NURBS description for the freeform surfaces and standardized interfaces. Despite 
the high standard reached in freeform machining of molds for replication of plastic 
lenses, a reduction of machining time is an important issue for future research.          
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Bäu10] 
Bäumer, S. (ed.): Handbook of Plastic Optics. Wiley-VCH Publ. Co. (2010) 
[Bre06a] 
Brecher, C., Lange, S., Merz, M., Niehaus, F., Wenzel, C., Winter-schladen, 
M., Weck, M.: NURBS Based Ultra-Precision Free-Form Machining. In: 
Annals of the CIRP 55/1/2006, Kobe, Japan, August 20-26, pp. 547–550 (2006) 
[Bre06b] 
Brecher, C., Lange, S., Merz, M., Niehaus, F., Winterschladen, M.: Off-Axis 
Machining of NURBS Freeform Surfaces by Fast Tool Servo Systems. In: 
Proceedings of the 4M 2006 Second International Conference on Multi-
Material Micro Manufacture, Grenoble, France, September 20-22, pp. 59–62 
(2006) 
[Bre10] 
Brecher, C., Lindemann, D., Merz, M., Wenzel, C.: FPGA-Based Control 
System for Highly Dynamic Axes in Ultra-Precision Machining. In: 
Proceedings of the ASPE Spring Topical Meeting, Boston (2010) 
[Bri02] 
Brinksmeier, E., Grimme, D., Preuß, W.: Generation of Freeform Surfaces by 
Diamond Machining. In: Proc. of the 17th Annual ASPE Meeting, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA, October 20-25, pp. 542–545 (2002) 

52 
C. Brecher et al.
 
[Bri03] 
Brinksmeier, E., Gläbe, R., Autschbach, L.: Novel Ultraprecise Tool Alignment 
Setup for Contour Boring ad Ball-end Milling. In: Proc. of the ASPE s 18th 
Annual Meeting, Portland, Oregon, October 26-31, pp. 271–274 (2003) 
[Bri04a] 
Brinksmeier, E., Autschbach, L.: Ball-end milling of Free-form Surfaces for 
Optical Mold Inserts. In: ASPE s 19th Annual Meeting, Orlando, FL, USA, 
October 24-29, pp. 88–91 (2004) 
[Bri04b] 
Brinksmeier, E., Autschbach, L., Weck, M., Winterschladen, M.: Closed Loop 
Manufacturing of Optical Molds using an Integrated Simulation Interface. In: 
Proc. of Euspen International Conference, Glasgow, Scotland, May 30-June 03, 
pp. 215–217 (2004) 
[Bri07] 
Brinksmeier, E., Gläbe, R., Krause, A.: Precision balancing in ultraprecision 
diamond machining. In: Laser Metrology and Machine Performance VIII, 8th 
International Conference and Exhibition on Laser Metrology, Machine Tool, 
CMM & Robotic Performance, Lamdamap, pp. 262–269 (2007) 
[Osm06a] Osmer, J., Autschbach, L., Brinksmeier, E.: Study of different nickel platings in 
ultra precision diamond turning. In: Proc. of the 6th Euspen International 
Conference, Baden b. Wien, May 28-June 01, vol. II, pp. 44–47 (2006) 
[Osm06b] Osmer, J., Brinksmeier, E., Lünemann, B.: Simulation of surface micro-
topography in ultra precision ball-end milling. In: Proc. of the 6th Euspen 
International Conference, Baden b. Wien, vol. II, May 28-June 01, pp. 40–43 
(2006) 
[Osm07] 
Osmer, J., Weingärtner, S., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E., Fröhlich, M., Müller, 
W., Bliedtner, J., Bürger, W.: Diamond Machining of Free-Form Surfaces: A 
Comparison of Raster Milling and Slow Tool Servo Machining. In: Proceedings 
of the 7th International Conference and 9th Annual General Meeting of the 
European Society for Precision Engineering and Nanotechnology, Congress 
Centre Bremen, Germany, May 20-24, pp. 189–192 (2007) 
[Osm08] 
Osmer, J., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Ultra Precision Machining of Free-
Form Surfaces and Tool Path Generation. In: Proceedings of the Euspen 
International Conference, Zürich, vol. 2, pp. 53–56 (May 2008) 
[Pie97] 
Piegl, L., Tiller, W.: The NURBS Book. Springer Publ. Co. (1997) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 53–66. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
Lars Schönemann and Werner Preuß * 
Abstract. This chapter will discuss the state of the art and advances in the 
development of dedicated processes for mold structuring by diamond machining 
with defined cutting edge geometry. The advantages and disadvantages of the 
individual processes, e.g. the achievable geometry spectrum or the required 
machining time, will be discussed. Particular attention will be given to the 
Diamond Micro Chiseling (DMC) process which was developed within the 
SFB/TR4 for structuring molds with discontinuous prismatic microstructures. 
Utilizing a novel tool kinematics and custom built V-shaped diamond tools, this 
process enables the machining and replication of such structures in optical quality. 
1   Introduction 
The demand for the replication of complex optical elements has increased in the 
past decades. Besides molds with continuous surfaces, as they have been 
described in the previous chapter, mold structuring technologies have gained great 
importance for the generation of functional surfaces. They are delimited from 
continuous surfaces by featuring “a deterministic pattern of usually high aspect 
ratio geometric features designed to give a specific function” [Eva99]. 
The range of application for optical microstructures is manifold. Perhaps the 
most important application of structured molds today is the production of retro-
reflective tapes used on sign-boards, safety garments, vehicles and many consumer 
articles [Bri05]. Other examples include optical patterns for the light distribution and 
homogenization in flat panel displays [Cor08], energy efficient headlights in the 
automotive industry [Neu07] or large-scale Fresnel lenses for astronomic 
applications [Ohm02]. Figure 1 shows some exemplary microstructures. 
Although such structures can be obtained by various processes, diamond 
machining utilizing tools with defined geometry serves as a key technology 
[Rie08]. It offers a high degree of flexibility while allowing the generation of 
nanometer scale surface roughness and sub-micrometer form accuracy [Dav03]. 
Therefore, the only machining step within a typical process chain for the 
replication of optical elements is mold structuring by diamond machining. 
Additional finishing steps, such as polishing, are not required in this case. 
                                                           
Lars Schönemann · Werner Preuß 
Laboratory for Precision Machining LFM, University of Bremen, Badgasteiner Straße 2, 
28359 Bremen, Germany 

54 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
 
Fig. 1 Exemplary microstructures generated by diamond machining 
Due to its limited spectrum of machinable materials, diamond machining is 
mainly used for the replication of plastic optics. Optical structures with feature 
size down to the nanometer level can be replicated using injection or injection-
compression molding. Here, it is important that the machined features are 
replicated without deformations resulting from clogging of the mold, demolding 
forces or solidification due to high temperature gradients within the mold [Mic08]. 
2   Machining Processes for Mold Structuring 
The processes utilized for generating optical microstructures can be categorized 
according to their cutting motion. These include:  
 
processes with rotating workpiece, i.e. turning 
 
processes with rotating tool, i.e. milling 
 
processes with neither rotating tool nor workpiece, i.e. planing 
Additionally, optical structures can be classified from the geometrical point of 
view according to Figure 2.  
 
Fig. 2 Geometric spectrum of machinable geometries 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
55
 
Most structure types can be machined in concave form by applying processes 
with rotary cutting motion, while their convex counterparts are obtained by 
replication processes. However, certain restrictions have to be considered with 
respect to the different processes: Milling processes are basically limited to linear 
features (grooves), diamond turning is used for generating Fresnel lenses, and 
micro lens arrays can be machined using contour boring or ball-end milling 
processes [Dor08]. In the recent past, the introduction of additional high-dynamic 
machining axes, like fast tool servos, has extended the geometric spectrum of 
turning processes to certain kinds of non-symmetric structures. Nevertheless, 
prismatic structures with sharp-edged facets (types A4 and B4), cannot be 
machined by these “conventional” processes. In this case, processes with 
dedicated kinematics are required. 
In the following, the relevant machining processes for each category will be 
presented in detail. 
2.1   Diamond Turning Processes 
In turning processes, the main cutting motion is generated by the rotation of the 
workpiece, while the (fixed) tool is moved along the surface. The application and 
the possibilities of diamond turning for the generation of microstructures is shown 
in Figure 3. 
 
Fig. 3 Machining of microstructures in a turning process 
In a basic turning setup, microstructures can either be generated by applying a 
feed-rate which is significantly larger than the characteristic dimension of the tool 
or by modulating the depth of cut according to the radial position on the 
workpiece. This however, always results in rotational symmetric (or helical) types 
of structures (type D), such as Fresnel lenses or facetted structures. If finite curved 
features (type E) are to be machined in a turning process, the depth of cut has to be 
dynamically modulated using a Fast Tool Servo (FTS) or Slow Slide Servo (S³). 
While the techniques are mainly intended for the generation of freeform surfaces, 
they can also be utilized to generate structured surfaces (cf. Figure 3c). Examples 
include the machining of lens arrays or diffractive gratings. 

56 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
The achievable aspect ratios, however, are limited, as the slope of the 
modulated depth of cut has to be smaller than the clearance angle of the tool. 
Furthermore, the structural density of the microstructures is limited by the 
bandwidth of the servo system, which implies a decrease in machining speed. 
Another disadvantage of FTS/S³ turning is the asymmetry of the machined 
features, which can be explained by the relation between process parameters, 
bandwidth of the servo and resulting structure size at a specific radial position.  
The number of structures (s) per revolution depends on spindle speed (n) and 
modulation frequency (f): 
 
n
f
s =
                                                                    (1) 
The length of a structure (li) can then be calculated by dividing the circumference 
at the current radial position (ri) by the number of structures (s): 
 
s
r
l
i
i
⋅
⋅
=
π
2
                                                             (2) 
For example, when machining a workpiece at a spindle speed of n = 100 min-1 
utilizing an FTS with a maximal bandwidth of f = 5 kHz, a possible amount of 
s = 3000 structures can be cut in circumferential direction. This means, the 
individual structures have a minimal size of li = 31.41 µm at the radius of 
ri = 15 mm. This size is constantly reduced upon moving the tool closer to the 
center of rotation (li = 20.94 µm at ri = 10 mm, li = 10.47 µm at ri = 5 mm etc.) 
until a continuous cut is made and no discrete features are machined anymore. 
When mounting the workpiece in an off-axis position, the curvature of the 
machined features can be reduced. This however, interferes with the use of FTS/S³ 
systems, as the machining speed (and thereby the required bandwith) is largely 
increased. In part, this effect can be avoided by applying a multi-pass cutting 
strategy: In the first cut, a specific amount of structures is omitted, thus reducing 
the required bandwidth. These structures are then cut in a second (or further) step 
of the process. 
2.2   Diamond Milling Processes 
In this category, the diamond tool is rotating on the main spindle and moved in 
relation to a fixed workpiece. According to the configuration of the machine setup, 
the processes can be sub-divided into peripheral- and face milling (see Figure 4). 
In peripheral milling, the tool is rotating around an axis parallel to the 
machined surface. Thus, the geometry of the cutting tool is directly copied into the 
workpiece. According to the chosen tool geometry (radius, V-shaped, trapezoidal 
etc.), different kinds of groove-like structures (type C, cf. Figure 2) are generated 
this way. By intersecting multiple of these grooves, prismatic features (types A3 
and B3), such as triple mirrors, can be realized. Besides the tool geometry, the 
swing radius of the tool has a large influence on the speed and geometric spectrum 
 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
57
 
 
Fig. 4 Classification of milling processes and possible geometric spectrum (cf. Figure 2) 
of the peripheral milling operations. A large swing radius decreases the machining 
time, as larger feed rates can be applied for achieving an optical surface 
roughness. However, the minimal dimension of finite concave microstructures is 
limited, due to the necessary space for tool approach and retraction. 
In face milling operations, the diamond tool is rotating around an axis 
perpendicular to the machined surface. By using half-arc or triangular tools, 
rotational symmetric cavities (type A2) and groove-like structures (types B2, C2, 
D2, C4 and D4) can be machined. Due to the primary cutting motion, the geometry 
of the grooves is limited to rotational symmetric profiles. Prismatic concave 
structures (A4 and B4) cannot be machined in this way. Compared to peripheral 
milling, the spectrum of machinable geometry is increased considerably on the one 
hand, but on the other hand the required machining time is extended as well.  
2.3   Processes with Neither Rotating Tool Nor Workpiece 
(Intermittent Cuts) 
Standard milling or turning processes, as they have been described above, are 
somewhat limited in generating microstructures considering the required process 
times or the achievable geometric spectrum. To some extent, these limitations can 
be overcome by processes with non-rotating cutting motion. For example, planing 
processes can be used to machine large microstructured parts in adequate time 
[Day02]. On the other hand, the geometric spectrum can be extended using the 
microgrooving process developed by Takeuchi et al. [Tak09], which allows the 
generation of V-shaped grooves with flat-ends on one side. 
However, the machining of prismatic features with sharp edges on all sides (A4 
and B4 in Figure 2), such as pyramidal micro cavities, linear finite V-grooves or 
corner cube retroreflectors, is not possible with these processes. Thus, the 
Diamond Micro Chiseling (DMC) process has been developed to overcome these 
restrictions [Bri08]. It requires the use of an ultraprecision machine tool with at 
least five numerically controlled axes (see Figure 5): three linear axes (X, Y and 
Z) are used for positioning the tool relative to the surface of the workpiece and 
two rotational axes are needed for setting the opening angle of the structure and 
for rotating the workpiece to the required angular position. 

58 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
The applied kinematics differs fundamentally from other known manufacturing 
processes: a V-shaped tool is moved on a triangular or trapezoidal path through 
the workpiece, forming a single facet with sharp edges. Multiple of these cuts, 
each with a different angular position of the workpiece, are connected by their 
start and endpoints in a way, that they form a pyramidal cavity. The number of 
facets is hereby only limited by the tools’ opening angle. The final machining step 
has to have its endpoint in the starting point of the initial cut, or otherwise the chip 
cannot be removed.  
The cutting steps for machining a three-sided cavity are illustrated in Figure 5. 
 
Fig. 5 DMC machining setup and exemplary steps for generating a three-sided cavity 
Such a cavity is typically cut in multiple layers with the aim of limiting the 
undeformed chip thickness. The cavity is thereby growing in its lateral 
dimensions, until the nominal geometry is reached. As there is no “feed” in the 
conventional sense, no kinematic roughness occurs. Thus, the surface quality of 
the facets is only depending on the workpiece material and the state of the tool 
during the last cut. Typically a roughness of Ra = 4-8 nm is reached. 
Using the DMC process, it is possible to machine prismatic micro cavities with 
a characteristic dimension of 50 to 500 µm. The individual structures can be 
aligned systematically, in order to form new types of structures. In this way, it is 
possible to machine corner cube retroreflectors by overlapping several three-sided 
cavities in a hexagonal pattern. 
3   Suitable Materials for Microstructured Molds 
Just like for continuous surfaces, nickel phosphorous plated steel is the material of 
choice for microstructuring of molds in most cases. Its characteristics have been 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
59
 
described in the previous chapter. However, softer materials are preferred in some 
cases to obtain an extended tool life. While good results have been achieved using 
aluminum or oxygen-free high-conductivity copper as substrate materials, alloys 
such as nickel silver have been frequently used as mold material for microstruct-
uring applications. It has been shown, that structures cut into specific nickel silver 
allows can almost reach [Sch10] or sometime exceed [Bri07] the surface quality of 
a comparable structures cut into a nickel phosphorous plating. Especially burr-
formation is negligible when using nickel silver as workpiece material [Bri10a]. 
Figure 6 exemplary shows the measured surface roughness of different V-grooves 
machined by the DMC process in OFHC copper (Cu), nickel silver alloy (N37) 
and nickel phosphorous (NiP). 
 
Fig. 6 Surface roughness Ra against undeformed chip thickness (left) and cutting speed 
(right) for different workpiece materials machined by DMC [Bri10b] 
To ensure sharp-edged machining paths, the cutting speed in DMC is chosen 
very low in comparison to conventional cutting processes. As in the DMC process 
the last layer of each facet is machined in a single cut, no kinematic roughness 
occurs. Thus, the surface quality is depending on the substrate material and the 
geometry of the cutting edge only. The best surface quality is achieved using NiP 
plating. However, the N37 alloy yields comparable results with selected 
parameters. N37 is a nickel silver alloy consisting of 62 % copper, 18 % nickel, 
19 % zinc and 1 % lead and is mainly used for manufacturing hinges and joints in 
the eyewear industry. It has an elastic modulus of E = 130 kN/mm² and a melting 
temperature of TS = 1050–1100°C (manufacturer’s data). Thus, its mechanical 
properties are similar to those of OFHC-Cu (E = 125 kN/mm², TS = 1083°C), 
which does not achieve an optical surface finish (i.e. Ra > 10 nm), regardless of 
the chosen parameters. Compared to NiP, the induced tool wear is greatly reduced. 
The machining of microstructures on hard coatings is possible as well. For 
example Sol-Gel films with a low hardness (<0.5 GPa) can be structured using 
tools with a small negative rake angle (γ = -10°). With an ideal set of parameters, 
a surface roughness of Ra = 5-15 nm can be achieved with almost no burr 
formation. In any case, the low thickness of the coating is the limiting factor for 
most microstructuring applications [Meh10]. Detailed information on hard 
coatings can be found in chapter 11. 

60 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
The characteristics of the mold materials used for generating optical 
microstructures are summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1 Properties of mold materials used for microstructuring 
material 
OFHC-
copper 
nickel 
phosphorous 
nickel silver 
Sol-Gel 
composition 
99.9% Cu 
82-97% Ni, 
3-18% P 
62% Cu, 18% Ni, 
19% Zn, 1% Pb 
Si(Naw) 
OxCyHz 
Young’s-modulus 
[kN/mm²] 
110-128 
120-190 
130 
3.8-6.6 
melting temp. Ts 
[°C] 
1083 
860-890 
1050-1100 
>600 
hardness 
50-90 HB 
500-700 HV 
0.1 
170 HB 
HIT = 
1 GPa 
structurability 
+ 
+++ 
++ 
++ 
applicability as 
mold-material 
+ 
+++ 
++ 
+ 
tool wear 
+++ 
+ 
++ 
+ 
4   Diamond Tools for Microstructuring 
In diamond machining, the tool geometry is directly copied into the surface. 
Therefore, mainly V-shaped, knife-type or facetted tools are used for 
microstructuring molds with grooves, blaze gratings or trapezoid structures. Half-
arc radius tools are mainly used in contour boring or ball-end milling processes for 
generating microlens-arrays.  
Although the specific requirements are varying, depending on the process 
kinematics and applied diamond tools, a precise tool alignment is crucial to all 
microstructuring processes. The errors in tool alignment can be divided into 
positional and angular errors and can have their source either in the tool or 
workpiece itself or are the result of a displacement of the tool coordinate system. 
In contour boring processes used for the machining of microlens arrays, for 
example, a misalignment of the tool leads to the formation of artifacts at the 
bottom of the cavity, or to an ogive-like deviation of the lens’ form (see Figure 7). 
Several attempts have been made in order to compensate the tool alignment in 
contour boring or ball-end milling, including mechanical [Bri03] and electrically 
driven [Sch09] tool holders. 
Similar demands apply to fly-cutting with V-shaped diamond tools. For 
example, an angular misalignment of the tool directly leads to a form error of the 
machined V-grooves. Lateral misalignment of the tool, however, is only relevant 
if multiple intersecting grooves are generated to form pyramidal structures. If the 
individual grooves do not meet at the desired point, the optical functionality of the 
structure is affected. 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
61
 
 
Fig. 7 Types of tool misalignment in contour boring [Bri03] (left) and tool holder for in-situ 
tool alignment [Sch09] (right) 
4.1   Dedicated Tool Design for Diamond Micro Chiseling 
Some processes, such as Diamond Micro Chiseling, require tools with a geometry 
dedicated to the requirements of the process (Figure 8). The notable difference to 
standard diamond tools is that the tool is rotated 90° around the shaft axis [Sch10], 
thus resulting in a switched alignment of rake and flank face. 
 
Fig. 8 Diamond tools used for DMC of molds [Sch10] 
The alignment of the diamond tools for Diamond Micro Chiseling is even more 
complex than the tool-setting for milling or turning processes. The DMC process 
requires a precise alignment of the diamond tool in all five machining axes in 
order to work as desired. Therefore, an iterative setup procedure utilizing a 
calibrated high-resolution video microscope is applied to measure dedicated test 
structures cut into the surface of the workpiece.  
As an example, the vertical and lateral position of the tool tip according to the 
workpiece coordinate system is determined by cutting a square-type test structure 
with a defined edge length into the surface. This is done in a two-step process, 
beginning with the lower left part of the square. After cutting this part, the 
workpiece is rotated 180° and the tool tip is repositioned to the calculated position 
of the previously cut structure. In the next step, the remaining part of the square is 
cut at the calculated position. If a deviation between the calculated and the true 

62 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
position of the tool occurs, this can be observed and measured from the 
deformation of the test structure. 
Using this tool alignment procedure in combination with other test structures 
for determining the angular position, the tool tip can be positioned with an 
accuracy of below 1 µm in all linear axes and below 0.1° in the rotational axes.  
5   Machining Time 
Machining of small-area microstructures is challenging, yet feasible. However, 
when trying to increase the microstructured area or to decrease the characteristic 
dimension of the individual features, machining time becomes a critical issue 
[Flu09]. Depending on the scaled parameter, the effect can be linear (increase of 
structured area) or potential (decrease of characteristic dimension). Figure 9 shows 
the magnitude of the scaling effect. All values are estimated for comparable 
characteristic dimensions, respectively the same amount of structured area. 
In the following, the scaling effect for increasing the structured area at a fixed 
characteristic dimension is examined for the different processes. 
In this context, turning processes have the most favorable scaling behavior: the 
time is merely depending on the workpiece’ radius and the applied feed and 
therefore shows a rather small inclination. When extending a turning process by a 
slow or fast tool servo system, the maximum applicable cutting speed is restricted 
by the bandwidth of the system, thereby slightly increasing the inclination. 
In milling operations, the machining time is dependent on the length in feed 
direction and the pitch of the individual features. This has to be multiplied by the 
number of necessary machining directions (e.g. three, for machining triple-mirror 
features as shown in Figure 1). The result is an increased machining time for a 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Scaling effect of machining time for constant structured area (A) (left) and constant 
characteristic dimension (right) [Flu09] 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
63
 
similar amount of structured area, compared to a turning process. However, the 
overall relation between structured area and machining time remains linear. 
The calculation of machining time for Diamond Micro Chilseling is even more 
complex than for the other mentioned processes. As each facet is cut separately 
and in multiple layers, the machining time depends on a number of factors. 
Besides the high number of cuts for machining a single cavity, the machine axes 
have to be moved very slowly in order to achieve the desired sharp-edged corners 
without inducing vibrations or overshoot of the machining axes. 
In typical applications, machining time ranges from a few minutes (turning), 
over several hours (milling) up to a couple of days (DMC). In this context, 
machine stability and environmental influences gain importance. In order to 
reduce these influences to a minimum, microstructuring processes have to be 
conducted in a controlled environment. This includes temperature-control, 
humidity-control and decoupled foundations for the machine tools. Nevertheless, 
innovative procedures for process monitoring and in-situ quality control have to 
be utilized to detect a critical state of the process at an early stage. As this occurs, 
dedicated compensation strategies (e.g. correction of tool alignment or change of 
worn out tools) have to be applied. 
6   Tool Wear in Microstructuring 
Besides the challenges of alignment, temperature and structural stability, tool wear 
is a critical issue, due to the extremely long machining times. When machining 
optical V-grooves by fly-cutting, for example, flank wear might degrade the 
roughness of the grooves’ flanks, while wear of the diamond tool tip leads to a 
rounding of the edges of the prisms. The result is a decrease of brightness of light 
reflected by the machined structure. 
A first attempt to determine tool wear as well as its effect on the machined 
surface has been made by conducting up- and down-milling experiments of 
V-shaped grooves on nickel phosphorous plating. For evaluating the surface 
quality, the flanks of the machined grooves were inspected with a white-light 
interferometer (cf. Figure 10). 
 
 
Fig. 10 90°-V-grooves cut into nickel phosphorous (left) and white-light interferometric 
image of one groove flank (right) 

64 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
There is no significant difference in roughness whether the grooves are cut in 
the up-milling or down-milling mode. Thus, alternating up- und down-milling 
may be applied which reduces machining time by a factor of two. 
The wear of the diamond tool has been investigated by fly-cutting 70°-V-
grooves into a large NiP plate and inspecting the tool after regular intervals (cf. 
Figure 11). After a total groove length of 400 m (corresponding to a cutting time 
of 60 hours), a rounding of the tip of the diamond tool of about 2 µm has been 
observed. Although this observation is based on one single experiment, it may be 
taken as a guideline to how long a typical V-shaped diamond tool may be 
engaged, before tool wear starts to degrade geometry and roughness of the 
grooves. 
 
Fig. 11 Flank faces of diamond tools after cutting distances of 160 m (left), 400 m (center) 
and 640 m (right) 
Machining of structures which exceed the tool life criterion require a tool- 
change within the process. It has to be ensured, that the second tool can be aligned 
with a high level of precision with respect to the structure machined by the first 
tool. 
7   Conclusion 
Diamond machining offers a broad spectrum of processes for fabricating optical 
structures with varying complexity and characteristic dimensions in the sub-
millimeter and down to the nanometer level. The inherent advantage of these 
processes is the high flexibility while achieving a low surface roughness as well as 
excellent form accuracy. On the other hand, the choice of workpiece material is 
limited compared to the machining of freeform surfaces. 
Depending on the type of structure, each process has its specific advantages and 
disadvantages: diamond turning always results in curved structures, but offers a 
very high machining speed, even on large areas. FTS and S³ are extending the 
capabilities of turning processes significantly. Milling processes are capable of 
machining linear features, but require an increased amount of time for comparable 
structured areas. Other processes, like Diamond Micro Chiseling pose high 
demands on the required equipment and require extremely long machining times, 
but allow generating novel types of geometries and therefore open up completely 
new areas in optical microstructuring. 

Mold Structuring by Diamond Machining 
65
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Bri03] Brinksmeier, E., Gläbe, R., Autschbach, L.: Novel ultraprecise tool alignment 
setup for contour boring and ball-end milling. In: Proc. of the ASPE Annual 
Meeting, Portland, Oregon, October 26-31, pp. 271–274 (2003) 
[Bri05] Brinksmeier, E., Autschbach, L., Gubela, H.-E., Ahbe, T.: Herstellung 
dreidimensionaler mikrooptischer Funktionsflächen. HTM 60(1), 33–39 (2005) 
(in German) 
[Bri07] Brinksmeier, E., Gläbe, R., Lünemann, B.: Diamond machining of diffractive 
optical patterns by using a nanometer-stroke Fast Tool Servo. In: Proc. of the VII 
LAMDAMAP Conference, Cardiff, Wales, June 25-28, pp. 232–241 (2007) 
[Bri08] Brinksmeier, E., Gläbe, R., Flucke, C.: Manufacturing of molds for replication of 
micro cube corner retroreflectors. Production Engineering - Research & 
Development 2(1), 33–38 (2008) 
[Bri10a] Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Gläbe, R., et al.: Submicron functional surfaces 
generated by diamond machining. CIRP Annals – Man. Tech. 59, 535–538 (2010) 
[Bri10b] Brinksmeier, E., Schönemann, L., Gläbe, R.: Review on Diamond-Machining 
Processes for the Generation of Functional Surface Structures. In: Proc. of 4th 
HPC Conference, Gifu, Japan, October 24-25, pp. 79–84 (2010) 
[Cor08] Cornelissen, H.: Polarized-light backlights for liquid-crystal displays. SPIE 
Newsroom (November 12, 2008),  
 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/2.1200811.1363  
(viewed online October 01, 2010) 
[Dav03] Davies, M.A., Evans, C.J., Patterson, R.S., Vohra, V., Bergner, B.C.: Application 
of precision diamond machining to the manufacture of micro-photonics 
components. In: Proc. of SPIE, vol. 5183, pp. 94–108 (2003) 
[Day02] Day, M., Weck, M.: Ultraprecsion Milling and Planing Machine for large 
Workpieces. In: Proc. of the 3rd Euspen Conference, Eindhoven, Netherlands, 
May 26-30, vol. 1, pp. 345–348 (2002) 
[Dor08] Dornfeld, D., Lee, D.E.: Precision Manufacturing, Springer Science+ Business 
Media (2008) ISBN 978 0 387 32467 8 
[Eva99] Evans, C.J., Bryan, J.B.: “Structured”, “Textured” or “Engineered” Surfaces. 
CIRP Annals – Man. Tech. 48, 541–556 (1999) 
[Flu09] Flucke, C., Schönemann, L., Brinksmeier, E., et al.: Scaling in Machining of 
Optics from Reflective to Diffractive Function. In: Proc. of the 9th Euspen 
Conference, San Sebastian, Spain, vol. 1, pp. 17–20 (June 2009) 
[Meh10] Mehner, A., Dong, J., Hoja, T., Prenzel, T., Mutlugunes, Y., Brinksmeier, E., 
Lucca, D.A., Klaiber, F.: Diamond Machinable Sol-Gel Silica Based Hybrid 
Coatings for High Precision Optical Molds. Key Engineering Materials 438, 65–
72 (2010) 
[Mic08] Michaeli, W., Klaiber, F., Scholz, S.: Investigations in Variothermal Injection 
Moulding of Microstructures and Microstructured Surfaces. In: Proceedings of the 
4M2008 Conference (2008), http://www.4m-net.org/files/papers/ 
4M2008/06-12/06-12.PDF (viewed online November 19, 2010) 

66 
L. Schönemann and W. Preuß
 
[Neu07] Neumann, C.: Innovative Optical Systems for Automotive Signal Lamps. 
Presentation at the iMOC 2007, Bremen, Germany (May 24, 2007) 
[Ohm02] Ohmori, H., Uehara, Y., Ueno, Y., Suzuki, T., Morita, S.: Ultraprecision 
Fabrication Process of Large Double-sided Spherical Fresnel Lens. In: Proc. of the 
3rd Euspen Conference, Eindhoven, Netherlands, May 26-30, vol. 1, pp. 365–368 
(2002) 
[Rie08] Riemer, O.: A Review on Machining of Micro-Structured Optical Molds. Key 
Engineering Materials 364-366, 13–18 (2008) 
[Sch09] Schönemann, L., Brinksmeier, E., Osmer, J.: A piezo-driven adaptive tool holder 
for ultraprecision diamond tool alignment. In: Proc. of the 9th Euspen Conference, 
San Sebastian, Spain, vol. 1, pp. 398–401 (June 2009) 
[Sch10] Schönemann, L., Brinksmeier, E., Flucke, C., Gläbe, R.: Tool Development for 
Diamond Micro Chiseling. In: Proc. of the 10th Euspen Conference, Delft, 
Netherlands, May 31-June 04, vol. 2, pp. 86–90 (2010) 
[Tak09] Takeuchi, Y., Yoneyama, Y., Ishida, T., Kawai, T.: 6-Axis control ultraprecision 
microgrooving on sculptured surfaces with non-rotational cutting tool. CIRP 
Annals - Manufacturing Technology 58-1, 53–56 (2009) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 67–83. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel 
Nitriding Processes 
Ekkard Brinksmeier, Franz Hoffmann, Ralf Gläbe, Juan Dong, and Jens Osmer* 
Abstract. The ultraprecision machining of steel alloys with optical surface finish 
could not be achieved in the past as catastrophic wear of the mono-crystal 
diamond tool occurs inevitably. A recently developed solution of this problem is  
a thermo-chemical treatment of the steel e.g. by custom nitriding or 
nitrocarburizing. This process leads to a compound layer at the steel surface, in 
which the iron atoms are bonded to nitride or carbon nitride, a layer which is 
diamond machinable without significant tool wear. This chapter covers all facts 
about the thermo-chemical treatment and the subsequent diamond cutting process: 
different nitriding and nitrocarburizing processes to produce a dense thick 
compound layer on steel are described. Results from the diamond machining of 
these layers show that an optical surface quality is achievable and the chemical 
tool wear can be suppressed. Furthermore, differences between the machining of 
non-ferrous metals and thermo-chemically treated steel alloys are discussed. 
Finally, examples for the replication of glass and plastic optics with moulding 
inserts made of thermo-chemically treated steel are given. Therefore, this chapter 
gives an overview over the whole process chain for the replication of complex 
optical parts with nitrided or nitrocarburized steel moulds.    
1   Introduction 
The ultraprecision machining of non-ferrous metals with single crystal diamond 
tools is state-of-the-art in optics manufacturing. Whereas an optical surface finish 
machining of steel alloys cannot be achieved as catastrophic wear of the single 
crystal diamond tool occurs. This is a severe disadvantage. Especially for the 
manufacture of complex glass or plastic lenses, as for the replication of these 
optical components moulding inserts made of steel alloys or ceramics have to be 
applied. So far these moulds are machined with various iterative process steps like 
                                                           
Ekkard Brinksmeier · Ralf Gläbe · Jens Osmer 
Laboratory for Precision Machining LFM, University of Bremen, Badgasteiner Straße 2, 
28359 Bremen, Germany 
 
Franz Hoffmann · Juan Dong 
Institute for Materials Science IWT, Badgasteiner Straße 3, 28359, Bremen, Germany 

68 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
grinding, polishing and measuring (cf. Fig. 1). A manufacturing procedure 
requiring only one single diamond machining process would reduce both 
machining time and cost. 
 
 
Fig. 1 Novel approach for optical mould making applying diamond cutting for substituting 
the conventional approach 
Even though the diamond tool wear mechanisms in ultra precision cutting of 
ferrous metal alloys are not fully understood it is clear that the wear is of 
chemical-abrasive nature. This is similar to thermo-chemical polishing of diamond 
with a steel disc [Che07]. Where iron catalysis a sp2-hybridisation of the carbon 
bonding at the surface of the diamond. This leads to a phase transition of the upper 
layers of the diamond lattice and the carbon atoms oxidise to CO and CO2 even at 
room temperature. Another possible removal mechanism is the diffusion of carbon 
atoms into the steel substrate. 
Since the wear mechanism has a chemical component many attempts to reduce 
the wear rate have been carried out for example by cooling the workpiece [Eva91], 
machining under carbon saturated atmospheres [Cas83], modifying or coating of 
the diamond cutting tool [Glä03] or by reducing contact time between workpiece 
and cutting tool in an ultrasonic assisted turning process [Mor99]. In recent 
developments the frequency of ultrasonic systems for diamond turning has been 
increased to 80 kHz, which reduces both contact time between workpiece and 
cutting tool and the tool wear. With these systems optical surface quality and 
excellent form accuracy can be achieved [Klo10]. Still one remaining 
disadvantage of ultrasonic assisted diamond turning is the comparably long 
machining time, which makes it only applicable for small optical components. 
In the research work of the SFB/TR4 a different approach has been undertaken 
based on a thermo-chemical treatment of the surface layer of the steel. The 
approach is motivated by the fact that thermo-chemical tool wear is not only a 
phenomenon in diamond machining of steel alloys, but also in machining of nickel 
based alloys. In this case the catalytic behaviour of the nickel can be reduced by 
alloying 10-12 percent phosphorus [Pau96]. Since the electron configuration of 
nickel (3 un-paired d-shell electrons) and iron (4 un-paired d-shell electrons) are 
comparable, the same effect can be used for steel alloys by adding nitrogen to the 
surface boundary layer by gas nitriding or gas nitrocarburising [DON03]. This 
thermo-chemical treatment leads to a compound layer where the iron atoms are 
bonded to nitrides or carbon nitrides minimising the catalytic activity of the iron 
and enabling diamond machining without significant tool wear [Bri06]. 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
69
 
2   Nitriding and Nitrocarburizing   
Nitriding and nitrocarburizing are thermo-chemical surface treatments performed 
at elevated temperature in a medium with nitrogen- and/or carbon-bearing species. 
Thereby nitrogen or nitrogen and carbon are diffused into steel surface, leading to 
formation of a compound layer, consisting of ε-Fe2-3(N,C) and/or γ’-Fe4(N,C), and 
below this a diffusion zone. The compound layer has therefore a distinguished 
chemical composition, electron configuration, crystal structure and properties  
in comparison with the steel substrate. A typical compound layer is shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
Fig. 2 Cross section and dominant phases after nitriding a hardened steel (42CrMo4) 
Machinability of the nitrided steel compound layer has been proven by 
diamond machining experiments showing that the diamond tool wear has been 
largely reduced by at least a factor of 300 [Don03, Bri04]. The success of these 
experiments leads to the encouraging aspect that the thermo-chemical treatment 
can enable steel to become diamond machinable. This application, however, 
demands a thicker and denser compound layer with better machinability and 
enhanced mechanical properties, and therefore the thermo-chemical treatment 
needs further development.    
The generation of thick compound layers in nitrocarburizing processes can 
generally be realized by increasing temperature, duration and nitriding potential. 
But the growth of the compound layer is accompanied by formation of pores 
leading to a reduction of density, hardness, strength and toughness of the 
compound layer. Furthermore, the porosity increases with increasing layer 
thickness [Hof91]. The decomposition of nitrides and the recombination of atomic 
to molecular nitrogen are regarded as a possible reason for the pore formation 
[Pre73, Som92, Hof96]. Till now, the knowledge about creating a thick compound 
layer with low porosity is still insufficient. Therefore, experimental investigations 
were conducted in the present work. The investigations concerned the influence of 
essential process parameters on the porosity of the compound layer. These 
parameters included process temperature, duration, nitriding potential KN, 

70 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
carburizing potential KC
B as well as the carbon bearing species used for 
nitrocarburizing. The important results were selected and presented in the 
following.  
3   Process Condition     
3.1   Equipment  
Low nitriding potential was recognized to be beneficial for the suppression of pore 
formation on low alloy steels [Pre73, Sly89], while hydrogen with a high partial 
pressure could favor the pore formation [Gra68, Sch02, Vog02]. This was 
examined by the present experiments. Two measures were taken to realize a low 
nitriding potential and a low hydrogen partial pressure. The first was a dilution of 
the process atmosphere by adding nitrogen and the second was a suppression of 
 
 
Fig. 3 Retort furnace for thermo-chemical treatment 
 
Fig. 4 Furnace with quartz glass reactor for thermo-chemical treatment 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
71
 
ammonia decomposition by avoiding unwanted catalytic surfaces. The later can 
for example be influenced by the steel retort of the nitriding furnace. Therefore, 
two equipments were introduced in this experimental work. These are a retort 
furnace and a quartz glass reactor as shown in figure 3 and 4.   
3.2   Nitriding in a Mixture of Ammonia and Nitrogen 
The first nitriding process (process 1.1N) was carried out in the retort furnace for 
6 h at 590 °C with a gas mixture of NH3/N2 = 5/5 and the nitriding potential 
KN = 0.6. The second nitriding process (process 2.1N) was carried out in the 
quartz reactor for 6 h at 615 °C with a gas mixture of NH3/N2 = 3/7 and the 
nitriding potential KN = 2.0. The hydrogen partial pressures were determined to be 
about 0.37 and 0.18 bar respectively.  
The metallographic microstructures of the steel 42CrMo4 after the two process 
1.1N and 2.1N (figure 5) showed the compound layers of about 30 µm and 22 µm 
respectively. The former had a porous outer zone of about 12 µm, which took 
about 40% the thickness of the compound layer. The later had a thinner porous 
zone of about 32% the thickness of the compound layer. The porosity level of the 
porous zone in the thinner compound layer appeared to be lower. The lower 
hydrogen partial pressure of process 2.1N was responsible for the lower porosity 
of the layer, while higher nitriding potential is supposed to favor the pore 
formation. The growth rate of the compound layer may be related to the porosity.  
 
Fig. 5 Compound (white) layer on 42CrMo4 after 
          a) Process 1.1N: 6 h at 590 °C, NH3/N2 = 5/5, KN = 0.6, and 
          b) Process 2.1N: 6 h at 615 °C, NH3/N2 = 3/7, KN = 2.0.  
3.3   Nitrocarburizing with Addition of Carbon Monoxide or 
Carbon Dioxide 
Carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO2) was used as donator for the 
nitrocarburizing. The influence of the carbon donator on the pore formation was 
examined by two experiments. These were carried out in the quartz reactor using 
the gas mixture of NH3/N2= 2/8 + 4.8% CO2 (process 2.2NC) and NH3/N2= 3/7 + 
2.0% CO (process 2.3NC) correspondingly.   
The microstructures after the nitrocarburizing (figure 6) demonstrate that the 
compound layer of process 2.2NC is thicker than that of process 2.3NC. The 

72 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
porous zone takes about 50% of the thickness of the compound layers. The 
nitrocarburizing combined with high nitriding potential is unfavorable for 
obtaining a dense compound layer. The carbon content in the compound layers 
reaches about 1% and 2% correspondingly. The higher carbon content hindered 
the growth of the compound layer.  
 
Fig. 6 Compound layer on 42CrMo4 after 
         a) process 2.2NC: 6 h at 605 °C, NH3/N2= 2/8 + 4.8% CO2, KN = 2.2, and 
         b) process 2.3NC: 6 h at 590 °C, NH3/N2= 3/7 + 2.0% CO, KN = 3.0.  
The combination of high hydrogen partial pressure and carbon dioxide in the 
nitrocarburizing atmosphere (process 1.3NC) also led to the formation of a porous 
compound layer with lateral cracks as figure 7 showes. Contra wise the 
nitrocarburizing in the nitrogen diluted gas mixture (process 1.2NC) suppressed 
the porosity effectively.   
 
 
Fig. 7 Compound layer on 42CrMo4 after nitrocarburizing 10 h at 590 °C 
         a) process 1.2NC: in NH3/N2= 4/5 + 2.7% CO2, KN = 0.8, PH2 = 0.30 bar, and 
         b) process 1.3NC: in NH3 + 2.6% CO2, KN = 0.6, KC
B = 0.1, PH2 = 0.54 bar.  
3.4   Two-Step Process   
In contrast to the conventional one-step nitrocarburizing process, a two-steps 
process was introduced in order to clarify if the porosity of the compound layer 
could be affected. The two-step process (process 1.4N-NC) involved the nitriding 
for 6 h at 590 °C in the first step and the nitrocarburizing for 10 h at 480 °C in the 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
73
 
second step. The microstructure of 42CrMo4 (figure 8a) showed that the thickness 
of the compound layer obtained by the two-step process is comparable to that by 
the one-step process (figure 5a). The pores seem smaller in figure 8a than in figure 
5a. This result indicates that the compound layer did not grow further in the 
second step at the lower temperature and the pores in the layer increased neither. 
But the nitrogen and carbon content in the compound layer were determined to be 
higher in the two-step process compared to the one-step process (figure 8b).  
 
 
Fig. 8 a) Compound layer, b) N- and C-profile in the layer (in comparison with that of the 
one-step process) on 42CrMo4 after the two-step process 1.4N-NC: 6 h at 590 °C, NH3/N2 
= 5/5, KN = 0.7 in the first step and 10 h at 480 °C, NH3/N2 = 5/5 + 2.4%CO, KN > 10, 
KC
B = 0.1 in the second step.  
It can be derived that the thickness of the compound layer is determined by fast 
diffusion of nitrogen in the first step at the higher temperature. The porosity of the 
layer can be reduced slightly in the second step, because pore formation can be 
suppressed by lowering the temperature and the specific volume of the carbon 
nitride increases with increasing content of nitrogen and carbon in the compound 
layer. The two-step process can therefore be used to control the thickness and 
composition of the compound layer separately.   
3.5   Alloy Elements in Steel  
Compared to the steel 42CrMo4, two other alloy steels were nitrided or 
nitrocarburized in the same processes (2.1N in figure 1b and 1.3NC in figure 6b). 
The microstructures of the alloy steels are shown in figure 9 and 10. The 
compound layers, consisting of special nitride MeXNY besides ε- and/or γ’-iron 
nitride, were generally thinner on the high alloy steels (X40CrMoV5-1 and 
X40Cr13) than those on 42CrMo4 after the same process. The compound layers 
after the nitriding (process 2.1N) were almost free of pores. In contrast the 
presence of carbon dioxide together with high hydrogen partial pressure (process 
1.3NC) led to the formation of pores and pore chains or cracks in the compound 
layers. The grain boundaries appeared to be the preferred places for pores to grow.  

74 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
 
Fig. 9 Compound layers on X40CrMoV5-1 after a) process 2.1N: 6 h at 615 °C, 
NH3/N2 = 3/7, KN = 2.0 and b) process 1.3NC: 10 h at 590 °C in NH3 + 2.6% CO2, KN = 
0.6, KC
B = 0.1 
 
Fig. 10 Compound layers on X40Cr13 after a) process 2.1N: 6 h at 615 °C, NH3/N2 = 3/7, 
KN = 2.0 and b) process 1.3NC: 10 h at 590 °C in NH3 + 2.6% CO2, KN = 0.6, KC
B = 0.1 
4   Diamond Machining 
During the development of the new thermo-chemical workpiece modification, 
diamond cutting tests were performed by using a diamond face turning process, 
which enabled a basic evaluation of the wear and machining results. With the 
consideration of practical needs (e.g. generation of free form surfaces) a raster fly 
cutting process was also applied. Figure 11 shows the machining set-ups for 
diamond turning and milling on ultra-precision machine tools. In the diamond 
turning set-up the cutting tool is fixed on an adjustable tool post and the workpiece 
is mounted with a vacuum chuck on the air bearing main spindle. For the milling 
experiments a four axes ultra-precision machine tool is applied. The cutting tool is 
mounted on a disc and is adapted to an air bearing milling spindle which can be 
linearly moved in x- and y-direction. The workpiece is mounted with a vacuum 
chuck on the clamped rotary axis of the machine tool.  
Table 1 summarises typical cutting parameters for both machining operations, 
diamond turning and diamond milling. As cutting tools single crystal diamond 
tools with nose radii from rε = 0.76 mm to rε = 3 mm have been applied. The 
cutting edge sharpness of the tools is in the range of rβ = 20 nm. 
 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
75
 
 
Fig. 11 Diamond turning (left) and diamond milling (right) set-ups on ultra-precision 
machine tools 
Table 1 Process parameters for diamond turning and diamond milling of thermo-
chemically treated steel alloys 
Cutting parameter 
diamond turning 
diamond milling 
spindle speed n 
250 - 500 rpm 
3,000 - 10,000 rpm 
feed rate f 
2 - 10 µm 
8 - 160 µm 
cutting speed vc 
20 - 160 m/min 
470 - 4,000 m/min 
depth of cut ap 
2 - 10 µm 
2 - 10 µm 
pitch 
--- 
72 µm 
swing radius 
--- 
25 - 65 mm 
 
To characterize the diamond machining results the cutting tool wear and the 
surface quality of the workpieces has been investigated. Subsequently detailed 
results for both, diamond turning and milling are presented. 
5   Diamond Turning 
The turning experiments were initially performed with an untreated steel workpiece 
as reference to evaluate the wear reduction effect when using nitrocarburized  
 
 
Fig. 12 Microscopic image of the clearance face of a diamond tool after face turning of 
untreated carbon steel (0.45% C); cutting distance 500 m 

76 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
workpieces. The cutting tool wear has been measured with a Nomarski light 
microscope. Figure 12 shows the flank wear of the applied diamond tool.  
In this case the machining yielded a catastrophic wear land width of 
VB = 36 µm after a comparably low cutting distance of 500 m. This tool wear 
leads to a non-optical surface finish and therefore the machining of moulding 
inserts with high requirements concerning surface quality and form accuracy 
cannot be achieved. 
After the basic investigations with carbon steel, further workpiece materials 
which are more frequently used for optical moulds, were thermo-chemically 
treated and diamond turned. Several experiments showed that by applying 
optimized cutting and nitrocarburizing parameters the tool wear can be reduced by 
three orders of magnitude. Diamond turning of thermo-chemically modified stress 
relieved and hardened 42CrMo4 tempering steel that exhibits a more 
homogeneous texture caused a diamond tool wear of less than 2 µm after diamond 
turning of lc = 500 m cutting distance. Figure 13 shows exemplarily a cutting edge 
after diamond turning of a nitrocarburized 42CrMo4 measured with a Nomarksi 
microscope (cf. figure 13 left).  As the tool wear is in the range of the lateral 
resolution of the Nomarski microscope an atomic force microscope has been 
applied for a detailed measurement of the cutting edge. The observed tool wear 
mark is shown on the right in figure 13. It is in the range of 1.5 µm. This wear is 
slightly higher compared to that occurring in the diamond machining of electroless 
nickel [Bri10]. The detectable wear is a result of the high hardness of the 
compound layer. Typical hardness values are about 1000 HV, whereas electroless 
nickel has a hardness of 550 HV. Further influence on the wear behaviour is the 
inhomogeneous structure of the workpiece material.  
 
 
Fig. 13 Microscope and AFM image of a diamond cutting tool after machining a 
nitrocarburized steel workpiece 
Diamond turning experiments with a hardened thermo-chemically treated high 
alloyed tool steel resulted in a wear land width of 5 µm after a cutting distance of 
lc = 300 m. The detectable wear is a result of the high hardness of 1200 HV which 
remained unchanged by the thermo-chemical modification process as well as the 
inhomogeneous structure of the workpiece material. 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
77
 
 
Fig. 14 Moulding inserts for the replication of glass optics and resulting surface topography 
measured with a white light interferometer 
The surface roughness was measured with a white light interferometer over an 
area of 1200 x 1000 µm2 at different locations on the surface. The measured 
roughness values of Ra = 8 - 12 nm did not depend on the cutting distance. The 
surface roughness could easily be reduced to approx. 4 nm Ra by manual 
post-polishing. Figure 14 shows two diamond turned moulding inserts made of 
X40CrMoV5-1 for the replication of glass lenses. 
To evaluate the differences in the machining of nitrocarburized steels compared 
to conventionally applied materials in ultra precision machining diamond turning 
experiments with five typical non-ferrous metals and nitrocarburized steel have 
been conducted [Osm10]. The non-ferrous metals were three aluminium alloys 
which are pure aluminium, AlMg3 and a special fine grained aluminium alloy 
RSA-905. Moreover, OFHC-copper and an electroless nickel plating have been 
included. The sixth material was a nitrocarburized tool steel. Table 2 shows the 
applied process parameter for the diamond turning experiments. 
Table 2 Process parameters for diamond turning of non-ferrous metals and nitrocarburized 
steel 
Cutting parameter 
diamond turning 
cutting tool 
single crystal diamond, rε = 0.76 mm, 
α = 6°, γ = 0° 
feed rate f 
5 / 10 µm 
cutting speed vc 
10 / 20 m/min 
depth of cut ap 
5 / 10 µm 
Lubricant 
spray mist, mineral oil 
 
The roughness values have been measured with a white light interferometer on 
an area of 1200 x 980 µm². Table 3 gives the minimal and maximal average values 
for the varied parameter combinations. Every value is the average of eight 
measurements per turning experiment. Slight differences concerning the surface 
roughness could be found for the different parameter combinations, but none of 
the variables show a statistically significant influence. 

78 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
Table 3 Achieved surface roughness Sa for different diamond turned workpiece materials 
workpiece 
material 
Al 
AlMg3 
RSA-
905 
OFHC-
copper 
NiP-
pla-
ting 
nitro-
carburized 
steel 
rough-
ness Sa 
[nm] 
min 
6.5 
6.0 
7.0 
6.3 
6.5 
9.0 
max 
8.0 
8.5 
9.0 
8.6 
9.7 
12.0 
 
Hence, the varied process parameters show no significant influence; the 
dominating factor for the surface roughness seems to be the inner microstructure 
of the material itself. In case of the pure aluminum and the OFHC-copper the 
anisotropy of the grain structure leads to unsteady surface topography [Lee00]. 
The amorphous electroless nickel plating and the fine grained RSA-905 aluminum 
alloy show a very regular surface topography which is dominated by the 
kinematics of the face turning process. The same effect can be found for the 
investigated nitrocarburized steel materials. Figure 15 shows exemplarily three 
surface topographies for the different steel materials. In all cases the surfaces 
exhibit a smooth and even surface topography dominated by the kinematics of the 
face turning process.  
 
 
Fig. 15 Surface topography for diamond turned nitrocarburized steels 
6   Diamond Milling 
For the future generation of moulding inserts with free form surfaces diamond 
milling experiments were performed. As a first result the preliminary diamond 
turning experiments showed that there is a strong correlation between cutting in 
the ε-phase or the γ’-phase of the compound layer and the diamond tool wear. 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
79
 
Therefore, several diamond milling experiments were performed at a depth 
beneath surface of 3 µm to 20 µm. Figure 16 shows three examples after diamond 
milling of 30 x 30 mm2 steel surfaces with a 15 µm thick compound layer at 
different depth of cut.  
 
 
 
Fig. 16 Diamond milled steel workpieces 
To characterize the diamond milled surfaces a white light interferometer was 
used to measure the surface roughness Sa. Therefore, all samples were measured 
at a size of 1200 x 980 µm2 at 10 different positions. Figure 17 summarizes these 
measurements. The lowest roughness value of Sa = 6.0 nm can be achieved at a 
depth beneath surface of 6 µm. 
 
 
Fig. 17 Surface roughness and diamond tool wear depending on the depth beneath the 
surface 

80 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
Moreover, figure 17 shows the diamond tool wear for the experiments 
discussed above. The wear is almost independent from the depth beneath surface 
indicating, that the chemical and mechanical properties in the compound layer are 
constant. The exceptional measuring point at a depth beneath surface of 20 µm 
with a width of wear land of approximately 5 µm shows that the diamond tool 
wear increases if the machining takes place in the diffusion layer beneath the 
compound layer. Therefore, it is essential for an optical surface finish and less 
diamond tool wear to machine the moulding inserts within the compound layer. 
In addition to the machining of continuous surfaces the micro-structuring of 
nitrocarburized steels has been investigated. Diamond milling experiments using a 
V-shaped diamond tool have been carried out. The cone angle of the tool was 
ε = 150°. Figure 18 shows images of a scanning electron microscope and a white 
light interferometer measurement of intersecting linear grooves. The measurement 
shows that the machining of structures in nitrocarburized steels is possible without 
burr formation. The surface roughness of the flank is Sa = 3 nm on a measurement 
area of 30 x 60 µm². 
 
 
Fig. 18 Images of SEM- and WLI-measurements of a structured steel mould 
7   Moulding Inserts for the Replication of Optics     
Steels modified by novel nitriding processes become diamond machinable. The 
possibility to apply this method in practice was inspected by the process chain for 
manufacturing of moulding inserts (figure 19), which were used for the replication 
of optics made of plastic or glass.  
 
 
Fig. 19 Process chain for manufacturing of moulding inserts 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
81
 
The workpieces after grinding were thermo-chemically treated by a two-step 
process. The first step was nitriding 10 h at 570 °C with KN = 1.1 and the second 
step nitrocarburizing 10 h at 480 °C with KN > 10, KC
B = 0.1. A compound layer 
of about 14 µm in thickness was obtained for the steel X40CrMoV5-1. A porous 
zone of about 4 µm appeared at the outermost range of the layer. The diamond 
machining had removed a surface layer of about 9 µm. Therefore, a 5 µm 
compound layer remained on the finished moulding insert. The hardness of the 
compound layer and the diffusion layer reached about 1300 HV0.025 and 930 
HV0.5 respectively. Figure 20a shows the nitrocarburized and diamond machined 
moulding insert for injection moulding of plastic, figure 20b the nitrocarburized, 
diamond machined and coated moulding insert for hot pressing of glass. The 100 
nm TiAlN coating was needed to prevent oxidation of the steel surface.  
The nitrocarburized steel mould (figure 20a) had withstood 50 shoots of 
injection moulding of PMMA lens without any damage, and the nitrocarburized 
and coated steel mould (figure 20b) had passed 18 pressings of low-Tg glasses at 
375 °C no noticeable change. However, a slight adhesion of plastic or glass at the 
surfaces of nitrocarburized or the coated steel moulds was observed. Therefore, 
anti-adhesion will be an issue in the future research work of the SFB/TR4.   
 
 
Fig. 20 a) nitrocarburized moulding insert Ø50 x 15 mm for injection moulding of plastic, 
and b) nitrocarburized and with 100 nm TiAlN coated moulding insert Ø30 x 10 mm for 
hot pressing of glass 
8   Conclusion 
The generation of thick and low porosity compound layers can be realized by pure 
nitriding with optimized process parameters. First of all, nitrogen potential and 
hydrogen partial pressure of the process atmosphere should be possibly low. The 
addition of carbon dioxide for nitrocarburizing, however, promotes pore 
formation. A two-step process is a useful method for controlling the thickness and 
composition of the compound layer separately. Alloy steel with suitable amount of 
nitride former shows high resistance against pore formation. 
The diamond machining results are a breakthrough in ultra precision turning and 
milling of steel with optical surface quality. The results prove that ultra precision 
machining of steel alloys is possible, if the surface zone of the workpieces is thermo-
chemically modified in a way that chemical reactions between the carbon atoms of 
the diamond lattice and the iron atoms of the workpiece material cannot take place, 

82 
E. Brinksmeier et al.
 
thus, preventing chemical tool wear. Interestingly, the hardness of the machined 
compound layer does not affect the diamond tool wear strongly, therefore, a 
hardened, thermo-chemically modified and diamond machined mould can be used 
directly for the replication of plastic parts or with a TiAlN coating to prevent 
oxidation even the hot pressing of low-Tg glasses is possible. Thermo-chemically 
treated workpieces can be machined by turning and milling, however, milling is 
more flexible and can be applied to moulds for the replication of optical free form 
components. First industrial applications have already been realised successfully.  
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Bri04] Brinksmeier, E.; Dong, J; Gläbe, R.: Diamond Turning of Steel Moulds for 
Optical Applications. Proc. of 4th euspen International Conference, Glasgow, 
Scotland (UK), May-June 2004  
[Bri06] Brinksmeier, E; Gläbe, R.; Osmer, J.: „Ultra-precision Diamond Cutting of Steel 
Moulds”. Annals of the CIRP, 55/1, p. 551-554 (2006) 
[Bri10] Brinksmeier, E; Gläbe, R.; Osmer, J.: „Diamond Cutting of FeN-Layers on Steel 
Substrates for Optical Mould Making”. Key Engineering Materials Vol. 438, p. 
31-34 (2010) 
[Cas83] Casstevens, J.: “Diamond Turning of Steel in Carbon Saturated Atmospheres”. 
Precision Engineering 5, p. 9-15 (1983) 
[Che07] Chen, Y; Zhang, L.C; Arsecularatne, J.A., Zarudi, I.: “Polishing of polycrystalline 
diamond by the technique of dynamic friction”, Part 3: “Mechanism exploration 
through debris analysis”. International Journal of Machine Tools and 
Manufacture, 47, p. 2282-2289 (2007) 
[Don03] Dong, J.; Gläbe, R.; Mehner, A., Mayr, P.; Brinksmeier, E.: Verfahren zur 
Mikrozerspanung 
von 
metallischen 
Werkstoffen. 
German 
Patent 
DE 
10333860A1, 2003, United States Patent No US7582170B2, 2009 
[Eva91] Evans, C.: “Cryogenic Diamond Turning of Stainless Steel”, Annals of the CIRP, 
40/1, p. 571-575 (1991) 
[Glä03] Gläbe, 
R.: 
“Prozess- 
und 
Schneidstoffentwicklung 
zur 
ultrapräzisen 
Drehbearbeitung von Stahl”. Dissertation Universität Bremen, Shaker Verlag 
(2003) 
[Gra68]  Grabke, H. J.: Reaktion von Ammoniak, Stickstoff und Wasserstoff an der 
Oberfläche von Eisen. I. Zur Kinetik der Nitrierung von Eisen mit NH3-H2-
Gemischen und der Denitrierung. In: Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft 72 (1968) 
Nr.4 p. 533-541  
[Hof91] Hoffmann, F.; Kunst, H.; Klümper-Westkamp, H.; Liedtke, D.; Mittemeijer E.J.; 
Rose, E.; Zimmermann, K.: Stand der Kenntnisse über die Porenentstehung beim 
Nitrieren und Nitrocarburieren. The 1th European conference „Nitriding and 
Nitrocarburising,” 1991, Darmstadt, Proceeding, p. 105-113   
[Hof96]  Hoffmann, R.; Mittemeijer, E.J.; Somers, M.A.J.: Verbindungsschicht-bildung 
beim Nitrieren und Nitrocarburieren. In: HTM 51 (1996), Nr. 3, p. 162-169 
[Klo10] Klocke, F.; Dambon, O.; Bulla, B.: “Direct Diamond Turning of Aspheric Steel 
Moulds with Ultra Precise Accuracy“. Proc. of the 25th Annual Meeting of the 
ASPE 2010, Atlanta, USA 

Diamond Machinable Tool Steels by Novel Nitriding Processes 
83
 
[Lee00] Lee, W. B.; To, S.; Cheung, C. F.: “Effect of Crystallographic Orientation in 
Diamond Turning of Copper Single Crystals”. Scripta Materialia, Volume 42/10 
(2000), p. 937-945 
[Mor99] Moriwaki, T.; Shamoto, E.: “Ultraprecision Diamond Cutting of Hardened Steel 
by Applying Elliptical Vibration Cutting”. Annals of the CIRP, 48/1, p. 441-444 
(1999) 
[Osm10] Osmer, J.; Meier, A.; Gläbe, R.; Riemer, O.; Brinksmeier, E.: “Ultra Precision 
Machining of Non-Ferrous Metals and Nitrocarburized Tool Steel”. Key 
Engineerig Materials Volumes 447-448 (2010), p. 46-50 
[Pau96] Paul, E.; Evans, C.J.; Mangamelli, A.; Mc Glauflin, M.L.: “Chemical Aspects of 
Tool Wear in Single Point Diamond Turning”. Precision Engineering 18, p. 4-19 
(1996) 
[Pre73]  Prenosil, B.: Einige neue Erkenntnisse über das Gefüge von um 600 °C in der 
Gasatmosphäre carbonitrierten Schichten. In: HTM 28 (1973), Nr. 3, p. 157-164  
[Sch02]  Schröter, W.; Spengler, A.: Beitrag zum Erkenntnisstand der Porenentstehung bei 
der Schichtbildung durch Stickstoff in Eisenwerkstoffen. ATTT/AWT-Tagung, 
Aachen, 10.-12. Apr, 2002 
[Sly89]  Slycke, J.; Sproge, L.: Kinetics of the gaseous nitrocarburising process. In: 
Surface Engineering 5 (1989) Nr. 2, p. 125-140 
[Som92]  Somers, M.A.J.; Mittemeijer, E.J.: Verbindungsschichtbildung während des 
Gasnitrierens und des Gas- und Salzbadnitrocarburierens. In: HTM 47 (1992), Nr. 
1, p. 5-13  
[Vog02]  Vogelsang, K.; Schröter, W.; Hoffmann, R. und Jacobs, H.: Ein Beitrag zum 
Problem der Porenbildung. In: HTM 57(2002), Nr. 1, p. 42-48 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 85–98. 
springerlink.com                                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool 
Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
Fritz Klocke, Ekkard Brinksmeier, Oltmann Riemer, Max Schwade,  
Heiko Schulte, and Andreas Klink* 
Abstract. In this chapter, two new process chains are introduced using novel 
processes for the machining of complex molds by diamond grinding and diamond 
profile grinding in combination with a machine-based abrasive profile polishing. 
Finest grained diamond grinding wheels with a metal bond provide superior 
grinding results. But the combination of a metal bond and very fine grains causes 
great difficulties for the trueing and dressing operation using conventional 
methods. For the machining of rotational symmetric mold inserts the novel 
process of electrochemical in-process dressing can be applied to achieve optical 
surface qualities without a subsequent polishing process. 
For more complex shapes a grinding wheel with a micro-profile is needed. The 
pre-dressing and profiling of the difficult to machine grinding wheels is done by 
the unconventional Wire-EDM process. To achieve a surface roughness of the 
profiled mold in optical quality a subsequent polishing process is necessary. 
Therefore the novel process of diamond profile grinding in combination with a 
subsequent machine-based profile polishing is introduced. 
1   Introduction 
The optical industry is in need of complex geometries like spheres, aspheres and 
structured shapes of lenses with very high form accuracies. The mass production 
of these lenses and lens systems by glass molding is a very high demanding 
production process. The mold materials need to be very hard and temperature 
                                                           
Fritz Klocke  
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT,  
Steinbachstraße 17, 52074 Aachen, Germany 
 
Ekkard Brinksmeier · Oltmann Riemer · Heiko Schulte 
Laboratory for Precision Machining LFM, University of Bremen, Badgasteiner Straße 2, 
28359 Bremen, Germany 
 
Max Schwade · Andreas Klink 
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering WZL,  
RWTH Aachen, Steinbachstraße 19, 52074 Aachen, Germany 

86 
F. Klocke et al.
 
resisting like cemented carbides and ceramics. But the machining of these hard 
and brittle materials is very difficult which makes precision diamond grinding a 
key technology, confer also [Sha96] and [Bri10]. Using fine grained diamond 
grinding wheels with a metal bond high profile constancies and wear resistances 
combined with high material removal rates and optimal surface qualities can be 
achieved. But the combination of a metal bond and very fine grains causes great 
difficulties for the trueing and dressing operation using conventional methods. 
For the machining of rotational symmetric classical lens mold inserts the novel 
process of electrochemical in-process dressing for metal-bonded grinding wheels 
can be applied to create continuous surfaces in optical quality. A subsequent 
polishing process is not necessary, which reduces time and lowers the manu-
facturing costs. 
More complex mold shapes like cylindrical lens arrays, which are used for the 
beam collimination of diode lasers, cannot be machined by ultra precision milling 
in optical quality. In this case diamond profile grinding in combination with a 
machine-based abrasive profile polishing is the key technology. The profiling of 
the metal-bonded grinding wheel with a simultaneous dressing operation can be 
achieved by Wire-EDM. To create a mold surface roughness in optical quality a 
subsequent profile polishing is necessary. 
In comparison to conventional polishing of continuous surface geometries the 
main challenge for abrasive profile polishing consists in preventing edge 
rounding, avoiding a non-uniform wear of the polishing tool as well as preventing 
differences in local material removal. Results from experiments with cemented 
carbide will show a significant improvement comparing to the pre-ground surface 
quality. In the following two process chains are introduced using these novel 
processes and detailed results are presented. 
2   Process Chain for Rotationally Symmetric Glass Lenses 
The initial process chain for the production of rotationally symmetric glass lenses 
can be seen in Figure 1, using a combination of precision diamond grinding and 
abrasive polishing for the machining of the molds. The workpiece quality and 
form accuracy significantly depend on the grinding process and especially the 
effort of following steps of the process chain depend on the quality of the grinding 
result. Therefore, the surfaces should possess such a good quality that a 
subsequent polishing process is unnecessary. This will reduce the needed steps of 
the manufacturing process, the manufacturing time and the manufacturing costs. 
By using metal-bonded grinding wheels a high wear resistance and profile 
constancy can be achieved during grinding. In combination with fine and ultra fine 
grains it is possible to create the desired optical surface qualities directly to avoid 
polishing. Bronze-bonded grinding wheels in particular can be used efficiently, as 
it is easier to modify their chemical composition – and therefore their bond 
hardness – to suit the specific grinding tasks. Hence these grinding wheels can be 
used for the task-specific precision machining of hard and brittle mold materials. 
But the combination of very small grained diamonds down to the smallest sized 
grains of only single-digit micrometers and the metal bond cause great difficulties 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
87
 
for conventional dressing. Due to the metal bond composition of the grinding 
wheel the novel process of electrochemical in-process dressing is a powerful 
alternative dressing technology. 
 
Initial process chain
Optimized process chain
Part design and mold 
design
Abrasive polishing
Precision diamond
grinding 
Precision glass 
molding
Part quality
Part quality
Precision glass
molding
Precision diamond grinding
+ electrochemical
in-process dressing
Part design and mold 
design
 
Fig. 1 Process chains for rotationally symmetric mold inserts 
This unconventional dressing process uses the anodic metal dissolution similar 
to electrochemical machining to set back the metal bond of the grinding wheel. 
Since the diamond grits are not electrically conductive they are not influenced by 
the process. It is commonly known that ECM has no thermal effect on the 
machined surface and thus there is also no indirect effect on the diamond 
structure. By setting back the bonding material, used diamond grits that have 
suffered wear by the grinding process are no longer held in place and are removed 
during grinding. New and sharp diamond grits from deeper layers form the new 
surface and an optimal grit protrusion can be achieved. The dressing process can 
be implemented on the actual grinding machine and the dressing operation can be 
performed in process, in parallel to grinding, as shown in Figure 2. The cooling 
lubricant used for the grinding process also serves as an electrolyte. 
Coolant nozzle
supply of 
electrolytic
coolant
+
-
Workpiece
Grinding wheel
Generator
Brush
contact
Coolant
nozzle
Electrode
Grinding
+
-
Workpiece
Grinding wheel
Generator
Brush
contact
Coolant
nozzle
Electrode
Grinding
 
Fig. 2 Principle of electrochemical in-process dressing 

88 
F. Klocke et al.
 
To avoid an excessive wear of the grinding wheel caused by the dressing process 
the formation of an oxide layer in the passive operating range is used. This layer 
possesses a high electrical resistance as a function of its thickness which slows 
down the anodic dissolution until it is stopped altogether (during pre-dressing). The 
efficiency of this in-process dressing method was already shown by research on the 
so called ELID-grinding process which also uses an oxide layer formation to 
restrict the set back of the bonding [Ohm90]. In ELID-grinding primarily cast-iron 
bonded grinding wheels are used because of their good passivating behaviour. 
Bronze-bonded grinding wheels are cheaper in production and have as already 
mentioned the advantage that their chemical composition and therefore their bond 
hardness can easily be modified to suit a specific grinding task. Therefore basic 
research on the oxide layer formation on bronze bonds was conducted. 
The surface topography of the oxide layers covering the grits of two grinding 
wheels with different bond material can be seen in Figure 3. The combination of 
bond material and electrolyte has a great influence on the growth behaviour and 
composition of the oxide layer which has a major effect on the grinding result. 
Fe-Bz D7, 200-times magnified
oxid layer surface
Cu-Bz D7, 200-times magnified
anodic metal dissolotion
without closed cover layer
200 µm
200 µm
Parameter: 
U = 60 V;  τ = 0.5; 
f  = 100 kHz; 
α = 100°;
Gap width = 0.5 mm  
vc = 27 m/s
Electrolyte: Cimiron 
CG-7: water = 1:50 
Wheel width: 2 mm
diamond grains
200 µm
200 µm
 
Fig. 3 Grinding wheel surface after electrochemical pre-dressing, [Kli09] 
During grinding, part of the oxide layer is easily mechanically removed which 
reduces the electrical resistance and thus the dressing operation is resumed. With 
precise knowledge of all influencing factors for the generation of the oxide layer 
and the mechanical removal optimal parameters can be found to achieve a 
dynamic balance by the self regulating process. If only so much of the bonding 
material is dissolved to remove the used diamond grits and to achieve an ideal grit 
protrusion with new abrasives, the grinding wheel stays in an optimal sharp 
condition throughout the grinding process with minimized wear and can produce 
optimal surface qualities at the same time. The circle of oxide layer growth and 
mechanical removal is shown in Figure 4 together with a characteristic current-
voltage curve. The build-up of the oxide layer is influenced by various factors, 
obviously by the amount of voltage applied, the gap width between the electrode 
and the grinding wheel surface and thus the resulting electric current, [Klo08]. 
Major factors are, as can be seen in Figure 3, the bond-material and electrolyte 
composition. 
Thus it is necessary to choose the correct combination for a specific grinding 
task. It can be seen that for different compositions of bronze bonds optical surface 
qualities can be achieved with Ra values of below 10 nm using grit sizes D3 
(average grain size from 2 µm to 4 µm) and D7 (average grain size from 5 µm  
 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
89
 
0
40
80
120
Voltage / V
0
4
8
12
Current / A
Pre-dressing
In-process
Current
Voltage
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time / min
Start of pre-dressing
Dressing
cycle
Finished pre-dressing
Start of grinding
Process stabilisation
Fe2+ -ion
Oxid layer Fe2O3
Dissolved oxids
Oxid abrasion
Grain wear
Electrochemical pre- and 
in-process dressing
 
Fig. 4 Dressing cycle for electrochemical dressing (ELID) after [Ohm90] 
Process parameters:
- Grinding wheel: dS = 75 mm, bS = 2 mm
- Workpiece: Si3N4-cylinder D = 25 mm
- Coolant: CIMIRON CG-7; κ = 2 mS/cm
- ECM-parameter: U = 60 V; τ = 0.1; f = 100 kHz
- Kinematics: Rotational peripheral plunge
grinding (vc = 27 m/s; 
vf = 5 mm/min; nw = 100 min-1
ae = 2 µm (D7);  1 µm (D3)
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Fe-Bz
Co-Bz
Fe-Bz
Co-Bz
Bonding material
G-ratio
ECM-dressing:
D7 continuous
D3 continuous
D7 every 5th cycle
D3 every 5th cycle
ECM-dressing:
D7 continuous
D3 continuous
D7 every 5th cycle
D3 every 5th cycle
1.8
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Fe-Bz
Co-Bz
Fe-Bz
Co-Bz
Bonding material
Surface quality Ra / nm
ECM-dressing:
D7 continuous
D3 continuous
D7 every 5th c.
D3 every 5th c.
ECM-dressing:
D7 continuous
D3 continuous
D7 every 5th c.
D3 every 5th c.
ECM-dressing:
D7 continuous
D3 continuous
D7 every 5th c.
D3 every 5th c.
16
 
Fig. 5 G-ratios and surface quality with in process ECM-dressing, [Kli09] 
to 10 µm) which fulfils the requirement of surface roughness for the glass molds, 
as shown in Figure 5. 
As workpiece material Si3N4 was used during testing to maximize the wear of 
the grinding wheel since this is currently the hardest to machine mold material 
used and thus less wear can be anticipated during the machining of cemented 
carbide. To optimize the dressing operation in regard of the wear of the grinding 
wheel a continuous electrochemical dressing was compared to a duty cycle with a 
ratio of 1:4 by measuring the G-ratio, which is defined as the ratio of removed 
material on the workpiece to the removed material on the grinding wheel. More 
details can be found in [Kli09]. Since the Cu-Bz bond did not form a closed oxide 
layer covering and thus the dissolution of the bonding material was too fast it was 
not investigated any further. 
Due to the results seen in Figure 5, a spherical cemented carbide mold insert for 
the precision glass molding operation was manufactured using a bronze-bonded 
grinding (Co-Bz) wheel with a D7 grit size and a cyclic electrochemical in-process 
dressing strategy. The mold can be seen in Figure 6 together with the according 
measurement plot. Using the above mentioned process parameters an optical 

90 
F. Klocke et al.
 
surface quality could be achieved with a Ra-value of about 6 nm. The peak-to-
valley vertical deviation was 0.53 µm which still can be reduced by further 
optimization of the electrochemical in-process dressing parameters, [Klo10]. 
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
4
8
12
Measurement length / mm
Vertical deviation / μm
0,2
0
0,3
0,1
-0,1
-0,2
-0,3
 
Fig. 6 Mold insert produced by precision grinding with ECM-dressing 
2.1   Resume 
Electrochemical in-process dressing of bronze-bonded diamond grinding wheels 
can be used to reduce the needed steps to manufacture mold inserts for the 
precision glass molding operation. A subsequent polishing process after precision 
grinding is unnecessary due to the optical surface quality achieved by grinding. 
3   Process Chain for Complex Lens Arrays 
Collimation lenses for high performance diode lasers show an increasing industrial 
application with the requirement for micro structured glass optics with cylindrical 
lens arrays. Insufficient quality of these lenses (e.g. high surface roughness) would 
lead to minimized power output of the lasers. 
As part of the process chain for the replication of complex optical glass parts, 
which is shown in Figure 7, the machining of structured molds by diamond profile 
grinding with electro discharge trueing and dressing and machine-based abrasive 
profile polishing are the key technologies. The subsequent replication is realized 
by precision glass molding. The quality inspection of mold and glass lenses is 
realized by white light interferometry for surface quality and by profilometry for 
shape accuracy. 
To machine structured glass molds within the required final quality and to 
avoid individual post-polishing of the glass lenses itself after the replication, a 
profile grinding process and an abrasive profile polishing process are well suited. 
Similar to the first process chain cemented carbides and ceramics are also widely 
used as mold material for the needed structured tool inserts due to their good 
performance and long tool life. Therefore metal-bonded grinding wheels with very 
fine grains in high concentrations are also used for this process chain to achieve 
best surface qualities and profile constancies. The difficulties in the dressing 
operation are similar as well. By staying with a metallic bonding material the 
electrochemical dressing operation described above is applicable, but not practical 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
91
 
since the desired shape of the molds in this case are not rotationally symmetric. By 
using Wire-EDM instead it is possible to dress the wheel and to create a micro 
structure on the grinding wheel surface which is transferred to the mold during the 
profile grinding operation. 
 
Part Design and Mould 
Design
Abrasive profile 
polishing
Precision diamond
profile grinding 
Precision glass 
molding
Part quality
 
Fig. 7 Process chain for the replication of complex optical glass parts 
The principle of wire electro discharge trueing and dressing is shown in  
Figure 8. The EDM process with small discharge energies takes place between the 
electrically conductive metal bond and the wire electrode, separated by a gap filled 
with a dielectric fluid. Since the diamond grits are not electrically conductive they 
are not primarily involved in the process and the bond material is set back resulting 
in the desired grit protrusion. In this way the grinding wheel is dressed and profiled 
at the same time. The grit protrusion of an eroded grinding wheel surface can be 
seen in Figure 9. 
Wire
electrode
Working gap
with dielectric
Bond material
Grinding
wheel
Electric 
discharge
Rotational axis
Programmed wire path
Grit protrusion
Diamond
grit
Upper wire guidance
Lower
wire guidance
Free wire
length
Grinding
wheel
Rotating
device
 
Fig. 8 Principle of wire electro discharge trueing and dressing 

92 
F. Klocke et al.
 
By moving the wire electrode along a predefined contour according to the 
programmed NC-code, thermal material removal takes place and the rotating 
grinding wheel is profiled. By using the Wire-EDM process, almost any user-
defined profile can flexibly be implemented on the grinding wheel, see also 
[Uhl08, Mas85]. In contrast to the electrochemical in-process dressing operation 
the EDM-dressing and profiling is performed before grinding and a precise 
clamping device is needed to transfer the grinding wheel from the conventional 
Wire-EDM machine, as shown in Figure 8, to the grinding machine. 
100 µm
Tilted 30°
Diamond grits protruding out of the eroded surface
Cobalt bronze
Co-Bz:
EDX-analysis: 
Co, Cu, Sn
Diamond grits
D15 C50:
EDX-analysis: 
C
 
Fig. 9 Diamond grit protrusion after Wire-EDM processing, [Kli09] 
In contrast to the electrochemical removal principle the thermal removal 
principle of EDM can damage the diamond grits although they are not electrically 
conductive. The material removal of the EDM process is caused by spark 
discharges and the formation of plasma channels with very small areas of heat 
sources on the material surfaces. It is widely believed that the temperature of the 
plasma channel rises above several thousand K during a discharge, [Klo07a]. At 
higher temperatures a transformation of diamond to graphite can be observed. The 
grade of transformation depends on the time and increases exponentially with the 
given temperature. Even if the heat source is not directly located on the diamond 
grit, a graphitisation of the diamonds can take place through thermal conduction. 
The discharges only last in the region of microseconds so the possible 
graphitisation is highly dependent on the location of the discharges. 
To determine the probability of a discharge in a certain location the electrical 
field between the tool (wire) electrode and the workpiece can be estimated as the 
electric field within a plate capacitor. The different permittivity characteristics of 
each material influence the resulting electric field in this region and a discharge 
will occur at the point with the highest electric field and smallest dielectric 
strength. FEM simulations have shown that, assuming good grit protrusion, the 
highest electric force is to be expected at the tips of the diamonds and at the 
intersection of diamond grit and bonding material using oil-based dielectrics. So 
discharges are more likely near the diamond grits or, if the diamond surface 
already shows graphitisation resulting in electric conductivity, on top of the grit 
itself. Thus the diamond grits can be influenced although they are not electrically 
conductive before the process. 
 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
93
 
By adapting the EDM-parameters and special strategies without too many trim 
cuts (without any additional offset correction) this effect can be limited to the 
surface of the grits. In this case there still is a diamond structure in the inner 
volume and the grinding process can still be performed. The wire electro 
discharge trueing and dressing process achieves very high profile accuracies. For 
the preparation of defined profiles only the working gap – which is inherent in the 
EDM process – must be taken into account. Deviation of cyclic running and side 
run out are below 1 µm after the EDM process, confer also [Kli09]. 
For machining of the cylindrical grooves a profile grinding process is 
necessary. Two grinding wheels were trued and dressed by Wire-EDM. The 
performance of these wheels was tested during grinding of the cylindrical lens 
array. A rough grinding operation was done with a coarse wheel (average grain 
size from 15 µm to 30 µm). The following finishing was done with a fine grinding 
wheel (average grain size from 5 µm to 10 µm). The according fine grinding 
parameters are shown in Figure 10. 
For the evaluation of the grinding process the shape accuracy and surface 
quality are measured. Therefore, radius RSP of the sphere and surface roughness 
Ra, on the mold insert were measured. The radius RSP is measured as least square 
fit radius measuring ± 150 µm from the center of each sphere. The surface 
roughness is measured perpendicular to the grinding direction. The sphere radius 
RSP is located within the requested tolerance band of 10 µm. The profile 
constancy of the fine grinding wheel was verified by a comparison of the graphite 
clearance grooves before and after the process. The least square fit radii were 
virtually equal. 
vc = 30 m/s
vf = 2 mm/min
ae = 2-5 µm
Measurement length / mm
Groove
1.115
1.120
1.125
1.130
1.135
1.140
1.145
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
Radius RSP / mm
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Surface finish Ra / nm
Ra
RSP
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
10
20
-20
-10
Profile height / µm
1
Grinding kinematics:
Ground part:
Measurement plot of cross-section:
Grinding results:
 
Fig. 10 Precision grinding of cemented carbide tool insert, [Kli09] 
During this process, the micro cross section profile of the circumferential wheel 
is directly reproduced in the micro geometry of the workpiece. Due to grain size 
and the grinding kinematics the process has not achieved optical surface quality. 
The surface roughness Ra is in the range of 38 to 44 nm for all grooves in 

94 
F. Klocke et al.
 
comparison to the continuous surface in the first process chain where a much 
better surface roughness of below 10 nm was directly possible. Thus, a following 
profile polishing process is needed to reduce surface roughness Ra below 10 nm. 
In comparison to conventional polishing of continuous surface geometries the 
main challenge for abrasive profile polishing consists in preventing edge 
rounding, avoiding a non-uniform wear of the polishing tool as well as preventing 
differences in local material removal, [Sch07]. Results from experiments with 
cemented carbide will show a significant improvement comparing to the pre-
ground surface quality. 
For abrasive polishing of structures an aspheric polishing machine was 
modified, now incorporating three numerically controlled linear axes (X, Y, Z), a 
polishing spindle and a workpiece spindle [Bri09], Figure 11a. The polishing 
spindle mounted on the vertical Z-axis can be tilted by ±90°, Figure 11b. For 
polishing linear structures the workpiece is aligned to the feed direction by using a 
manual rotary table. Process forces can be measured by a force transducer placed 
beneath the workpiece. Furthermore, the polishing tools can be dressed in-situ 
with a diamond tool to ensure minimal run-out. A camera system with an 
integrated zoom is used to visualize and control the tool making and the polishing 
process. The adjustment of a polishing tool above a groove can be controlled by 
the camera system, Figure 11c. The polishing process can be controlled by 
monitoring the force components and moving the X-, Y- and Z-axis, in order to 
guarantee a continuous polishing pressure at the workpiece surface. 
b)
Polishing
spindle
Polishing tool
Workpiece
spindle
Force 
transducer
Camera
Rotary table
Workpiece
B-axis
vf
c)
Camera view
y
z
B
a)
Workpiece
Polishing
tool
x
 
Fig. 11 Experimental set-up for polishing cylindrical lens arrays [Bri09] 
Compared to conventional polishing processes, the polishing tools for 
structured surfaces are contacting a much smaller area of the workpiece. The tool 
material must have a high strength of shape but be still soft enough to embed 
abrasives to ensure the polishing effect [Sch08a]. Preparation of the exact tool 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
95
 
shape is realized by diamond turning in-situ on the polishing machine. Hence, the 
material must also be machinable by turning operations. The potential of different 
tool materials was investigated. Organic felt material offers a good polishing 
effect but a very low strength of shape and no machinability. By impregnating the 
material to carbonized felt diamond turning of the tool tip becomes possible. But 
the inhomogeneity of the organic fiber structure and the low wear resistance of the 
impregnation limit the application of this material. The plastics POM 
(polyoxymethylen) and PA6 (polyamide) were chosen for polishing experiments 
because of the very high strength of shape and the good machinability with 
diamond tools. But a very low polishing effect was achieved with POM/PA6 as 
only a few abrasives situated in the contact zone between the hard plastic material 
and the workpiece surface. For the presented experiments laminated pear woods 
were used. This hard wood has good diamond tool machinability, leads to a good 
polishing effect and offers a high wear resistance during the polishing process. 
The profile polishing of the cylindrical lens array’s mold insert was realized by a 
pin type polishing tool with a planar front side [Sch08b]. The tilt of the planar front 
side guarantees a constant velocity in the cylindrical groove because of the cylinder 
edge contact area (linear engagement). By adapting the cylinder diameter of the 
polishing tool and tilting it the resulting contact ellipse in the workpiece groove 
ensures a homogeneous polishing pressure. Following polishing parameters were 
selected: 
• 
Polishing tool: tilted cylindrical pin (inclination: 57°) with planar front  
side made of laminated hardwood (pear) 
• 
Diamond suspension: oil based (abrasive size: 3 µm) 
• 
Rotation speed: n = 2500 min-1 (relative velocity: vr = 4.103 mm/min) 
• 
Polishing force: F = 0.2 N (polishing pressure: p = 0.8 N/mm2) 
• 
Feed rate: vf = 5 mm/min 
• 
Machining cycles: 2 (± feed direction) 
A detailed process analysis is given in Figure 12. It shows the mold insert quality 
of one single groove. Measurements with white light interferometry show an 
improvement of the surface quality from Sa ≈ 40 nm to Sa < 10 nm, [Klo07b]. The 
shape measurement was done by profilometry. Here, a constant shape deviation 
below 0.5 µm is visible. Only at the groove tips a minimal tool material 
deformation leads to edge rounding resulting from the compression load during 
polishing. The tip radius was expanded from 0.005 mm to 0.007 mm. 
3.1   Resume 
Metal-bonded fine grained diamond grinding wheels can efficiently be used for 
precision profile grinding of filigree structured mold inserts in highest form 
accuracy. The resulting surface quality in the range of 40 nm Ra depends on the 
grit size and on the grinding kinematics. Wire-EDM can successfully be used for 
trueing and dressing of the grinding wheels. By abrasive profile polishing the 
roughness of the cylindrical grooves can be improved to optical quality. Therefore, 
this polishing process is applicable in optical mold making to increase the quality 
of replicated structured glass lenses. 

96 
F. Klocke et al.
 
40 µm
300 µm
400 µm
0 µm
0 µm
0 µm
Ground
Sa = 40 nm
40 µm
300 µm
400 µm
0 µm
0 µm
0 µm
Polished
Sa = 9 nm
-0,5
-0,25
0,5
0
0,25
Width w / mm
Profile height
z / µm
0
10
20
30
Ground mold insert
Polished mold insert
zdev / µm
Shape deviation
0
2
1
-0,5
-0,25
0,5
0
0,25
Width w / mm
R = 5 µm
R = 7 µm
 
Fig. 12 Comparison of roughness and profile before and after polishing 
4   Conclusion 
In this chapter, two process chains were presented introducing novel processes for 
manufacturing of cemented carbide molds with rotationally symmetric and 
structured surfaces for precision glass molding operations. 
It was shown that diamond profile grinding in combination with electrochemical 
in-process dressing is capable of machining molds with continuous surfaces 
directly in optical quality. A subsequent polishing process is not necessary and 
therefore the process chain is condensed which saves time and will lower the 
manufacturing costs (Figure 13a). 
In the second process chain the manufacturing of a mold insert with cylindrical 
lens array geometry by precision diamond profile grinding and abrasive profile 
polishing is presented. It was shown that the novel process combination of 
diamond profile grinding together with Wire-EDM trueing and dressing is capable 
to create lens arrays with highest profile constancies. By abrasive profile polishing 
the roughness of the grooves can be improved to optical quality without critical 
shape deviation. Thus precision glass molding can directly replicate filigree micro 
structured glass optics, as shown in Figure 13b. 

Novel Processes for the Machining of Tool Inserts for Precision Glass Molding 
97
 
a)
b)
 
Fig. 13 Finished cemented carbide glass mold inserts in optical quality 
In conclusion the two presented process chains were designed and optimized by 
applying basic research and development and can now be applied to almost any 
user defined geometry. 
References 
[Bri09] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Mechanisches Polieren linearer und 
räumlich begrenzter Strukturen. Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und 
Polieren, pp. 282–298. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2009) 
[Bri10] 
Brinksmeier, E., Mutlugünes, Y., Klocke, F., Aurich, J.C., Shore, P., Ohmori, 
H.: Ultra-precision grinding. Annals of CIRP 59(2), 652–671 (2010) 
[Kli09] 
Klink, A.: Funkenerosives und elektrochemisches Abrichten feinkörniger 
Schleifwerkzeuge, Dissertation. RWTH Aachen (2009) 
[Klo07a] 
Klocke, F., König, W.: Fertigungsverfahren 3. Abtragen, Generieren und 
Lasermaterialbearbeitung, pp. 30–37. Springer, Berlin (2007) 
[Klo07b] 
Klocke, F., Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Klink, A., Schulte, H.: Manufacturing 
structured tool inserts for precision glass moulding with a combination of 
diamond grinding and abrasive profile polishing. Industrial Diamond 
Review (4), 64–69 (2007) 
[Klo08] 
Klocke, F., Klink, A., Henerichs, M.: ELID Dressing Behaviour of Fine 
Grained Bronze-Bonded Diamond Grinding Wheels. In: Proc. of the 1st Int. 
ELID Grinding Conference, Changsha, pp. 12–18 (2008) 
[Klo10] 
Klocke, F., Schwade, M., Klink, A.: Precision Grinding with In-Process ECM-
Dressing. In: Proc. of the 10th Euspen Int. Conf., vol. 2, pp. 339–342 (2010) 
[Mas85] 
Masuzawa, T., Fujino, M., Kobayashi, I.I.S.: Wire Electro-discharge Grin-ding 
for Micro-Machining. Annals of CIRP 34(1), 431–434 (1985) 
[Ohm90] 
Ohmori, H., Nakagawa, T.: Mirror Surface Grinding of Silicon Wafers with 
ELID. Annals of CIRP 39(1), 329–332 (1990) 
[Sch07] 
Schulte, H., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Surface finishing of ground micro-
structured glass molds. In: Proc. of the 7th Euspen Int. Conf., vol. 2, pp. 237–
240 (2007) 

98 
F. Klocke et al.
 
[Sch08a] 
Schulte, H., Riemer, O., Gläbe, R., Brinksmeier, E.: Characterization of Pad 
Materials in Abrasive Profile Polishing. In: Proc. of the ASPE 23th Annual 
Meeting Portland, Oregon, USA, vol. 43, pp. 428–431 (2008) 
[Sch08b] 
Schulte, H., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: FEM-based Prevention of Process-
related Local Shape Deviation during Polishing of Micro Structures. In: Proc. 
of the 8th Euspen Int. Conf., vol. 2, pp. 7–10 (2008) 
[Sha96] 
Shaw, M.: Principles of Abrasive Processing. Oxford Uni. Press (1996) 
[Uhl08] 
Uhlmann, E., Piltz, S., Oberschmidt, D.: Machining of micro rotational parts by 
wire electrical discharge grinding. Prod. Eng. Res. Devel. 2, 227–233 (2008) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 99–117. 
springerlink.com                                                       © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and 
Structured Molds 
Fritz Klocke, Christian Brecher, Ekkard Brinksmeier, Barbara Behrens,  
Olaf Dambon, Oltmann Riemer, Heiko Schulte, Roland Tuecks, Daniel Waechter, 
Christian Wenzel, and Richard Zunke* 
Abstract. The replication of ultra precise optical components requires molds with 
an extremely low surface roughness, a minimum of defectivity and high shape 
accuracy. To meet these demands polishing is essential. In comparison to other 
fields of application, polishing molds combines high demands and new 
geometries, e.g. aspherical cavities or structured surfaces for cylindrical lens 
arrays. Due to a lack of suitable polishing strategies, tools and innovative tool 
machines, the molds often have to be polished manually. In this chapter the 
authors discuss the major aspects for deterministic polishing starting from basic 
investigations on the material removal mechanisms to process strategies, tool 
development and design of innovative polishing tool machines. The materials 
dealt with reach from steel to advanced ceramics and tungsten carbide. The 
addressed geometries are smooth molds with a continuous surface as well as 
structured surfaces. The discussed issues look at the needs in replication of both 
plastic and glass optics.  
1   Introduction 
One key to success in the replication of plastic and glass optics represents the 
mold inserts. Therefore, deterministic, powerful and automated manufacturing 
processes for the mold making are required. Polishing forms the most frequently 
                                                           
Fritz Klocke · Barbara Behrens · Olaf Dambon · Richard Zunke 
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT,  
Steinbachstraße 17, 52074 Aachen, Germany 
 
Christian Brecher · Roland Tuecks · Daniel Waechter · Christian Wenzel 
Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production Engineering WZL, RWTH Aachen, 
Steinbachstraße 19, 52074 Aachen, Germany 
 
Ekkard Brinksmeier · Oltmann Riemer · Heiko Schulte 
Laboratory for Precision Machining LFM, University of Bremen, Badgasteiner Straße 2, 
28359 Bremen, Germany 

100 
F. Klocke et al.
 
used technology if high surface quality in terms of low roughness and high surface 
integrity is demanded. In many applications polishing secures the functionality of 
the samples. Due to its position at the end of the manufacturing sequence, it 
determines the sample quality substantially. For long-time polishing has been 
established in the conventional manufacturing of optics by grinding and polishing. 
In the fields of metal sheet forging or plastic injection molding, molds and dies 
have been polished manually for many years.  
The manufacturing of molds for the replication of optics combines the high 
demands in terms of accuracy of the optics manufacturing with complex 
geometries, partly dealt with in mold and die making industry.  
Within the SFB / TR4 several projects focused on the development of 
appropriate polishing machines, automated processes and the required 
fundamental understanding of polishing necessary for finishing mold inserts. 
Figure 1 provides an overview of the major influences, which determine the 
polishing result in terms of form accuracy, surface quality, sub-surface condition 
and efficiency (material removal rate). 
Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of the material removal in polishing 
presents the key for the systematic development of polishing processes and helps to 
explain the causes of process instabilities and defects on the polished surfaces. This 
will be presented for the different mold materials in the next section. 
In the field of mold and die making industry logical explanatory models are 
missing for describing defects like pull-outs which are the reason for many 
judicial issues. Process strategies for manufacturing ‘defect free’ high gloss 
polished tool steel surfaces will be shown and a defect chart with advices for 
avoiding defects will be presented in the second section. 
Goals
Form accuracy
Surface quality
Sub surface condition
Material removal rate
Polishing slurry
Polishing liquid
Type (Chemical, 
physical properties
Concentration of 
abrasives
Viscosity
Temperature
Supply and 
conditioning
Service time
Polishing abrasive
Type (Chemical, 
physical properties
Hardness
Grain size
Size distribution
Grain shape
Polishing tool
Tool body
Geometry
Rigidity
Dressing 
Pad 
Material
Hardness
Condition
Input parameters
Pressure
Relative velocity
Polishing time
Oscillation movement
Inhomogenities
Environmental 
influences
Operator
Uncontrolled variables
Construction
Type of kinematic
……
Machine
Material
Geometry 
Thermal, chemical 
properties
Sample
 
Fig. 1 Overview of major influences on the polishing results 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
101
 
The following chapter describes an innovative polishing tool machine for local 
polishing of smooth, free formed surfaces. New membrane based tools are 
designed and analytical simulations support the choice of the most suitable 
polishing kinematic in regard to the final surface texture and shape accuracy.  
Optical and medical industries are demanding a large variety of optical 
elements exhibiting complex geometries in the shape of localized cavities or 
grooves. The authors finally present the development of a new abrasive polishing 
process for finishing structured molds, which is exclusively realized by vibration 
motion [Bri09, Schu09, Bri10]. The absence of rotational tools opens up the 
possibility to machine new types of surface geometries.  
2   Fundamental Mechanism in Polishing 
Four hypotheses about material removal mechanisms in polishing emerged from 
the investigations on the chemical and physical phenomena in polishing [Ham01, 
Eva03]. These are the hypothesis of abrasion, the flow hypothesis, the chemical 
hypothesis and the friction wear hypothesis. Recent research activities focus on 
the interaction between the system components [Xie96, Kom97, Luo04, Cha08], 
for example the interaction between an abrasive grain, the sample surface and the 
polishing pad. Evans et al. provide an extensive discussion of the two-component 
and three-component interactions in the process area [Eva03]. 
In the following discussion, fundamental differences in material removal 
mechanisms are expressed by grouping them into two categories: a merely 
mechanical removal mechanism and a chemical-mechanical one. The mechanical 
removal mechanism refers particularly to the abrasion and flow hypothesis as well 
as the abrasive wear theory. Samuels stated that the difference between grinding 
and polishing is only in terms of scratches’ and chips’ magnitude, but not in terms 
of removal mechanisms [Agh70, Sam03]. The flow hypothesis, developed by 
Beilby, Tabor and Bowden [Bei21, Bow50], assumes the occurrence of material 
displacements and the formation of an modified surface layer. 
The chemical-mechanical removal mechanism combines chemical and 
mechanical effects for explanation of material removal. Examples are the friction 
wear theory or the developed understanding of chemical-mechanical planarization 
(CMP) in wafer processing [Kom96, Jia01, Eva03]. 
Preston’s equation represents the basis for modeling the polishing process 
[Pre27]. It states that the material removal rate dz/dt is proportional to the applied 
pressure p and to the relative velocity vR between the sample and the polishing 
pad: 
R
P
v
p
K
dt
dz
⋅
⋅
=
 
 
 
    (1) 
The design of many polishing machines and of nearly all polishing processes is 
based on Preston’s equation. Additionally, more complex predictive models were 
developed [Xie96, Luo04, Cha08, Wan08], particularly in CMP.  
By the design of the polishing system the occurrence of a specific material 
removal mechanism can be influenced. The polishing system is defined by the 
sample material, the polishing liquid, the polishing agent and the polishing pad. In 

102 
F. Klocke et al.
 
the following, the basic mechanisms and their effects on the surface and sub 
surface area in polishing steel, advanced ceramics and tungsten carbide are 
explained when applying one specific material removal mechanism. 
2.1   Polishing of Steel  
Within the SFB / TR4 best results in polishing steel were achieved with diamond 
slurries. Based on the assumption that the material removal is predominantly of 
abrasive nature, the chip formation mechanism can be modeled as follows: The 
polishing grain penetrates the work piece surface and scratches across the surface, 
embedded in the polishing pad [Dam05, Klo06a]. Both the resulting normal and 
tangential load generate stresses in the form of pressure, tension and shearing. As 
soon as the yield strength of the material is exceeded, the stresses lead to plastic 
deformation [Klo05]. The grooving grain displaces material and, once, the 
maximum formability is reached, chip formation occurs. A detailed analytical 
calculation of the penetration depth of a single abrasive grain and the resulting 
material flow stresses can be found in [Klo08a]. Further chemical aspects in 
polishing steel are discussed in [Dam05, Klo06b]. 
In order to draw conclusions on removal mechanisms and chip formation, 
hardened and unhardened CrMo-steels were investigated [Klo05, Dam05]. One 
astonishing result is, that hardened steels shows higher material removal rates 
(MRR) than unhardened ones. The experiments also revealed, that a better surface 
roughness is reached with hardened steels than with unhardened ones [Klo05]. 
According to Zum Gahr, different chip formation mechanisms can be charac-
terized from the ratio of the displaced volume to the volume of the cutting trace 
[Gah98]. In the so called micro ploughing only material displacement takes place. In 
contrast, in micro cutting the removed volume equals the volume of the cutting trace. 
The findings on the MRR correspond with Zum Gahr’s wear theory. In polishing 
ductile, unhardened steel the degree of plastification and material displacement is 
higher than in polishing brittle, hardened ones. A higher ratio of micro ploughing 
occurs and the amount of removed material is lower. Contrarily, because of the high 
dislocation density in hardened steels no significant material displacement appears, 
but cutting of material occurs instantaneously [Dam05, Klo05].  
 
100 nm
1. Boundary layer
2. Deformed layer
3. Bulk material
1. Boundary layer
2. Deformed layer
3. Bulk material
vc
1
2
3
bulk material
deformed grain
Surface Layer (W & Au)
high dislocation
density
bulk material
 
Fig. 2 Sub surface condition of an unhardened steel after polishing with diamond (TEM, 
right) 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
103
 
TEM analyses confirm that hardened steel, with its martensitic structure, is less 
subject to plastic deformation. In terms of unhardened steel a boundary layer close 
to the surface can be identified with strongly deformed grains and significantly 
higher dislocation density (Figure 2). In deeper regions, no influence of the 
polishing process on the lattice structure can be observed. In terms of hardened 
steel, a boundary layer with a high amount of dislocations can not be identified 
[Dam05]. 
2.2   Polishing of Advanced Ceramics  
Both silicon carbide and silicon nitride are widely known for superior material 
properties. In specific applications, for example molds, polishing of these 
advanced ceramics is required to ensure low surface roughness and damage free 
subsurface regions.  
To clarify the effects of both distinguished material removal mechanisms, 
investigations on polishing silicon carbide (SIC) and silicon nitride (HIPSN) are 
summed up [Klo07a, Klo09a]. Three different types of slurries were employed: 
water-glycol with diamonds (synthetic, 2-4 µm), and two water based slurries with 
ceria (Opaline by Rhodia) resp. with zirconia (CC10TM by Saint-Gobain). The 
usage of a diamond slurry results obviously in a mechanically dominated removal 
mechanism [Kom97, Eva03, Dam05, Klo09a]. Ceria and zirconia slurries feature 
chemical-mechanical interactions [Kom96, Klo07a]. Due to their lower hardness 
compared to the ceramics pure abrasion can be excluded.  
The occurring material removal mechanism effects the MRR, the surface 
quality and the influence of machining parameters. Figure 3 indicates the 
dependency of MRR on material and material removal mechanism, determined by 
the design of the slurry [Klo09a].  
MRR [µm/min]
HIPSN
SSiC
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
diamond with
water glycol
diamond with
water glycol
ceria with water
zirconia with water
ceria with water
zirconia with water
Machining parameters: p=200kPa, n=500min-1
Mechanical removal 
mechanism
Chemical-mechanical
removal mechanism
 
Fig. 3 Average MRR in polishing silicon based ceramics with various polishing agents 

104 
F. Klocke et al.
 
Apparently, employing diamond is the best choice for polishing silicon carbide. 
In contrary, the usage of the water based ceria slurry was an efficient choice in 
processing silicon nitride. 
An statistical analysis of the influence of pressure and relative velocity on the 
MRR indicates that they do not show the same effect for all material removal 
mechanisms. In diamond polishing an increase of both input parameters results in 
a similar effect on the MRR which correlates with the Preston’s equation. 
Whereas, if using ceria or zirconia, the relative velocity does not effect 
significantly the MRR in the same manner as the applied pressure. Therefore, the 
actual removal mechanism has to be considered regarding the choice of machining 
parameters [Klo09a].  
In addition to the empirical investigations, the influence of the material removal 
mechanism on the surface and sub surface area was investigated by SEM, TEM, 
and AFM [Klo09a]. After polishing with diamond, the subsurface layer of both 
ceramics reveals dislocations up to 100 nm. They reach deeper in HIPSN than in 
SIC. The high toughness of silicon nitride implicates that the applied polishing 
work is converted to form the dislocations before any micro chipping occurs. In 
contrary, the high brittleness of silicon carbide leads primarily to micro chipping 
and cracking [Klo09a].  
Following the general argumentation for chemical-mechanical polishing of 
HIPSN, the silicon nitride surface is worn by hydrolysis with the aid of ceria as a 
catalyst [Kom96, Jia01, Hah99]. In a second step, ceria removes the formed oxide 
layer. Own investigations revealed several indicators for the validity of this 
hypothesis, e.g. an observed increase of pH and a measured amount of ammonia in 
the slurry [Klo09b]. After chemical-mechanical polishing TEM analyses show a 
complete absence of any dislocations in the subsurface layer and the surface seems 
to be free of scratches on AFM images [Klo09a].  
2.3   Polishing of Tungsten Carbide 
Binder less tungsten carbide represents a common choice of material for the molds 
and dies in precision glass molding. That is why the previous explained 
methodology is extended on binderless tungsten carbide. The investigated type 
shows a ratio of binder below 0.30 % and an ultrafine texture with an average grain 
size below 200 nm. Due to the high chemical wear resistance of the material, the 
investigation focuses on a mechanical dominated material removal mechanism.  
The effects of the relative velocity and the applied pressure on MRR (Figure 4) 
show that the Preston’s equation can also be applied to describe the material 
removal when polishing tungsten carbide. But both parameters do not effect the 
resulting surface quality significantly in terms of roughness parameters. The 
values of Rms are below 2 nm and the peak to valley roughness below 20 nm 
(diamond grit size 2-4 µm, polyurethane polishing foil). This result implies that 
binder less tungsten carbide can be polished with high removal rates without 
decreasing surface quality, which is not given in polishing steel and advanced 
ceramics.  

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
105
 
100  150  200
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
500
[min-1]
1000
[kPa]
500
1000
1000
MRR [µm/min]
100 150  200
Spherical Mold insert
Ra: 1.22
nm
Rms: 1.53
nm
Rpv: 12.81 nm
 
Fig. 4 Influence of applied pressure and spindle revolution on MRR (left) and average 
surface roughness (right) 
The fundamental investigations were applied on spherical mold inserts, shown 
on right side of Figure 4, which confirms the feasibility of polishing tungsten 
carbide in short time with a high surface quality. 
3   Polishing Processes for the Mold and Die Making Industry  
The polishing process in the mold and die making industry is mainly done 
manually. The quality of a manual polished mold strongly depends on the 
worker’s skill and experience. In order to reduce this dependency, the main goal 
of the research at Fraunhofer IPT consists in the automation of the polishing 
process in order to support the worker up to 80% of his manual, monotone work. 
But previous to the automation a complete understanding of the polishing process 
and the influencing parameters is essential.  
An important aspect is to find logical explanatory models for describing the 
appearance of imperfections which are a knock-out criterion for the required 
surface of the final plastic part and the reason for many judicial issues between 
polisher, steel manufacturer, mold maker and end user. 
In the transfer project named SFB/TR4-T3, process strategies for 
manufacturing of defect free high gloss tool steel surfaces were developed in 
purpose to get robust strategies for avoiding the imperfections and/or giving 
advices about what to do when surface imperfections appear. 
3.1   Polishing Strategies and Influencing Parameters 
To gain a complete understanding of the polishing process, many experiments on 
different tool steels have been executed in order to analyze the influencing 
parameters on a polished surface in a scientific manner. The following relevant 
parameters have been examined during the project:  

106 
F. Klocke et al.
 
 
steel composition and structure, 
 
manufacturing process, 
 
polishing kinematics, 
 
cleaning strategies and 
 
polishing systems. 
Experiments with different steel compositions gave evidence that small 
differences in the alloying elements such as manganese, molybdenum and 
vanadium don’t affect the polishing result. Although, differences in microstructure 
and steel manufacturing show clearly that the number of carbides and non-metallic 
inclusions are decisive for the quality of the polishing result. 
In this context pull-outs might be the most interesting defects, as they appear as 
peaks on injection molded plastic parts, which therefore are rejected. They occur, 
as the name indicates, when carbides or non-metallic inclusions breaks out of the 
steel matrix. Four different scenarios are imaginable for the interaction between a 
diamond grain and a steel matrix containing carbides (Figure 5, left): 
 
    
 
Fig. 5 Interactions with diamond grain and steel surface (left) [Dam05], Non-metallic 
inclusion (right) 
1. 
A typical mechanical abrasion of steel caused by a diamond grain (no 
carbide particles involved),  
2. 
A diamond grain strikes a large primary carbide, which stays in the 
surface as it is still enclosed by the steel matrix,  
3. 
Secondary carbides, which are smaller than the diamond grain, are 
removed out of the steel matrix and will not affect the surface quality,  
4. 
Carbides having the same size as the diamond grain, or even larger, are 
not easily removed out of the steel matrix, but will be cut into pieces/or 
pulled-out by the diamond grain.  
Another reason for the pull-outs are non-metallic inclusions (NMI), e.g. oxidic 
and/or sulphidic particles occurring as line shaped or globular inclusions. NMI 
can, as carbides, break out and leave holes or stay in the steel matrix, but in some 
cases only the softer material around the NMI is removed leaving a “stuffed hole” 
with the disadvantage that water can enter, leading to corrosions around actual 
inclusions (see Figure 5 right). 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
107
 
3.2   Defect Chart 
As a first step towards an uniform polishing vocabulary, Fraunhofer IPT has 
created a defect chart in cooperation with the Swedish University of Halmstad 
[Reb09] on the basis of the European standard EN ISO 8785 [Eni99]. 
 
Fig. 6 Classification of surface imperfections – defect chart 
With this table and the according manifold experiments, polishing strategies for 
various examined steel grades were formulated and are presented on the SFB/TR4 
homepage.  
On the basis of these results, the aim of further research at Fraunhofer IPT is 
the development of automated, integrated and robotic polishing systems to 
compensate the disadvantages of manual processing and to support the manual 
polisher in his monotone work. The goal is to automate up to 80 percent of the 
polishing process so that only 20 percent of the work will still be performed 
manually. This was already shown on parts with freeform surfaces in a robot cell 
with an integrated force-controlled polishing spindle [Klo10]. 

108 
F. Klocke et al.
 
4   Computer Controlled Polishing of Free Formed Surfaces 
Replication technologies, such as the injection molding of plastics or the 
embossing of glass, bear a very high potential for a cost effective high quality 
mass production of such complex optical components. The key component within 
this complex process is the mold insert itself. However, little knowledge about the 
replication processes and insufficient possibilities of simulating the exact behavior 
of the deformed material cause a difficult and cost intensive ramp up. Due to the 
lack in calculation the shrinkage and inner tension related deformations of the 
replicated optics, the mold inserts has to be tested and iteratively adopted. The 
form correction machining of the molds for the optimization needs to be able to 
remove material in a range of a few microns to several tens of Nanometers in 
order to assure maximum shape deviations below a 100 nm PV. Usually, 
chemically and mechanically highly withstanding metals or even ceramics are 
used. A surface finish of down to 2 nm Ra are requested. Conventional path 
controlled machining such as milling or turning operation does not reach out to 
this level of accuracy. 
4.1   Dwell Time Controlled Polishing 
Different from conventional milling or grinding operation, the locally applied 
polishing is a dwell time controlled process. The material removal is controlled by 
the feed-rate of the tool on the surface. The more material has to be removed, the 
slower the feed-rate is adjusted. For little removal the feed-rate is increased. This 
approach turns the achieved precision on the work piece away from the accuracy 
of the applied machine tool towards the process stability and a sophisticated pre-
calculation of the pursuit polishing strategy. Presupposing the above, defined form 
corrections in the sub-micron range are possible on materials used in the optical 
mold making. The pre-calculation is conducted in an off-line mode prior to the 
actual polishing by an algorithm. As input data, the supposed geometry of the 
mold insert is needed. This geometry usually differs from the one of the final 
replicated optic due to the influence of shrinkage and inner tension that needs to 
be corrected. In addition, a shape measurement of the part taken either 
interferometrical or tactile is used to determine the local error map of the insert 
that needs to be corrected. The third requested input is the so called influence 
function of the locally applied polishing tool, describing the material removal 
profile in dependence of adjustable process parameters such as pressure and 
relative velocity. With the above three input variables the subsequent calculation 
of the polishing algorithm is based on an optimization assisted division of the 
influence function and the error profile, generating the ultra-precise polishing 
strategy. Of fundamental importance for the functionality of this machining 
approach with a pre-calculated dwell time map is a stable, reproducible and 
deterministically adjustable influence function. For the insurance of the control 
over the polishing influence function, extensive knowledge about the process itself 
especially including tribo-mechanical interactions is needed. Beyond this 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
109
 
understanding, a machining system is necessary providing and controlling 
constant process parameters even on complex form shapes. 
4.2   Machining System – Adaptive Polishing Head 
At the Fraunhofer IPT a new, adaptable polishing head based on a parallel-
kinematic-structure has been developed for the locally applied polishing. The 
machining system is capable of providing all the relevant kinematics for the 
polishing tool. The work piece does not have to be driven separately. Due to the 
kinematic setup of a specially designed Double-V-Parallel-Kinematic-Structure, 
eccentric movements, angles of precession and dynamic adaptations under 
consideration of the process relevant eccentricity can be realized. On account of 
the independence of a work piece rotation or linear movement, the process 
conditions are ideally stable, also on complex free-form shapes. A more detailed 
description of the mechanical setup and its control system can be found in 
[Wec04, Bre05]. Figure 7 shows the final design of the test bench used for the 
process parameter investigation. 
 
Fig. 7 a) Machine tool setup used for investigations of the zonal polishing process, b) closer 
view on the polishing tool and process kinematic, c) polishing pad with polyurethane foil. 
The overall machine system consists of a 3-Axis base machine and the attached 
adaptive polishing head with in addition have 5 DOF. The adjustable parameter 
ranges are given in table 1. 
 

110 
F. Klocke et al.
 
Table 1 Parameter range of the polishing head 
Polishing force F 
0.5 - 20 N 
Force increment 
0.2 N 
Eccentric frequency fecc 
1 - 10 Hz 
Eccentric radius recc 
0.2 - 4 mm 
Spindle revolutions n 
500 - 5000 min-1 
4.3   Process Development for the Zonal Polishing  
Numerous polishing strategies which determine the process conditions and hence 
the result of the finishing are used for scientific experiments regarding the 
influence function.  
Taking Preston’s equation for granted (Formula 1), a linear increase of the 
MRR should be realized starting from the center of the rotating tool. Figure 8 a) 
shows the accruing characteristic W-profile by the adjusted process parameters 
pressure p and relative velocity vr which are based on theoretical conversion of 
former specified values.  
 
Fig. 8 Determination of eccentric radius as the main parameter for achieving the required 
(b) Gaussian profile of the influence function »Footprint« - Process development on a 
silicon Nitride sample (Si3N4) 
However, the maximum material removal is not found on the outer diameter but 
at one half to two thirds of the radius of the polishing tool, forming the influence 
function. Looking further towards the boundary of the influence function, the 
removal depth declines steadily. This simple trial emphasizes the fact that either an 
inhomogeneous pressure profile or an influence of the relative velocity in the gap 
between the tool and the sample is influencing the geometrical formation. 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
111
 
The influence function is characterized by depth dIF and radius RIF which in this 
case can be identified as 1.6 mm. Preliminary investigations on polishing of steel 
have shown that this dimension can be used for setting up the eccentricity of the 
polishing tool movement in order to achieve a Gaussian profile of the influence 
function [Bre05, Klo08b]. Further investigations lead to a ratio of RIF and 
eccentric radius recc of about 1:2. By using this value and an experimentally 
identified value for the eccentric frequency fecc of 4 Hz the required Gaussian 
profile for the dwell time algorithm can be achieved as shown in figure 7 b). The 
appropriate volume of removed material VIF was computed by importing the 2D-
graph of a Form TalySurf in a specially developed Matlab program and amounts 
to 0.005 mm³ on average (after polishing time of 240 s). 
With the adaptive polishing head, a machine base is given to intensively 
investigate the formation of the influence function of a locally applied polishing 
tool. In terms of the machine parameters, the eccentric frequency shows only a 
small impact for the profile formation. However, the eccentric radius, the applied 
normal force and the relative velocity do have significant impact on the formation 
of the influence function determining the process efficiency. This kind of process 
development is of vital importance in order to conduct form corrections on high 
precision molds for replication purposes in plastic injection molding or embossing 
of glass.  
5   Polishing of Structured Molds  
Optical and medical industries are demanding a large variety of optical elements 
exhibiting complex geometries and multitude opto-functional areas in the range of 
a few millimeters [Eva99]. Therefore, mold inserts made of steel or carbides must 
be finished by polishing for the replication of glass and plastic lenses [Klo07b]. 
For polishing these complex components in the shape of localized cavities or 
grooves the application of rotating polishing pads is very limited [Bri07]. 
Established polishing processes are not applicable, so state of the art is a time 
consuming and therewith expensive polishing procedure by hand. Therefore, a 
new abrasive polishing process for finishing these complex mold geometries to 
optical quality was developed. The necessary relative velocity in the contact area 
between polishing pad and workpiece surface is exclusively realized by vibration 
motion which is an advantage over vibration assisted rotating polishing processes. 
The absence of rotation of the pad opens up the possibility to machine new types 
of surface geometries.  
5.1   Polishing Machine 
The vibration polishing device is powered by two voice-coil actuators, see 
figure 9. These two actuators enable frequencies up to f = 150 Hz and amplitudes 
up to A = 250 µm in two axes and were implemented into a conventional machine 
tool [Bri10].  
During the design process a large area of applicable machining frequencies and 
amplitudes was considered to achieve a multifunctional and flexible system. 
 

112 
F. Klocke et al.
 
 
Fig. 9 Vibration polishing test set up: voice-coil actuators on workpiece side and pad side 
[Bri10] 
On pad side the control is realized open loop with spring return and variable 
stiffness as this concept enables the maximum vibrational frequency. On work 
piece side the control is realized closed loop with a position sensor. 
5.2   Vibration Polishing Material Removal Characterization 
During material removal characterization the polished surface area (material 
removal function – “footprint”) is divided into profile sections. The tip of the 
profilometer loaded with an adjustable normal force drives along these profiles 
with continuous speed. The height position of the tip is continuously recorded and 
with this information the surface contour for each profile section is created. By 
interpolation between the single profiles the 3D-shape of the measuring area can be 
evaluated. The data determined with this procedure realizes primarily the material 
removal calculation. The method for analyzing material removal is described on 
basis of one single profile section in figure 10 [Bri10]. The workpiece material 
below the reference height href is shown hatched. The remaining areas represent  
the void volume above and below href. The distance ltot is the overall length of  
the measuring profile. The length lref represents the measuring section, on which no 
material removal appeared. For calculating the removed material volume the 
difference from the average void volume of the reference length Vvoid,ref/lref and the 
average void volume of the total distance Vvoid,tot/ltot is identified and multiplied 
with the total distance ltot. 
The material removal of one single profile is calculated as follows: 
tot
ref
ref
,
void
tot
tot
,
void
l
l
V
l
V
)
removal
material
profile
(
PMR
⋅





−
=
  
(2) 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
113
 
If this procedure is applied to the entire measured area the material removal is 
calculated as follows: 
tot
ref
ref
,
void
tot
tot
,
void
A
A
V
A
V
)
removal
material
field
(
FMR
⋅





−
=
  
(3) 
The process parameters pressure p, polishing time t and relative velocity vr were 
characterized regarding their linear dependence on material removal [Scu09], 
which can be expected according to Preston’s equation (Formula 1). 
 
 
Fig. 10 Parameter definition for material removal characterization 
For validating the linear material removal behavior the parameters were varied 
on three levels. The polishing system consisted of a synthetic felt pad and  
an oil-based polishing slurry with diamond abrasives of a size of 1 μm. This  
system showed a good applicability and low variances. The experiments were 
accomplished with four repetitions at each level. 
Figure 11 (left) shows the linear increase of the material removal dz over 
polishing time t. The stability index R2 = 98,6 % indicates the fit of the measured 
values to the linear smoothing function. The error bars show the 66,7 % confidence 
region of the average values of the repetitions. The influence of the polishing time 
conforms the Preston’s equation with variables kp, p and vr kept constant. 
 
 
Fig. 11 Verification of Preston’s equation: influence of polishing pressure, relative velocity 
and polishing time on material removal [Schu09] 

114 
F. Klocke et al.
 
The polishing pressure was analyzed at two levels with four repetitions each. A 
pressure larger than p = 0.5 N/mm² is not practible because of the limited power of 
the vibration polishing head. A pressure smaller than p = 0.3 N/mm² would lead to 
very low material removal and therefore non detectible volumes. Figure 11 
(center) shows the linear behavior of the polishing pressure within the covered 
pressure range and confirms also the Preston’s equation. 
The average relative velocity between polishing pad and workpiece is 
calculated from the total distance s and time t for one vibration period 
(1/frequency). The polishing pad covers s = 4 .A (amplitude) during one period of 
oscillation. Hence, the value of relative velocity is calculated by 
r
1
ds
4 A
v
4 A f
dt
f −
⋅
=
=
=
⋅
⋅                                           (4) 
In order to change the relative velocity both the oscillating amplitude and the 
oscillating frequency can be varied. The material removal rate was examined in 
dependence of the frequencies f = 50 Hz, 100 Hz and 150 Hz. 
It is evident from figure 11 (right) that a linear dependence of frequency - and 
thus also the relative velocity - and the material removal rate is applicable. 
Therefore, Preston’s equation can be applied to vibration polishing within the 
analyzed parameter range without restriction. 
Figure 12 shows a polished rectangular slot which was machined to optical 
quality by vibration polishing [Bri09]. 
 
 
Fig. 12 Reference workpiece with vibration polished slot [Bri09] 
6   Conclusion  
This chapter started with a fundamental discussion on the material removal 
mechanisms in polishing with regard to common mold materials. On the one side, 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
115
 
the effects of a mechanical removal mechanism, occurring when using diamond 
abrasives, on the surface and sub surface were discussed. On the other side, a 
damage-free chemical-mechanical removal mechanism for polishing silicon 
nitride was presented. The scientific driven first section was developed to an 
application ready state for polishing steel molds in the second section. With the 
explained defect chart and the development of robust process strategies a first step 
towards a common understanding of the polishing step is made with the goal of an 
international standardization. 
With the adaptive polishing head developed at the Fraunhofer IPT, a machine 
base is given to intensively investigate the formation of the influence function of a 
locally applied polishing tool. The machine in combination with the process 
development enables form corrections on high precision molds, which result in 
higher accuracies of the molded optics with less iteration in mold making process. 
Finally, for finishing complex shaped optical mold inserts a novel polishing 
process was presented, which operates without the classical rotating motion of the 
polishing pad and therefore can be used more flexibly at finite-dimensional opto-
functional surfaces.  
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Agh70] 
Aghan, R.L., Samuels, R.L.: Mechanisms of Abrasive Polishing. Wear 16, 293–
301 (1970) 
[Bre06] 
Brecher, C., Wenzel, C.: Kinematic Influences on the Formation of the 
Footprint During Local Polishing of Steel. WGP Annals XIII(1), 23–26 (2006) 
[Bri07] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Kinematiken zum Polieren von 
Mikrostrukturen. Wt Werkstattstechnik Online 97, 431–436 (2007) 
[Bri09] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Mechanisches Polieren linearer und 
räumlich begrenzter Strukturen. Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und 
Polieren: Verfahren und Maschinen, pp. 282–298. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2009) 
[Bri10] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Material removal mechanisms in 
abrasive vibration polishing of complex molds. In: Advanced Optical 
Manufacturing Technologies, Proceedings of 5th International Symposium on 
Advanced Optical Manufacturing and Testing Technologies, AOMATT 2010. 
SPIE, vol. 7655-02 (2010), doi:10.1117/12.864553 
[Bei21] 
Beilby, G.: Aggregation and Flow of Solids. McMillan and Co. Ltd., London 
(1921) 
[Bow50] 
Bowden, F.P., Tabor, D.: The Friction and Lubrication of Solids. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford (1950) 
[Cha08] 
Chandra, A., Karra, P., Bastawros, A.F., Biswas, R., Sherman, P.J., Armini, S., 
Lucca, D.A.: Prediction of scratch generation in chemical mechanical 
planarization. Annals of the CIRP 57(1), 559–562 (2008) 
[Dam05] 
Dambon, O.: Das Polieren von Stahl für den Werkzeug- und Formenbau, PhD 
thesis, Shaker, Aachen (2005) 

116 
F. Klocke et al.
 
[Eni99] 
Deutsches Institut für Normung e.V., DIN EN ISO 8785: Geometrische 
Produktspezifikationen (GPS) – Oberflächenunvollkommenheiten (Oktober 
1999) 
[Eva99] 
Evans, C.J., Bryan, J.B.: “Structured”, “Textured” or “Engineered” Surfaces. 
CIRP Annals – Manufacturing Technology 48-2, 541–555 (1999) 
[Eva03] 
Evans, C., Paul, E., Dornfeld, D., Lucca, D., Byrne, G., Tricard, M., Klocke, F., 
Dambon, O., Mullany, B.: Material Removal Mechanisms in Lapping and 
Polishing. Annals of the CIRP 52(2), 611–634 (2003) 
[Gah98] 
Zum Gahr, K.-H.: Wear by hard particles. Tribology 31(10), 587–596 (1998) 
[Hah99] 
Hah, S.R., Burk, C.B., Fischer, T.E.: Surface Quality of Tribochemically 
Polished Silicon Nitride. J. Electrochem. Soc. 146(4), 1505–1509 (1999) 
[Ham01] 
Hambücker, S.: Technologie der Politur sphärischer Optiken mit Hilfe der 
Synchrospeed-Kinematik, Ph-D-Thesis, University of Technology Aachen 
(2001) 
[Jia01] 
Jiang, M., Komanduri, R.: Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP) in Magnetic 
Float Polishing (MFP) of Advanced Ceramic (Silicon Nitride) and Glass 
(Silicon Dioxide). Key Engineering Materials 202-203, 1–14 (2001) 
[Klo05] 
Klocke, F., Dambon, O., Capudi Filho, G.G.: Influence of the polishing process 
on the near-surface zone of hardened and unhardened steel. Wear 258(11-12), 
1794–1803 (2005) 
[Klo06a] 
Dambon, O., Demmer, A., Peters, J.: Surface Interactions in Steel Polishing for 
the Precision Tool Making. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 55(1), 
609–612 (2006) 
[Klo06b] 
Klocke, F., Dambon, O., Schneider, U.: Removal Mechanisms in the Mechano-
chemical Polishing of Steel Using Synchro-Speed Kinematics. In: Production 
Engineering, WGP (2008) 
[Klo07a] 
Klocke, F., Zunke, R., Dambon, O.: Wirkmechanismen beim Polieren von 
Keramik. Wt Werkstattstechnik Online 97(6), 437–442 (2007) 
[Klo07b] 
Klocke, F., Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Klink, A., Schulte, H., Sarikaya, H.: 
Manufacturing structured tool inserts for precision glass moulding with a 
combination of diamond grinding and abrasive polishing. IDR Industrial 
Diamond Review 4, 65–69 (2007) 
[Klo08a] 
Klocke, F., Dambon, O., Zunke, R.: Modeling of contact behavior between 
polishing pad and workpiece surface. In: Production Engineering, WGP (2008) 
[Klo08b] 
Klocke, F., Brecher, C., Zunke, R., Tuecks, R.: Finishing Complex Surfaces 
with Zonal Polishing Tools. In: 41st CIRP Conference on Manufacturing 
Systems and Technologies for the New Frontier, Tokyo, Japan, May 26-28, pp. 
445–448 (2008) 
[Klo09a] 
Klocke, F., Zunke, R.: Removal mechanisms in polishing of silicon based 
advanced ceramics. Annals of CIRP 58, 491–494 (2009) 
[Klo09b] 
Klocke, F., Schneider, U., Waechter, D., Zunke, R.: Computer-based 
monitoring of the polishing processes using LabView. Journal of Material 
Processing, 6039–6047 (2009) 
[Klo10] 
Klocke, F., Brecher, C., Zunke, R., Tücks, R., Zymla, C., Driemeyer Wilbert, 
A.: 
Hochglänzende 
Freiformflächen 
aus 
Stahlwerkzeugen. 
Wt Werkstattstechnik Online, Jahrgang 100, Heft 6, 480–486 (2010) 
[Kom96] 
Komanduri, R., Umehara, N., Raghunandan, M.: On the Possibility of Chemo-
Mechanical Action in Magnetic Float Polishing of Silicon Nitride. J. of 
Tribology 118(4), 721–727 (1996) 

Deterministic Polishing of Smooth and Structured Molds 
117
 
[Kom97] 
Komanduri, R., Lucca, D.A., Tani, Y.: Technological Advances in Fine 
Abrasive Processes. Annals of the CIRP 46(2), 545–596 (1997) 
[Luo04] 
Luo, J., Dornfeld, D.: Integrated Modeling of Chemical Mechanical 
Planarization for Sub-Micron IC Fabrication. Springer, London (2004) 
[Pre27] 
Preston, F.W.: The Theory and Design of Plate Glass Polishing Machines. 
Journal of the Soc. of Glass Technology 11, 214–256 (1927) 
[Reb09] 
Rebeggiani, S.: Polishability of Tool Steels – Characterisation of High Gloss 
Polished Tool Steels. Department of Materials and Manufacturing Technology, 
Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg (2009) 
[Sam03] 
Samuels, L.E.: Metallographic Polishing by Mechanical Methods. ASM 
International (2003) 
[Scu09] 
Schulte, H., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Finishing complex mold inserts by 
abrasive vibration polishing. Technical Digest of the SPIE Optifab, TD 06-18, 
Rochester, New York, USA (2009) 
[Wan08] 
Wang, Y., Zhao, Y., Jiang, J., Li, X., Bai, J.: Modeling effect of chemical-
mechanical synergy on material removal at molecular scale in chemical 
mechanical polishing. Wear 265(5-6), 721–728 (2008) 
[Wec04] 
Weck, M., Wenzel, C.: Adaptable 5-axes Polishing Machine-head. Production 
Engineering 11(1), 95–98 (2004) 
[Xie96] 
Xie, Y., Bhushan, B.: Effects of particle size, polishing pad and contact 
pressure in free abrasive polishing. Wear 200(1), 281–295 (1996) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 119–132. 
springerlink.com                                                         © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Process Chain for the Replication of Complex 
Optical Glass Components  
Fritz Klocke, Olaf Dambon, Allen Y. Yi, Fei Wang, Martin Hünten,  
Kyriakos Georgiadis, Daniel Hollstegge, and Julia Dukwen* 
Abstract. Precision glass molding is becoming a promising technology for fast 
production of complex optical glass components in high volume. It is a replication 
process and becomes economical after a few batches. The glass molding process 
can be holistically described by a process chain which starts with the design of the 
optical component and modeling of the glass molding process using numerical 
simulation. An ultraprecision grinding process is applied to manufacturing the 
molds. Chemically insert coatings are necessary in order to prolong mold life 
because the mold has to withstand high mechanical and thermal loads. The 
parameters of the subsequent molding steps such as temperature or pressure 
depend on the type of glass and the size of the optical component. The last step of 
the process chain is the qualification of the optical components by measuring their 
optical properties using precision metrology. 
1   Introduction 
The demand for high-precision, complex-shaped optical components is rapidly 
growing worldwide. Such components are used in classical metrology applica-
tions, such as camera lens modules in mobile phones, optical systems in auto-
mobiles or for optical storage media in information technology. 
The traditional production method for optical components is grinding, followed 
by a polishing step. This method is not economical for manufacturing of complex 
shaped components such as aspheric lenses, free-form lenses or lens arrays in 
medium to large quantities. The final polishing step is extremely costly and 
therefore it is only selected for very high-quality components in small volume.  
As optical materials, glasses offer many advantages over optical polymers. 
Glasses have not only higher transparency but also lower susceptibility to 
                                                           
Fritz Klocke · Olaf Dambon · Fei Wang · Martin Hünten · Kyriakos Georgiadis ·  
Daniel Hollstegge · Julia Dukwen 
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT, Steinbachstraße 17, 52074,  
Aachen, Germany 
 
Allen Y. Yi  
Ohio State University, Ohio, 210 Baker Systems, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 

120 
F. Klocke et al.
 
corrosion and higher strength. Another advantage of glasses is the higher power 
density they allow. This is necessary for high-energy laser and high power lighting 
applications. In addition, glasses provide a greater range of refraction indices than 
optical polymers. On the market different glasses are available. These differences 
in their composition result in different optical properties.  
The precision molding technology is an established technology for fast and 
economical production of complex optical components in large quantities. A glass 
preform and the molding tools are heated up to the molding temperature and 
pressed into the desired shape. In a single step, an optical component with double-
sided functional surfaces and high accuracy is produced, without the need for 
subsequent finishing. Since the mold production by grinding and polishing is 
costly, and the precision glass molding is a replication process, the entire process 
chain only becomes economic after a minimum number of batches. By using 
multi-cavity tools, multiple optical components can be molded in one batch, thus 
increasing the efficiency of the process. 
 
Fig. 1 Process chain for the replication of glass components 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
121
 
Figure 1 describes the complete glass molding process. In the first step, the 
optical component is designed and the molding process simulated. Due to the 
different thermal properties of glass and mold, the lens has a non-negligible 
deviation from the desired shape after the pressing process because of the 
shrinkage of the glass during cooling. Using FEM simulation, the shrinkage of 
glass and changes of its optical properties such as refractive index after molding 
can be calculated. Taking this into account, the mold is manufactured. High 
demands are placed in the form accuracy and roughness of the mold, since any 
form deviations will be transferred to the optical component. To prolong the mold 
lifetime, protective coatings that prevent wear and thus increase the profitability of 
the process are deposited on the mold. The parameters of the pressing process 
such as temperature or pressure depend on the type of glass and the size of the 
optic. After the molding process, the quality of the lenses is controlled by 
measuring of their optical properties using precision metrology. 
2   Design and FE-Simulation 
2.1   Objective of Simulation 
In precision molding process, glass raw material is first heated to a temperature 
above its transition temperature (e.g., B270, Tg=533°C, forming temperature 
625°C) and subsequently pressed into a lens shape, and then carefully cooled 
down together with the mold inserts. During pressing and cooling, many factors 
such as thermal expansion and stress relaxation affect molding process and thus 
lead to form deviation in final geometry and variation in refractive index. 
Therefore, by mold design, the surface deviation should be compensated on the 
mold surface based on the original lens design by adding a slight amount of 
correction, so that the molded lens matches both the geometrical and optical 
specifications. Traditionally, the amount of compensation is determined by costly- 
and time intensive trial and error molding. In recent years, numerical modeling is 
implemented to assist the mold making process to predict these errors before the 
actual mold manufacturing.  
2.2   Thermal and Mechanical Modeling  
The process simulation of precision glass molding is developed based on FE 
method and consists of a thermal model predicting the actual temperature 
distribution and a mechanical model to predict the visco-elastic deformation and 
thermal shrinkage of the molded glass lens.  
The thermal model considers all three heat transfer mechanisms occurring in a 
typical glass molding process (conduction, convection and radiation), in order to 
determine the temperature distribution and variation rate inside both the glass and 
mold volumes during the entire molding process. The temperature distribution 
determines the visco-elastic material behavior of glass material.  
 

122 
F. Klocke et al.
 
Optical 
design
FE-Analysis
Mould and insert 
dimensions
Insert quality (form 
accuracy, roughness) 
R 1
2
Height 
G
Thickness
R 2
Glass
Insert
12.5 µm void
Glass shrinkage
Temperature, stress
Lens dimensions 
Lens specifications 
(nd, ν, etc)
Lens quality (form 
accuracy, scratch/dig)
Mold design 
Optical 
design
FE-Analysis
Mould and insert 
dimensions
Insert quality (form 
accuracy, roughness) 
R 1
2
Height 
G
Thickness
R 2
R 1
2
Height 
G
Thickness
R 2
Glass
Insert
12.5 µm void
Glass
Insert
Glass
Insert
12.5 µm void
Glass shrinkage
Temperature, stress
Lens dimensions 
Lens specifications 
(nd, ν, etc)
Lens quality (form 
accuracy, scratch/dig)
Mold design 
Mold design 
 
Fig. 2 Design of molded optical glass components with the assistance of FE-simulation  
For a typical visco-elastic material, such as glass at the molding temperature, 
the application of a constant load will lead to material deformation, which consists 
of instantaneous deformation (elastic effect) and continuous deformation over 
time (viscous effect). The visco-elastic property will cause decay of the applied 
load and this decay is called stress relaxation, which determines the deformation 
behavior of glass. To describe the visco-elastic behavior, a generalized Maxwell 
model expressed in Eq. 1: 

=
−
=
n
1
i
i
i
)
t/τ
exp(
w
2G
G(t)
 
                  (1) 
can be used to model the stress relaxation of glass at transition temperature 
[Dam09, Jai05, Jai06], where G(t) is the stress relaxation module, ωi are weighting 
factor and τi are the corresponding relaxation times under certain temperature. 
2.3   Index Variation Modeling 
The refractive index of an optical glass changes after precision compression 
molding mainly due to structural relaxation in glass. In the past the phenomenon 
of group index drop has been studied using the Tool-Narayanaswamy-Moynihan 
(TNM) model for different heat treatment and cooling rates [End99]. Meanwhile 
inhomogeneous temperature distribution inside the glass during cooling can cause 
structural distortion and thus refractive index variation after cooling. According to 
Su et al.’s previous research, the refractive index variation inside the molded glass 
will also introduce substantial wavefront deviation for precision glass components 
[Nar71]. This index variation could be modeled by the famous Lorentz-Lorenz 
equation [Rit55]: 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
123
 
α
ρ
π
M
N
n
n
A
3
4
2
1
2
2
=
+
−
                                            (2) 
where M is molar weight, NA is Avogadro number, ρ is density and α is mean 
polarization. Using this equation, refractive index distribution of a molded glass 
lens could be determined by calculating the density change. This prediction of 
index variation during molding is especially necessary for precision imaging 
optics, so that the variation can be compensated during the optical design  
stage. 
2.4   Mold Design and Manufacturing 
After the process simulation in the FEM code like ANSYS, ABAQUS or MSC 
MARC, the calculated glass lens shape after shrinkage is compared to the desired 
form, which shows a maximum deviation of about several up to a hundred 
micrometer depending on different lens surface shape and diameter. For efficient 
compensation, the simulation result of shape deviation will be combined with the 
compensation value of the index drop and then fitted into standard non-spherical 
equation. The amount of deviation is directly mirrored on the mold surface as the 
compensation value. Based on this compensation, the mold inserts made of alloys 
and ceramics will be manufactured on precision grinding machine (e.g. Toshiba 
ULG-100D SH3), thus the molded glass lenses match the specification directly 
without any finishing steps. 
3    Mold Manufacturing 
Optical glass is molded between 350 and more than 800 °C depending on the glass 
type and its chemical composition. While so called low-Tg glasses can be molded 
using nickel plated mold materials, ceramic molds are used for the majority of 
optical glasses. In order to guarantee the highest accuracies and a long mold 
lifetime ceramics are most suitable to be used as mold materials. Their hardness, 
chemical resistance, thermal stability and low coefficient of thermal expansion 
qualify them as the forming tools for the glass molding process. On the other side, 
those properties make it hard to machine these materials. 
While in the past molds made of silicon carbide and other ceramics were used, 
today a binderless tungsten carbide with fine grains is the first material of choice. 
In comparison to conventional hard metals those special grades contain just a very 
small amount of nickel or cobalt, which is used as a metallic binder. Thus, very 
dense (15,57 g/cm³), hard (2825 HV10) and materials can be produced with the 
proper properties a glass molding tool needs. 
Due to its hardness, tungsten carbide can only be machined by grinding and 
polishing [Mei09, Bri07, Bri09]. Here, diamonds are typically used as abrasives. 
 

124 
F. Klocke et al.
 
 
Fig. 3 Ground tungsten carbide molds for precision glass molding 
Since the molds need to be very accurate with optical surface finish, a ductile 
machining process as described by Bifano [Bif88], Grimme [Gri07] and others 
[Liu03, Liu01] is necessary. In ductile mode cutting the process parameters are 
chosen in a way to enable plastically deformation of the material. Thus, cracking 
of the surface is avoided and a very smooth and shiny surface finish is obtained. 
Characteristics of ductile mode cutting processes are very small depth of cut and 
feed rates as well as round instead of sharp cutting edges. Thus, the chip thickness 
is smaller than the so called critical chip thickness, which is an indicator for 
ductile mode cutting and depends on the mechanical properties of the material. In 
addition to the abovementioned process parameters compressive stresses and high 
temperatures in the cutting zone have positive effects on ductile machining. 
To manufacture the molds, an ultraprecision grinding process [Bri10, Che03] is 
applied. Therefore, ultraprecision machines with highly accurate guideways and 
air bearing spindles are needed. For the machining of the tungsten carbide 
materials, resin bonded grinding wheels are used. Typically, the abrasives in the 
bonding are 3 to 5 µm in diameter. The concentration of diamonds is usually 
rather high, so high number of cutting edges can machine the material and 
therefore guarantee a small chip thickness. Thus, a mirror finish can be generated 
on the tungsten carbide surface showing less than 10 nm roughness (Ra).  
Since a grinding wheel is continuously effected by wear, the mold 
manufacturing process usually needs several iterations to reach the final form 
accuracies. Typically, the mold is ground and then the form of the mold is 
measured. Based on this metrology data and their characteristics of the machine 
setup, the grinding wheel position e.g. can be determined. In the final steps the 
metrology data is also used to generate the tool path with compensation of the 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
125
 
existing errors on the mold [Luo97, Che10, Mei10]. Thus, form accuracies of up 
to 150 nm (PV) and irregularities of less than 100 nm can be achieved. 
After grinding, the mold surface already shows an optical finish but there are 
still some regular structures on the mold caused by the grinding process 
characteristics. These regular structures can effect the quality of the optic. To 
eliminate them a subsequent polishing process is needed. Since the large number 
of the molds are rather small or steep, there is no automated polishing process 
capable to machine the molds. Therefore, the majority of the molds are polished 
by hand. 
Based on the current state of the art, a large spectrum of mold geometries of 
different sizes can be machined including rotationally symmetric molds with 
spherical and aspherical shapes, cylindrical shapes, either spherical or aspherical, 
and freeforms such as non rotationally symmetric parts and arrays. 
4   Coatings for Glass Molding 
A crucial requirement for the successful application of the precision glass molding 
technology in practice is the protection of the optical surfaces of the molds 
through the application of suitable coatings [Ma08]. The production of the molds 
in the extreme form accuracy required for optical applications is technically 
difficult and therefore expensive. Protective coatings that can withstand the  
high mechanical, thermal and chemical stresses during the molding process are 
essential. 
     
50000x
500nm
50000x
50000x
50000x
500nm
 
Fig. 4 Coating process (left); PtIr coating (right) 
There are two main failure modes of the molding tools that need to be 
addressed by coatings: 
The first one is glass adhesion on the tool surface. Due to the high temperature 
and the long contact time between molding tool and glass, sometimes glass sticks 
to the mold surface. This phenomenon is the result of chemical interactions 
between the glass and the mold surface. These chemical interactions are 
accelerated by diffusion processes between glass, coating and substrate that take 
place near the surface during multiple pressing cycles. Therefore, coatings with 
the least possible chemical reactivity towards glass, like noble metal coatings, are 
preferred [Fis10]. Alloys of Platinum and Iridium are being successfully used in 

126 
F. Klocke et al.
 
this application [Pat87]. Furthermore, substrates don’t contain elements that 
diffuse easily, like binderless tungsten carbide, are also preferred. Since different 
glasses can have significantly different compositions, each coating should ideally 
be optimized for a specific glass type. 
The second failure mode is the deterioration of the surface quality of the 
molding tool (increased roughness, cracks, scratches etc.). The coatings applied 
should be hard enough to prevent scratching during handling and resilient against 
mechanical and thermal cyclic loads in order to prevent such defects. 
For the deposition of suitable protective coatings, there is a multitude of 
technologies that could be used. There are however several necessary char-
acteristics that the selected coating technology should exhibit: 
 
During cooling, there is usually a difference in the shrink rate of the glass 
and the mold, due to different coefficients of thermal expansion. The 
adhesion of the coating to the substrate should be higher than the 
adhesion of the coating to the glass, in order to avoid coating 
delamination in this situation. Parameters that affect the adhesion are the 
cleanliness and activation method of the substrate prior to coating, as 
well as the deposition parameters [Mat10]. 
 
The coating should not increase the surface roughness. This depends on 
the deposition technology and parameters, as well as the coating 
thickness [Mat10]. 
 
The coating should be as defect-free as possible. Especially in-situ 
coating defects (droplets, clusters, pinholes etc.) should be minimized in 
order to meet the defect density specifications of the optical component. 
 
The coating thickness should not have large variation across the molding 
tool surface. A lot of effort is required to produce molding tools with 
form accuracies down to 150nm (PV or peak to valley). A coating 
thickness variation of a few hundred nm would derail this effort. Low 
coating thicknesses (well below 1µm) and suitable substrate rotation 
during coating can be used to prevent this problem. 
By using the above mentioned characteristics as selection criteria, the most suited 
coating technology is sputtering. This PVD (physical vapor deposition) process is 
able to provide smooth, defect-free coatings with low coating thickness variation 
and is extremely flexible regarding possible coatings and substrates [Mat10]. 
5   Glass Molding 
Several hot forming technologies for glass products have been developed during 
the last decades. The most precise of them is called precision glass molding, or 
precision pressing and was originally developed in Asia and the United States 
approximately at the same time [Yi07, Klo04].  
Sometimes the process is described as ‘isothermal’ process. This refers to the 
fact that the molding tools and glass have the same temperature throughout the 
process. The system itself is exposed to a heat cycle from room temperature to 
700° in some cases and is therefore not strictly isothermal. The material input for 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
127
 
the precision glass molding process consists of a glass preform with polished or 
fire-polished surface quality. As a general rule, the surface quality of the final 
molded product cannot be better than the preform or the mold surface. Drops of 
glass can be formed directly from the melt or glass can be cut, ground and 
polished into balls, disks or spherical lenses. The molding tools with the preform 
in between are heated up to pressing temperature by infrared radiation in a process 
chamber. The process chamber is first evacuated and then purged with nitrogen to 
prevent oxidation on the tools. The pressing temperature is chosen in the range 
between the yield point and the softening point so that the viscosity of the glass is 
between 1010 and 107 dPa s. After reaching the pressing temperature a 
homogenizing phase is added to achieve a uniform temperature distribution within 
the molds and the glass. The glass does not absorb much of the infrared light and 
is mainly heated by thermal conduction over the contact area or convection by the 
nitrogen flow. Thereafter the glass is pressed between the molds. The pressing 
cycle is mainly force controlled, in combination with the glass viscosity this leads 
to strain rates of a few mm/ minute. To achieve the desired center thickness of the 
lens, several end conditions are used. As the temperature control is very exact, a 
defined pressing time can be used to achieve a defined strain. Alternatively, 
position control can be employed and an end position for pressing can be defined. 
When the molding tools engage during pressing in a way that a closed cavity is 
formed, the center thickness is defined to a large amount by the preform volume.  
After the pressing phase, the tools are cooled by nitrogen gas flow. A holding 
force is applied and the glass is cooled via the heat transfer over the molds. The 
holding force compensates the shrinkage of the glass when in viscoelastic regime 
and suppresses deformation due to internal stresses when approaching the elastic 
regime. The cooling phase is divided in two steps. A first step with a slow, 
controlled cooling rate and a second step of fast cooling once the glass has been 
cooled down under the transition temperature. The process ends at approximately 
200 °C, the process chamber opens, the molded glass part is removed from the 
molds and a new preform is put in. The overall cycle time is around 15 to 25 min 
depending on the size and geometry of the product. To increase throughput, 
several molding tools can be used in one process. The advantages of this specific 
glass molding technology is the ability to mold double-sided parts with a lateral 
alignment of 5 µm and angular alignment of 50 arcseconds using many types of 
optical glasses. 
6   Measurement of Optical Properties 
Structural relaxation is the non-linear time dependent response of glass material 
properties (e.g., volume, density and enthalpy) to temperature change [Sch86]. 
The structural response depends on the thermal history, current temperature and 
the direction of the temperature change. The optical properties such as refractive 
index of an optical glass will change after molding due to structural relaxation in 
glass [Su10]. This requires appropriate process conditions in manufacturing to 
minimize the impact due to refractive index change. Figure 3 illustrates a three 
dimensional (3D) measurement setup [Zha09]. 

128 
F. Klocke et al.
 
 
Fig. 5 Optical setup for 3D refractive index distribution measurement [Zha09] 
The 3D measurement shown here is based on computed tomography, a 
nondestructive method that is widely used to generate 3D images of a specific 
property inside of an object from a series of two dimensional (2D) projections 
taken around a single axis of rotation. Details of computed tomography used in 
glass molding study can be found in [Zha09]. Using this setup, refractive index 
change down to 10-4 can be precisely measured. 
 
Fig. 6 3D refractive index map of a molded BK-7 lens [Zha09] 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
129
 
 
Fig. 7 Refractive index variation of molded glass lens under different cooling rate [Zha09] 
 
Fig. 8 Flow chart of FEM assisted glass molding process optimization [Su10] 
 

130 
F. Klocke et al.
 
Figure 4 shows a 3D refractive index distribution map of a molded BK-7 glass 
lens. The cooling rate for this lens was -39.22 °C/min. The 3D computed 
tomography shows that the refractive index distribution of the thermally treated 
glass is no longer uniform. The index variation could be as large as 2x10-3.  
As a comparison, a second BK-7 glass sample was thermally treated with a 
cooling rate of -10.17 °C/min, and its refractive index distribution was also 
reconstructed by use of 3D computed tomography, shown in Figure 5 with an 
untreated glass blank. The refractive index variation under -10.17°C/min cooling 
was about 1.3 x 10-4, smaller than the variation for the higher cooling rate (=-
39.22°C/min) but still much larger than that of a blank, shown in the dashed line 
in the same figure, indicating that refractive index variation in a molded glass lens 
depends on cooling rate and geometry of the lens.  
The optical property change is crucial for process compensation in designing 
glass molding process. Figure 6 is the process flowchart showing how the index 
variation information can be utilized. Specifically, finite element method (FEM) 
assisted numerical simulation is adopted to calculate the refractive index changes 
[Su10]. This information is then incorporated into the optical lens design so the 
optical lens geometry can be modified to compensate for the index variation due 
to cooling. This arrangement allows high volume, low cost and high precision 
optical lenses to be manufactured by eliminating the need for the costly trial and 
error approach. Similarly, other optical properties such as stress induced 
birefringence and dispersion also experience different degree of change during 
cooling thus can be measured and potentially compensated for in manufacturing 
process using similar strategy. 
7   Conclusion 
Driven by demand for high-precision and low cost optical glass components the 
precision glass molding technology offers a good possibility for fast production of 
precision optical glass components in medium and high volumes. The 
manufacturing process is holistically described by the process chain for replication 
of complex optical glass components. Each of the process steps has a crucial 
impact on the final result. 
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Re-search Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”.  
References 
[Bif88] 
Bifano, T.G.: Ductile regime grinding of brittle materials. PhD Thesis, North 
Carolina State University (1988) 
[Bri07] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Kinematiken zum Polieren von 
Mikrostrukturen. Werkstattstechnik Online 97(6), 431–436 (2007) 

Process Chain for the Replication of Complex Optical Glass Components 
131
 
[Bri09] 
Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O., Schulte, H.: Mechanisches Polieren linearer und 
räumlich begrenzter Strukturen. In: Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und 
Polieren. Ausgabe, vol. 64, pp. 280–296. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2009) 
[Bri10] 
Brinksmeier, E., Mutlugünes, Y., Klocke, F., Aurich, J.C., Shore, P., Ohmori, 
H.: Ultra-precision grinding. CIRP Annals-Manufacturing Technology, 652–671 
(2010) 
[Che03] 
Chen, W.K., Huang, H.: Ultra precision grinding of spherical convex surfaces on 
combination brittle materials using resin and metal bond cup wheels. Journal of 
Materials Processing Technology, 217–223 (2003) 
[Che10] 
Chen, F.J., Yin, S.H., Huang, H., Ohmori, H., Wang, Y., Fan, Y.F., Zhu, Y.J.: 
Profile error compensation in ultra-precision grinding of aspheric surfaces with 
on-machine measurement. International Journal of Machine Tools and 
Manufacture, 480–486 (2010) 
[Dam09] Dambon, O., Wang, F., Chen, Y., Yi, A.Y., Klocke, F., Pongs, G.: Efficient 
Mold Manufacturing for Precision Glass Molding. Journal of Vacuum Science 
& Technology B 27(3), 1445–1449 (2009) 
[End99] 
Endrys, J.: Measurement of radiative and effective thermal conductivity of glass. 
In: Proceedings of the 5th ESG Conference A5, pp. 10–17 (1999) 
[Fis10] 
Fischbach, K.D., Georgiadis, K., Wang, F., Dambon, O., Klocke, F., Chen, Y., 
Yi, A.Y.: Investigation of the effects of process parameters on the glass-to-mold 
sticking force during precision glass molding. Surface and Coatings 
Technology 205, 312–319 (2010) 
[Gri07] 
Grimme, D., Rickens, K., Zhao, Q., Heinzel, C.: Dressing of Coarse-Grained 
Diamond Wheels for Ductile Machining of Brittle Materials. In: Towards 
Synthesis of Micro-/Nano-Systems, pp. 305–307 (2007) 
[Jai05] 
Jain, A., Yi, A.Y.: Numerical modeling of viscoelastic stress relaxation during 
glass lens forming process. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 88(3), 
530–535 (2005) 
[Jai06] 
Jain, A., Yi, A.Y., Xie, X., Sooryakumar, R.: Finite Element Modeling of Stress 
Relaxation in Glass Lens Molding Using Measured, Temperature-Dependent 
Elastic Modulus and Viscosity Data of Glass. Modelling Simulation in Material 
Science and Engineering 14(3), 465–477 (2006) 
[Klo04] 
Klocke, F., Pongs, G., Heselhaus, M.: Komplexe Optiken aus der Presse. 
Photonik, 70–72 (2004) 
[Liu01] 
Liu, K., Li, X.P.: Ductile cutting of tungsten carbide. Journal of Materials 
Processing Technology 113, 348–354 (2001) 
[Liu03] 
Liu, K., Li, X.P., Rahman, M., Liu, X.D.: CBN tool wear in ductile cutting of 
tungsten carbide. Wear 255, 1344–1351 (2003) 
[Luo97] 
Luo, S.Y., Liao, Y.S., Chou, C.C., Chen, J.P.: Analysis of the wear of a resin-
bonded diamond wheel In the grinding of tungsten carbide. Journal of Materials 
Processing Technology, 289–296 (1997) 
[Ma08] 
Ma, K.J., Chien, H.H., Chuan, W.H., Chao, C.L., Hwang, K.C.: Design of 
Protective Coatings for Glass Lens Molding. Key Engineering Materials 366, 
655–661 (2008) 
[Mat10] 
Mattox, D.M.: Handbook of physical vapor deposition (PVD) processing, 2nd 
edn. William Andrew (2010) 
[Mei09] 
Meiners, K., Rickens, K., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Ultraprecision grinding 
of tungsten carbide moulds for hot pressing glasses. In: Proceedings of the 
Euspen International Conference, vol. I, pp. 146–149 (2009) 

132 
F. Klocke et al.
 
[Mei10] 
Meiners, K., Rickens, K., Riemer, O., Brinksmeier, E.: Investigation on resulting 
form errors of precision ground optical moulds with respect to tool path 
compensation. In: Proceedings of the Euspen International Conference 2010, 
vol. II, pp. 144–147 (2010) 
[Nar71] 
Narayanaswamy, O.S.: A model of structural relaxation in glass. Journal of the 
American Ceramic Society 54, 491–498 (1971) 
[Pat87] 
Patent US4685948: Mold for press-molding glass optical elements and a 
molding method using the same. Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. Ltd. (1987) 
[Rit55] 
Ritland, H.N.: Relation between refractive index and density of a glass at a 
constant temperature. Journal of the American Ceramic Society 38, 86–88 
(1955) 
[Sch86] 
Scherer, G.W.: Relaxation in Glass and Composites. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
New York (1986) 
[Su10] 
Su, L.J.: Experimental and Numerical Analysis of Thermal Forming Processes 
for Precision Optics. PhD Thesis, The Ohio State University (2010) 
[Yi07] 
Yi, A.Y.: Optical Fabrication. The Optics Encyclopedia (2007) 
[Zha09] 
Zhao, W., Chen, Y., Shen, L.G., Yi, A.Y.: Investigation of refractive index 
distribution in precision compression glass molding by use of 3D tomography. 
Measurement Science and Technology 20, 055109 (2009) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 133–160. 
springerlink.com                                   © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel 
Hard Coatings 
Gert Goch, Don Lucca, Andreas Mehner, Helmut Prekel, 
Heinz-Rolf Stock, and Hans-Werner Zoch* 
Abstract. Optical molds for precision glass pressing are frequently coated to 
improve their wear and oxidation resistance, and to reduce sticking of the hot glass 
to the mold surface during the glass pressing process. Currently PVD (Ti,Al)N, 
CrN, ZrN and PtIr coatings are used as protective coatings for these molds. Novel 
nano crystalline PVD Ti-Ni-N and Ti-Cu-N coatings and thin sol-gel ZrO2 
coatings were developed and tested as new protective coatings for glass pressing 
molds. Optical molds for injection molding of plastic lenses are frequently coated 
with thick diamond machinable electroless nickel coatings since steel cannot be 
machined with diamond tools. These nickel coatings have several drawbacks such 
as residual porosity, limited hardness and temperature resistance. Therefore, thick 
sol-gel silica based coatings were developed and tested as an alternative for the 
electroless nickel coatings. 
1   Introduction 
1.1   Protective Coatings for Precision Glass Pressing Molds 
Replication of glass lenses for optical applications is performed by precision glass 
pressing of polished glass balls or glass disks of suited dimensions. Precision glass 
pressing is carried out at temperatures up to 800 °C with maximum loads up to 
6 kN, depending on the type of glass. One pressing cycle takes about 10 min. 
                                                           
Gert Goch · Helmut Prekel 
Bremen Institute for Metrology, Automation and Quality Science BIMAQ,  
University of Bremen, Linzer Straße 13, 28359 Bremen,Germany 
 
Don Lucca 
Oklahoma State University, OK, 218 Engineering North, Stillwater,  
Oklahoma 74078-5016, USA 
 
Andreas Mehner · Heinz-Rolf Stock · Hans-Werner Zoch 
Institute for Materials Science IWT, Badgasteiner Straße 3, 28359, Bremen, Germany 

134 
G. Goch et al.
 
Thus, the mechanical, chemical and thermal strain on the mold material is very 
high. Only a few materials, such as hard ceramics (especially Si3N4) or cemented 
tungsten carbide (WC/Co) can withstand these severe conditions during the glass 
pressing process. As a result of long contact times, there is often sticking between 
the hot glass and the mold. Thin and hard PVD coatings as TiN, TiAlN, CrN, ZrN 
or PtIr are known to reduce sticking between the glass and the mold material. 
These coatings also increase the oxidation resistance of the molds [Rie05]. Novel 
PVD Ti-Cu-N and Ti-Ni-N coatings and thin sol-gel ZrO2 coatings were 
developed, characterized and tested as alternative protective coatings for precision 
glass pressing molds. 
1.2   Diamond Machinable Coatings for Injection Molding of 
Plastics 
For mass production of plastic optical elements by injection molding, molten 
plastics (especially PMMA) with temperatures up to 250 °C are injected into 
optical mold cavities with pressures up to 1400 bar. Generally the mold cavities 
are manufactured from hardened stainless steel such as X40Cr13 (AISI 420, WKN 
1.2083). Pre-machined steel molds are frequently coated with thick electroless 
nickel coatings. The nickel coatings allow for the manufacturing of complex 
aspheric or micro-structured surfaces by high precision machining with diamond 
tools. Generally, the mechanical and chemical properties of electroless nickel 
coatings are sufficient for injection molding of plastics, but not for precision glass 
pressing. Some drawbacks of electroless nickel coatings include residual porosity, 
limited hardness and temperature resistance, as well as a high heat conductivity 
which has some negative effects on the injection molding process. Therefore, 
thick sol-gel silica hybrid coatings were investigated and tested as novel diamond 
machinable coatings for injection molding. 
1.3   Demands on the Coating Properties  
The demands on the mechanical, physical and chemical properties of coatings for 
precision glass pressing and for injection molding are different and in some cases 
even contrary. The thickness of protective coatings for glass pressing molds 
should be less than 1 µm, since thicker coatings would change the final shape and 
surface roughness of the molds. However, diamond machinable coatings for 
injection molding should have a coating thickness of at least 30 µm to insure a 
sufficient thickness for the high precision machining process with diamond tools. 
Also, the demands on the hardness for both types of coatings are different. The 
hardness of the protective coatings for precision glass pressing should have 
indentation hardnesses HIT above 7 GPa (≈ 700 HV1) to ensure high wear 
resistance. For the diamond machinable coatings the hardness should be less than 
7 GPa to guarantee good machinability without abrasive wear of the diamond  
tool. Table 1 shows a summary of coating properties required for protective  
 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
135
 
Table 1 Demands on the mechanical, physical and chemical properties of coatings for 
precision glass pressing and injection molding and the types of PVD and sol-gel coatings 
investigated 
Application 
Precision Glass 
Pressing 
Injection Molding 
Type of Coating: 
Protective 
Coatings 
Diamond 
Machinable 
Coatings 
Thickness (µm) 
< 1 
> 30 
Indentation hardness (GPa) 
Hardness (HV 1) 
Hardness (HRC) 
> 7 
> 700 
> 60 
< 7 
< 700 
< 60 
Temperature resistance (°C) 
Oxidation resistance 
> 800 
> 600 
Diamond machinability 
-- 
Yes 
Adhesion to the substrate 
(Rockwell class [DIN39]) 
1 
1 or 2 
Adhesion to glass or plastics 
Low 
Low 
Microstructure (morphology) 
Amorphous or 
Nanocrystalline 
Amorphous or 
Nanocrystalline 
Porosity (Vol. %) 
< 1 
< 1 
Heat conductivity  
-- 
Low 
Investigated  
PVD Coatings  
Ti-Cu-N;  
Ti-Ni-N 
Ti-Cu-N;  
Ti-Ni-N 
Investigated  
Sol-Gel Coatings  
ZrO2 
SiOxCyHz 
SiNauOxCyHz 
 
coatings for glass pressing and for diamond machinable coatings for injection 
molding of plastics. 
2   Deposition and Characterization of PVD Coatings 
2.1   The Magnetron Sputtering Process 
The PVD (physical vapor deposition) coatings investigated in the collaborative 
research center were deposited by reactive magnetron sputtering using a 
commercial magnetron sputterer (Fa. Cemecon, CC800/9), shown schematically 
in Fig. 1.  
Novel nanocrystalline Ti-Cu-N and Ti-Ni-N coatings were deposited using 
titanium targets with integrated copper or nickel blanks. The aim of the research 
was to deposit and characterize Ti-Ni-N and Ti-Cu-N coatings with thicknesses of 
at least 30 µm to allow for precision machining and structuring of these coatings 
by grinding and polishing. 

136 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 1 Experimental setup of a PVD magnetron sputterer with titanium targets and 
integrated Cu or Ni blanks 
Hardened and polished stainless steel disks (AISI 420, X42Cr13) with a 
hardness of 53 HRC were used as substrates for the coating experiments. The 
magnetron chamber was evacuated to a residual pressure of 5 mPa. Argon was 
added at 200 mln/min and the bias voltage of the substrates was -650 V for sputter 
cleaning and activation of the stainless steel surface. The coating process started 
by igniting a 4 kW pulsed plasma in front of the titanium targets and reducing the 
bias voltage of the substrates to -60 V. After 10 to 20 s, a Ti-Ni layer several 
nanometers thick was deposited onto the substrates to improve the adhesion of the 
following nitride layers. The deposition of the Ti-Ni-N nitride layers by reactive 
sputtering started after the addition of nitrogen gas to the atmosphere at a rate of 
10 to 50 mln/min. Micro-crystalline and homogenous growth of the coatings was 
achieved by periodically interrupting the deposition process with a pulsed  
bias voltage. DC bias voltages result in columnar coating morphologies and pulsed 
bias voltages result in micro- or even nanocrystalline coating morphologies, as 
shown in Fig. 2. Pulsing of the bias voltage also prevents the formation of 
inhomogeneities such as hillocks. 
2.2   Results for PVD Ti-Ni-N Coatings 
Figure 3 shows a ternary diagram of the chemical composition of PVD Ti-Ni-N 
coatings deposited onto stainless steel disks (AISI 420, X42Cr13). The nickel 
content of the coatings was controlled using different titanium targets having 10, 
20, 30 or 40 integrated nickel blanks. The nitrogen content was controlled by 
varying the nitrogen gas flow from 10 to 50 mln/min. The chemical composition of 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
137
 
the coatings was measured by GDOES (glow discharge optical emission 
spectroscopy) and nickel contents of approx. 8, 18, 23 or 32 at.% were measured 
for coatings deposited using titanium targets with 10, 20, 30 or 40 nickel blanks. 
 
a)                                                     b)       
a)                                                     b)       
 
Fig. 2 Coating morphology of PVD TiNx coatings deposited with DC bias voltage (a) and 
with pulsed bias voltage (b) 
 
Fig. 3 Ternary diagram of the chemical composition of Ti-Ni-N coatings measured by 
GDOES (glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy). The coatings were deposited 
using different titanium targets that had 10, 20, 30 and 40 Ni blanks. 
The coating hardness was measured by micro-indentation using a commercial 
micro-indenter (Fisherscope 100) with a Vickers diamond indenter and a 
maximum load of 20 mN. The hardness HUplast increased with the nitrogen content 
for almost all coatings, as shown in Fig. 4. A maximum hardness HUplast of 
22 GPa was measured for Ti-Ni-N coatings with 18 at.% nickel and a N/Ti ratio of 
0.9. For stoichiometric TiN coatings HUplast is about 27 GPa, indicating that the 
addition of nickel does not increase the hardness as observed for Ti-Cu-N [He01, 
Myu03]. 

138 
G. Goch et al.
 
The microstructure of the Ti-Ni-N coatings showed a transition from an 
amorphous state for low N/Ti ratios, to a columnar microstructure for N/Ti ratios 
above 0.5. Detailed results for the Ti-Ni-N coatings were previously published 
[Ben04, Gri04]. 
 
 
Fig. 4 Measured indentation hardness HUplast vs. the atomic N/Ti ratio for coatings with 
nickel contents of 8, 18, 23 and 32 at.% 
Figure 5a shows a PVD Ti-Ni-N coated mold which was successfully tested by 
replicating 500 PMMA disks by injection molding. The surface topography of the 
coatings as measured by FE-SEM (field emission scanning electron microscopy) 
and shown in Figs. 5b and 5c did not change after the replication. The visual 
differences between Figs. 5b and 5c are due to different electric charging of the 
surface. 
 
 
Fig. 5. PVD Ti-Ni-N coated mold for injection molding (a). Surface topography measured 
by FE-SEM (field emission scanning electron microscopy) before (b) and after (c) 
replication of 500 PMMA disks. 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
139
 
3   Sol-Gel Coatings 
3.1   The Sol-Gel Coating Process 
The sol-gel coating process is based on liquid sols containing metal organic 
polymers dispersed in organic solvents [Bri90]. The silica hybrid coating 
(SiOxCyHz) sols were deposited onto the substrates by the dip or spin coating 
process, followed by a heat treatment at 300 °C for 30 min. Figure 6a shows the 
dip coating process where the substrate is immersed into the sol and withdrawn at 
constant velocity. These coatings were derived from silica based sols with 
different molar ratios of ethanol to SiO2. The resulting coating thickness for both 
sols increased with the withdrawal speed as shown in Fig. 6c. For the spin coating 
process, which is illustrated in Fig. 6b, the sol was dripped onto the rotating 
substrate. The resulting coating thickness decreased with increasing spin 
frequency (Fig. 6d). The coating thickness was measured by the ball grinding 
method [Meh05]. 
 
 
Fig. 6 Dip coating process (a) and spin coating process (b). Coating thickness of silica 
hybrid coatings after heat treatment at 300 °C for 30 min as a function of the withdrawal 
speed for dip coating (c) and as a function of the spin frequency for the spin coating process 
(d). The results for 2 silica based sols (A and A*) with different molar ratios of the solvent 
ethanol to SiO2 are shown. 

140 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 7 The sol-gel coating process illustrated schematically 
After depositing the sol, the liquid sol films rapidly transform into solid gel 
films by the evaporation of the solvent as illustrated schematically in Fig. 7. 
Above 300 °C the gel converts into an inorganic amorphous xerogel with high 
residual porosity due to pyrolysis of the organic groups. Above 500 °C the 
inorganic porous coatings convert into dense glass-like coatings by sintering. 
Silica based coatings (SiO2) remain amorphous even at higher temperatures. Other 
metal oxide coatings, such as sol-gel zirconia (ZrO2) or alumina coatings (Al2O3), 
crystallize at temperatures above 500 °C and convert into nanocrystalline ceramics 
[Bri90].  
Hardening of the sol-gel coatings by thermal treatment in ambient air 
frequently induces crack formation due to shrinkage of the coatings during the 
heat treatment and differences between the thermal expansion coefficients of the 
coating and substrate. For sol-gel metal oxide coatings such as ZrO2 or Al2O3, the 
maximum coating thickness which can be deposited without cracks is limited to 
about 0.5 µm per layer [Meh05]. For silica based hybrid coatings the maximum 
thickness was about 5 µm per layer. Thicker coatings were produced by multilayer 
deposition. 
To overcome the problems associated with thermal treatment, hardening by ion 
irradiation using 125 keV H+, 250 keV N2+ and 2 MeV Cu2+ was investigated 
[Luc07, Ghi07]. 
3.2   The Sol Synthesis 
Precursors for the sol synthesis are alkoxides such as TEOS (tetra-ethoxy-ortho-
silicate) Si(OC2H5)4 and ZTP (zirconium tetra-n-propoxide) Zr(OnC3H7)4 [Bra01]. 
The general chemical formula of metal alkoxides for a n-valent metal M is 
M(OR)n, where R represents alkyl groups such as methyl (-CH3), ethyl (-C2H5), 
propyl (-C3H7) or butyl (-C4H9). For the sol synthesis these alkoxides are dissolved 
in organic solvents such as ethanol, 1- or 2-propanol. Cross-linking of the 
alkoxides is accomplished by the addition of a small amount of water. The 
hydrolysis reaction (1) is followed by condensation reactions (2a) and (2b) 
resulting in the formation of cross linked metal organic polymers [Bri90]. 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
141
 
(RO)n-1M-OR  +  H2O           →  (RO)n-1M-OH  +  ROH             (1) 
(RO)n-1M-OR  +  HO-M(OR)n-1  →  (RO)n-1M-O-M(OR)n-1  +  ROH   (2a) 
(RO)n-1M-OH  +  HO-M(OR)n-1  →  (RO)n-1M-O-M(OR)n-1   + H2O    (2b) 
3.3   Thin Sol-Gel ZrO2 Coatings for Glass Pressing Molds 
The precursor for the sol synthesis for the deposition of the ZrO2 coatings was 
zirconium tetra n-propoxide (ZTP: Zr(OnC3H7)4). In addition to ZTP, the sol 
consisted of acetylacetone (CH3COCH2COCH3), 2-propanol, water and 
polyethylene glycol (PEG400) with a molar weight of 400 g/mol. The molar ratios 
of 2-propanol, H2O and acetylacetone to ZTP were 15, 3 and 1, respectively. To 
adjust the sol viscosity and prevent film cracking, 5 wt.% PEG 400 was added. 
More details of the sol synthesis were published previously [Izu89, Pat97]. 
Hardness measurements were performed on 5-layer sol-gel ZrO2 coatings with 
total thicknesses of 600 to 800 nm which were deposited onto polished AISI 304 
stainless steel substrates, 40 x 20 x 1 mm3 in dimension. Nanoindentation was 
performed using a load-controlled commercial nanoindenter in conjunction with an 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) system and a Berkovich diamond indenter. The 
instrument and sample were allowed to thermally equilibrate for 10 h inside a thermal 
enclosure before measurements were performed. A single indentation sequence 
consisted of loading and unloading at 50 μN/sec for 10 sec with a 5 sec hold at the 
maximum load to allow time dependent effects to diminish. The maximum load 
ranged from 100-3000 μN which corresponded to indentation depths from 10 to 
180 nm. Before each indentation, the local surface topography was measured by 
AFM. Typical surface roughness was <2 nm rms over a 1 μm2 scan area. 
Figure 8 shows the measured hardness H and the reduced elastic modulus Er for 
5-layer ZrO2 coatings heat treated for 10 min at temperatures from 400 to 700 °C 
[Luc04]. The reduced elastic modulus is shown instead of the elastic modulus, 
since it eliminated the need to assume a value for the Poisson’s ratio of the 
coating. Indentations were performed at normalized contact depths of 7-10% of 
the total coating thickness. The error bars denote the maximum and minimum 
values for 5-7 indentations. Both hardness and reduced elastic modulus exhibit a 
monotonic increase over the temperature range from 450 to 700 °C. X-ray 
diffraction on coatings from the same sol system indicated a transition of the ZrO2 
structure from amorphous, to cubic, to a combination of cubic and monoclinic 
over this temperature range [Meh97]. The upper part of Fig. 8 shows a plot of the 
coating density determined from weight gain and coating dimensions. The density 
is seen to exhibit a modest increase up to 500 °C, and then a significant decrease 
as the heat treatment temperature is increased further. The increase in density 
might contribute to the observed increase in hardness at lower temperatures. 
However, it cannot explain the increase in hardness at higher temperatures. 
Significant compressive residual stresses measured by x-ray diffraction for similar 
films heat treated above 600 °C [Meh97] may counter the effects of reduced 
density at higher temperatures. More details on the crystallographic phase 
transitions, the evolution of residual stress, hardness and reduced elastic modulus 
of the ZrO2 coatings were published elsewhere [Pat98, Meh99]. 

142 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 8 Hardness and reduced elastic modulus for various heat treatment temperatures of 5-
layer sol-gel ZrO2 coatings [Luc04]. Estimated coating density is shown above 
 
Fig. 9 ZrO2 coated steel mold with a cylindrical lens array (a) and glass lenses pressed with 
the coated steel mold (b) 
Pre-machined and polished precision glass pressing molds (∅ 25 mm) made of 
hardened martensitic steel (AISI 420) with 13 wt.% Cr were coated with ZrO2 by 
spin coating at 2500 rpm, followed by a heat treatment at 600 °C for 30 min in 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
143
 
ambient air. The coating thickness was 120±20 nm, as measured by step height 
measurements using AFM. The glass pressing process was performed at 570 °C 
with a load of 4 kN. The pressing cycle for one lens took about 15 min. Figure 9 
shows a ZrO2 sol-gel coated mold with a cylindrical lens array structure and glass 
lenses which were pressed with this mold. No sticking between the coated mold 
surface and the glass was observed, indicating that the ZrO2 sol-gel coatings 
successfully prevented the sticking between the glass and the steel mold which 
occurs for uncoated molds [Meh06]. 
3.4   Silica Based Sol-Gel Coatings for Injection Molding 
Silica based hybrid coatings from sols based on tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS: 
Si(OC2H5)4) and methyltriethoxysilane (MTES: Si(CH3)(OC2H5)3) were char-
acterized and tested for manufacturing of micro-structured optical molds [Dat05 
Meh06, Meh07, Meh10b]. 
Sols based on TEOS and MTES precursors must be catalyzed by acids or bases 
since the chemical reactivity of these molecules is very low. For the acid catalyzed 
sols, acetic acid (CH3COOH), water and ethanol (C2H5OH) were used and 
polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP: (C6H9NO)n) was added to reduce crack formation 
during the heat treatment. The typical molar composition for an acid catalyzed sol 
was TEOS : MTES : CH3COOH : H2O : PVP : C2H5OH = 0.4 : 0.6 : 1 : 1 : 0.25 : 
5 (sol A). Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was used as a catalyst for the base catalyzed 
sols having a typical molar composition of TEOS : MTES : NaOH : H2O : 
C2H5OH = 0.2 : 0.8 : 0.2 : 1.1 : 0.2 (sol B). More details on the sol synthesis of 
acid and base catalyzed sols were published previously [Meh10a]. 
The type of catalyst used has significant impact on the growth mechanism of 
the polysilicates. In acid catalyzed sols the growth of the polysilicates occurs by 
cluster-cluster aggregation resulting in weakly branched polymers (Fig. 10). For 
pH < 6 only a few silanol groups (≡Si-OH) are deprotonated and deprotonation 
preferentially occurs at the ends of the polysilicates [Bri90, Ile79]. In base 
catalyzed sols the growth of the polysilicates occurs by monomer-cluster 
aggregation resulting in highly branched, compact polymer clusters (Fig. 10). For 
pH > 8 the polysilicates exhibit a high degree of deprotonation of the silanol 
groups (≡Si-O-). The electric repulsion of the negatively charged polysilicates 
prevents cluster-cluster aggregation and the polysilicates preferentially condensate 
with neutral monomers by monomer-cluster aggregation [Bri90, Ile79]. 
The difference in the microstructure of the polysilicates in acid and base 
catalyzed sols has a direct impact on the mechanical and chemical properties of 
the resulting coatings. 
In the following, coatings from the acetic acid catalyzed sol (sol A) will be 
denoted as A-coatings (SiOxCyHz). Coatings derived from the sodium hydroxide 
catalyzed sol (sol B) will be denoted as B-coatings (SiNauOxCyHz). The B-
coatings contain sodium due to the sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in the B-sol. The 
exact chemical composition of these coatings depends on the heat treatment 
temperature. 

144 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 10 The polymer growth mechanisms of acid and base catalyzed silica sols 
3.5   Mechanical Properties of Silica Hybrid Coatings 
Thickness and hardness of A- and B-coatings were measured as a function of the 
heat treatment temperature. The thickness was measured by step height 
measurements of scratched coatings using AFM. The hardness was measured by 
nanoindentation experiments using a Berkovich diamond indenter with a 
maximum load resulting in indentation depths of 10% of the coating thickness. 
Figure 11 shows the measured thickness and hardness H versus heat treatment 
temperature for A- and B-coatings. The thickness decreased and the hardness 
increased with increasing heat treatment temperature for both types of coatings. 
The hardness of the B-coatings exceeded that of the A-coatings for all heat 
treatment temperatures. A maximum hardness of approximately 3.4 GPa was 
achieved for the B-coatings (SiNauOxCyHz) after heat treatment at 600 °C, which 
is approximately 3-times the measured hardness for A-coatings (SiOxCyHz). This 
indicates that the type of catalyst has an impact on the hardening behavior.  
 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
145
 
 
Fig. 11 Thickness and hardness of A- and B-coatings vs. heat treatment temperature THT. 
The heat treatment time for the A- and B- coatings was 10 and 30 min, respectively. 
The observed decrease of the coating thickness for both types of coatings is due 
to compaction of the porous coatings by viscous sintering and also due to the 
evaporation of residual organic and inorganic compounds in the xerogel during 
heat treatment. Three reasons were proposed to explain the higher hardness of the 
B-coatings. Firstly, the glass transition temperature Tg of silica glasses decreases 
with increasing sodium content. For pure silica Tg is 1200 °C, which decreases to 
545 °C for a soda-lime glass with 14% sodium [Mar82]. The sodium to silicon 
ratio Na/Si of the B-coatings was in a range from 0.2 to 0.9, as shown in Fig. 14b 
[Meh10a]. These ratios correspond to sodium contents of 7.1 to 28%. Therefore, it 
is expected that the B-coatings have a significantly increased viscous sintering 
activity compared to the A-coatings which do not contain any sodium [Meh10a]. 
Secondly, base catalyzed silica sols contain highly condensed particle-like 
polymers (see Fig. 10) resulting in a higher xerogel density and thus a higher 
hardness compared to acid catalyzed sols, which contain less branched polymers 
[Meh10a]. Thirdly, the polymers of acid catalyzed sols are less condensed and 
therefore contain more organic residuals. These groups are known to constrain the 
densification processes [Sch97]. All three effects should increase the viscous 
sintering activity of the B-coatings compared to the A-coatings. 
Soda lime glass, which has a similar chemical composition as the B-coatings, 
has a hardness of 5.5 GPa and an elastic modulus of 70 GPa [Mar82]. Thus, the 
measured maximum hardness of 3.4 GPa for the B-coatings indicates that the 
hardening due to sintering is not complete after heat treating for 30 min. This 
conclusion is supported by long term heat treatment times up to 4 h where a 
maximum hardness of 6.5 GPa was measured for the coatings [Meh10a]. 

146 
G. Goch et al.
 
3.6   Crack Formation of Silica Hybrid Coatings 
A major drawback of the sol-gel coating technology is the limitation of the coating 
thickness for a single layer due to crack formation [Meh05]. Crack formation, or 
even delamination, occurs if a critical coating thickness is exceeded. The 
deposition of crack-free silica hybrid coatings thicker than 5 µm was only 
achieved by multi-layer deposition which is laborious and time-consuming 
because each layer needs a complete heat treatment to prevent crack formation. 
Tensile experiments with coated specimens were carried out in order to 
characterize the brittleness of the coatings as a function of the sol-gel processing 
parameters. Figures 12a and 12b show the tensile testing machine which was 
equipped with a USB microscope for in-situ monitoring of crack formation during 
the tensile test. The strain of the tensile specimens was measured with a clip gauge 
mounted on the specimens. Figure 12d shows the typical parallel cracks of a silica 
coated specimen during the tensile test.  
 
 
Fig. 12 Tensile testing machine (a), equipped with an USB-microscope for in-situ 
monitoring of the crack formation during tensile testing. Sol-gel coated tensile specimens 
(c). Formation of parallel cracks on the coated specimens during the tensile test (d). 
The results in Fig. 13 show that the critical strain for crack formation εcrit. of A- 
and B-coatings increased significantly with decreasing coating thickness. This is 
consistent with the general observation that thin coatings have fewer cracks than 
thick coatings. Theoretical models to describe this effect are based on an energy 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
147
 
balance analysis of the elastic energy stored in tensile stressed coatings and the 
energy needed for crack growth [Hut92, Beu96]. The energy needed for crack 
growth ΔECrack is directly proportional to the new area created by the crack 
ΔAcrack= Δl⋅t. (Δl: increase of the crack length, t: coating thickness). Therefore, 
ΔECrack/ΔACrack is a constant R (R : crack resistance). Hutchinson and Beuth 
showed that the released specific elastic energy due to crack growth in a coating 
ΔEelast/ΔACrack is directly proportional to σ2/E⋅t (σ: tensile stress in the coating, E: 
elastic modulus of the coating). Therefore, in thin coatings less elastic energy is 
released than in thick coatings. Crack growth only occurs if the released elastic 
energy ΔEelast /ΔACrack is high enough to overcome the crack resistance R. 
Therefore a critical coating thickness exists, below which no crack growth occurs. 
 
 
Fig. 13 Critical strain of silica hybrid coatings from acid (a) and base (b) catalyzed TEOS-
MTES sols as a function of the coating thickness 
3.7   Chemical Properties of Silica Hybrid Coatings 
Several spectroscopic measurements (XPS, Raman, FT-IR) were performed for a 
more detailed study of the chemical effects during the heat treatment of the B-
coatings. The chemical composition of the coatings was analyzed by x-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) and Raman 
spectroscopy. The hydrogen content of the coatings was determined by elastic 
recoil detection (ERD). Figures 14a and 14b show the chemical composition of A- 
and B-coatings versus the heat treatment temperature, measured by XPS and ERD. 
For the B-coatings the measured atomic ratios of oxygen to silicon (O/Si) 
increased up to 2.8. Oxygen to silicon ratios above 2 indicate the formation of 
oxygen containing compounds in addition to silicon dioxide (SiO2). According to 
the XP-spectra (not shown) sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), sodium carbonate 
(Na2CO3) or sodium carboxylates (such as NaOOCH) come into consideration as 
additional oxygen containing compounds. These results were confirmed by FTIR 
and Raman spectroscopic measurements [Meh10a]. 
 

148 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 14 Molar ratios of A- and B-coatings as a function of the heat treatment temperature 
3.7.1   Ion Irradiation of Silica Based Sol-Gel Coatings 
Ion irradiation is an alternative to heat treatment for converting the sol-gel films to 
the ceramic state. In contrast to heat treatment at high temperature, which leads to 
high levels of carbon loss and film cracking, crack-free films having a high 
concentration of carbon with the selective release of hydrogen are formed after ion 
irradiation [Piv97]. Incident ions are decelerated while passing through the film, 
during which time the energy is transferred to atoms in the films either by 
collision with target atoms of the film (nuclear stopping) or by excitation of 
electrons and subsequent ionization (electron stopping) [Tra99].  
The ion irradiated films were prepared by diluting the acid and base catalyzed 
sols and performing an initial heat treatment at 300 oC for 10 and 30 min, 
respectively. Base catalyzed films had thicknesses ranging from 950 to 1025 nm 
[Qi10], while acid catalyzed films were about 600 to 650 nm in thickness [Luc08], 
as determined by step height measurements using AFM. The film density was 
estimated to be 1.3 g/cm3 based on the measured film thickness, the coated area of 
the film, and the measured weight gain after coating and heat treatment. Ion 
irradiation was carried out at room temperature using 125 keV H+ and 250 keV 
N2+ at fluences ranging from 1 × 1014 to 2.5 × 1016 ions/cm2. To measure the 
hydrogen concentration of the films, elastic recoil detection (ERD) was performed 
using 3 MeV 4He+ and a detection angle of 30° with respect to the incident beam. 
ERD and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) identified the chemical 
composition of the unirradiated acid catalyzed films as 20 at. % O, 14 at. % Si, 
34 at. % H, and 32 at. % C and the unirradiated base catalyzed films as 
44.2 at. % O, 22.1 at. % Si, 20.3 at. % H, 10.7 at. % C and 2.7 at. % Na. 
Mechanical properties of the resulting thin films were investigated through 
nanoindentation experiments performed using a load-controlled commercial 
nanoindenter in conjunction with an AFM. A Berkovich diamond indenter was 
used for all indentations. Hardness and reduced elastic modulus were measured 
over a range of contact depths, from a maximum of 20% of the film thickness to a 
minimum of either 5% of the film thickness or 20-times the rms surface 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
149
 
roughness, whichever was largest. Prior to nanoindentation surface roughness was 
measured by AFM. The surface roughness of all films, before and after ion 
irradiation, was approximately 1 nm rms over a scan area of 1 μm2.  
Figure 15 shows the nanoindentation hardness evaluated at 10% of the film 
thickness as a function of fluence. The observed hardness increase with increasing 
ion fluence is consistent with previous studies of the acid catalyzed films [Ghi08]. 
Irradiation with N2+ was found to be more effective than with H+ in converting the 
sol-gel films to their ceramic state for both the acid and base catalyzed films 
[Luc10]. For the acid catalyzed films, the irradiating ion species played a greater 
role in the final achieved hardness than for the base catalyzed system. At the 
highest fluence investigated for both ions, the hardness of N2+ irradiated acid 
catalyzed film was 270% greater than the hardness of H+ irradiated film. Whereas 
for the base catalyzed films, only a 30% difference in hardness was observed. In 
addition, at the highest fluence, N2+ irradiation of the acid catalyzed films resulted 
in higher hardness than for that of the base catalyzed films, 7.4 GPa compared to 
4.7 GPa. This is in contrast to H+ irradiation in which the results showed a 
somewhat higher hardness for the base catalyzed films. For the base catalyzed 
films, the reduced elastic modulus showed no dependence on ion species. 
 
 
Fig. 15 Nanoindentation hardness evaluated at 10% of the film thickness as a function of 
fluence for irradiations with 125 keV H+ and 250 keV N2+ [Luc10] 
Film thickness of the base catalysed films was observed to decrease with 
increasing fluence as shown in Fig. 16. Hardness increases with increasing film 
shrinkage when the films are subjected to ion irradiation, consistent with heat 
treatment. However hardness is not simply a result of film shrinkage as shown in 
Fig. 17, where ion irradiation resulted in films with a higher hardness compared to 
heat treated films with a comparable amount of shrinkage. 
 

150 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 16 Film thickness of the base catalyzed films as a function of fluence for irradiations 
with 125 keV H+ and 250 keV N2+ 
 
Fig. 17 Nanoindentation hardness of the base catalyzed films as a function of film 
shrinkage 
The effect of ion irradiation on hardness and hydrogen concentration as a 
function of fluence is shown in Fig. 18. Compared to the acid catalyzed films, the 
unirradiated base catalyzed films had a somewhat higher hardness, 0.78 GPa 
compared to 0.32 GPa. Hardness was observed to increase with fluence, while 
hydrogen concentration decreased, for both the acid and base catalyzed films. The 
observed decrease in hydrogen concentration with increasing fluence is consistent 
with previously reported observations of inorganic polymer films [Tan02, Piv03]. 
As produced, the acid catalyzed films had a higher concentration of hydrogen than 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
151
 
that for the base catalyzed films, which could be attributed to the addition of 
polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in the acid catalyzed sols. The films exhibited a 
different hardening response, as well as hydrogen release process, to irradiation 
with H+ or N2+ based on sol composition. 
 
 
Fig. 18 Nanoindentation hardness and hydrogen concentration as a function of ion fluence 
for H+ and N2+ [Qi10] 
The FT-IR spectra obtained for the unirradiated base catalyzed film and for 
films irradiated with H+ and N2+ over a range of fluences are shown in Figs. 19a 
and 19b. The FT-IR spectrum of the unirradiated film exhibits three distinct peaks 
centered near 1060, 1165, and 1275 cm-1. The 1060 cm-1 peak is associated with 
the transverse optical (TO) mode of Si-O-Si anti-symmetric stretching and the 
1165 cm-1 peak has been reported to be related to the longitudinal optical (LO) 
mode of strained Si-O-Si anti-symmetric stretching in porous silica [Gal02, 
Alm90]. The peak near 1275 cm-1 is attributed to the C-H bending mode of Si-CH3 
groups. With increasing fluence, the C-H peak gradually decreases in intensity and 
is no longer observed at the higher fluences, suggesting a reduction of C-H bonds 
in Si-CH3 groups due to irradiation. The continuous decrease of the C-H peak 
intensity is consistent with the decreasing hydrogen concentration observed with 
increasing fluence shown in Fig. 18. 
With increasing fluence, changes in the relative intensity of the TO and LO 
modes of Si-O-Si bridging bonds are observed. These peaks transition from two 
distinct peaks into one broad peak, indicating a widening range of Si-O-Si related 
species. The increase in intensity of the TO mode with increasing fluence, relative 
to the LO mode suggests a more polymerized network [Gal02]. The decrease in 
relative intensity of the LO mode also suggests a decrease in film porosity with 
increasing fluence since the LO mode at 1165 cm-1 has been shown to be related to 
strained Si-O-Si bonds that are present at the surface of gel pores [Gal02].  
 

152 
G. Goch et al.
 
 
Fig. 19 FT-IR spectra of base catalyzed films irradiated with (a) 125 keV H+ and (b) 
250 keV N2+ at various fluences. For comparison the FT-IR spectra for an unirradiated film 
is also shown [Qi10]. 
An increase in the network polymerization and a decrease in film porosity may 
partially account for the increasing hardness that was observed with increasing ion 
fluence. 
3.8   Machining of Silica Based Sol-Gel Coatings 
Micro-structured molds for injection molding of optical elements were 
manufactured by micromachining. Hardened steel disks (Ø 50 mm, t: 15 mm, 
AISI 420: X40Cr13, 55 HRC) were ground and polished to an optical surface 
quality. The base catalyzed sol B was deposited on the steel disks by spin coating 
at 500 rpm followed by a heat treatment at 300 °C for 120 min. The spin coating 
and heat treatment process was repeated 4 times. The resulting 4-layered coatings 
had a total thickness of ≈ 17 µm. The coatings were structured by fly-cutting using 
a diamond cutting tool with a negative rake angle γ= -20° and a cutting edge 
radius of rε= 3 mm. Diamond machining of the coated molds was performed on an 
ultra-precision machine tool. The milling process is illustrated in Fig. 20a. 
Figures 20b and 20c show the structured coating with the micromachined channels 
[Meh10b]. The surfaces of the machined channels were smooth and the edges 
were sharp, showing no defects or burr formation. The measured roughness Ra 
was about 15 nm. Injection molding of PMMA optical elements was accomplished 
with sol-gel coated and structured molds using a commercial injection molding 
machine (backpressure: 1300 bar, PMMA temperature: 230 °C, mold temperature: 
80 °C and injection velocity: 20 cm3s-1). Figure 20d shows an example of an 
optical element replicated by injection molding using the sol-gel coated and 
micro-structured mold in Fig. 20b. No adhesion or sticking between the PMMA 
and the coated molds occurred and the replicated elements showed an almost 
optical surface quality with a surface roughness Ra of 21 nm. Microscopic 
examination of non-structured coatings after injection molding of 1000 lenses 
revealed no visible changes. Thus, corrosion and wear resistance of these  
 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
153
 
 
Fig. 20 Schematic of the diamond milling process (a). Steel mold with a micro-structured 
B-coating (b) and (c). PMMA optical element replicated by injection molding with the 
micro-structured mold (d) and (e). Profile of a lattice line (f). 
 
Fig. 21 Diamond milling of a sol-gel coated steel mold (a). Steel mold with a micro-
structured A-coating (b). SEM image of the micromachined coating surface (c). 
coatings are sufficient for injection molding of PMMA optical components.  
Figure 21 shows the micromachining of a 4-layer A-coating and the resulting 
microstructures. 
4   Coating Characterization by Photothermal Methods 
In addition to mechanical and chemical properties, mold coatings also provide a 
thermal barrier, which help to control the cooling rates of the injected plastic 
material. The effectiveness of this thermal barrier depends on its design, mainly 
the coating thickness and thermal properties (thermal conductivity and heat 

154 
G. Goch et al.
 
capacity) of the material. Photothermal measurement techniques have the ability 
to measure both the thickness and thermal properties of the coatings. 
Different photothermal techniques exist, but in most cases an intensity 
modulated laser beam will thermally excite the specimen surface as shown in 
Fig. 22. Thermal waves are created and propagate to the layer/substrate interface 
[Ros76], where they are reflected back to the surface. Depending on the thermal 
diffusion length μ, the layer thickness d and the thermal reflection coefficient R, 
multiple thermal wave reflections can occur. These multiple waves result in an 
oscillating temperature, defined by a temperature amplitude T0 and a phase 
difference Δϕ (with respect to the exciting thermal wave). This behavior 
resembles optical thin film interferometry, thus it is often referred to as thermal 
wave interferometry [Ben82]. The temperature is usually measured by infrared 
detection and contributions to the phase difference from electronic components are 
corrected by normalization procedures.  
 
Substrate
(S)
Layer
(L)
Air
(A)
z
0
d
Intensity 
Modulated
Radiation
Infrared
Detection
Δt
T
Time
Intensity
Δφ= Δt*2*πT 
-1
Substrate
(S)
Layer
(L)
Air
(A)
z
0
d
Intensity 
Modulated
Radiation
Infrared
Detection
Δt
T
Time
Intensity
Δφ= Δt*2*πT 
-1
 
Fig. 22 Experimental setup of a photothermal measurement and the definition of the 
measured phase difference Δϕ 
For a one-dimensional geometry and optically opaque coatings, mathematical 
equations exist that describe the thermal wave behavior. For instance, at the 
coating surface (z=0) the complex temperature amplitude TL is given by 
)
exp(
)
exp(
)
(
L
L
L
L
d
R
d
R
I
z
T
L
σ
σ
σ
κ
2
1
2
1
2
0
0
−
⋅
−
−
⋅
+
=
=
  
 
(1) 
where I0, d, κL denote the excitation intensity, the layer thickness and the thermal 
conductivity of the coating layer, respectively. The complex parameter σL is given 
by  
L
L
/)i
(
μ
σ
+
= 1
 
 
 
    (2) 
The reflection coefficient for thermal waves, R, depends on the thermal contrast 
between the coating (subscript L) and the substrate (subscript S): 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
155
 
L
S
L
S
e
e
e
e
R
+
−
=
1
1
  
 
 
      (3) 
with  
j
j
j
j
c
e
ρ
κ
=
  
 
 
(4) 
Here, ρ and c are the mass density and the heat capacity, respectively. 
The thermal diffusion length μL is finally calculated by 
 
ω
ρ
κ
ω
α
π
λ
μ
L
L
L
L
L
L
c
2
2
2
=
=
=
 
 
 
(5) 
 
The magnitude of the thermal diffusion length, which can be interpreted as the 
thermal wave propagation range, is smaller than the thermal wavelength λ and 
decreases with increasing modulation frequencies (f=ω/2π) of the excitation 
radiation. Figure 23 shows the calculated phase difference Δϕ of the complex 
temperature amplitude (Eq. (1)) with respect to the coating thickness d, 
normalized to the thermal diffusion length μL. The phase difference varies with the 
thermal reflection coefficient R.  
As indicated by the straight line superimposed over the R=-0.9 curve, within a 
limited range the phase difference depends almost linearly on the layer thickness. 
 
Δϕ
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
-40
-30
-20
-10
0  
10
20 
30
40 
R= -0.9 
R= -0.5 
R= -0.25 
R= +0.9 
R= +0.5 
R= +0.25 
Phase Difference,         (Degree)
Normalized Coating Thickness, d/µ L
Δϕ
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
-40
-30
-20
-10
0  
10
20 
30
40 
R= -0.9 
R= -0.5 
R= -0.25 
R= +0.9 
R= +0.5 
R= +0.25 
Phase Difference,         (Degree)
Normalized Coating Thickness, d/µ L
 
Fig. 23 Normalized phase difference for different reflection coefficients 

156 
G. Goch et al.
 
Within this nearly linear region, the coating thicknesses can be measured if the 
thermal parameters of the substrate and the coating are known. (Alternatively, the 
correlation between Δϕ and d can be determined by calibration.) 
It must be noted that in Fig. 23 the layer thickness has no effect on the 
maximum phase value, which is influenced exclusively by the reflection 
coefficient R.  
Figure 23 reveals that the phase curves at constant frequency and varying layer 
thicknesses d have the same shape as those at constant layer thickness and varying 
frequencies. In order to determine the coating thermal properties, the phase Δϕ has 
to be measured for different modulation frequencies and plotted as a function of 
f1/2 (Fig. 24). Then the maximum phase value and the thermal reflection 
coefficient R can be estimated. Equations (3) and (4) then yield the product 
κLρLcL. Afterwards, a normalization factor s for the abscissa in Fig. 24 must be 
determined by approximation. The correct value of s is found when the maximum 
of the measured phase is located at the same position as the maximum of the phase 
curve in Fig. 23 (calculated for the same value of R).  
d
c
s
L
L
L
πρ
κ
=
  
 
             (6) 
Now, the thermal diffusivity κL/ρLcL can be calculated using the relationship (6). 
Combining the thermal diffusivity and the product κLρLcL will finally yield the 
thermal conductivity κL of the coating. Figure 24 shows phase curves as measured 
for five specimens of PVD TiCuN coatings on steel substrates.  
 
-4
0
4
8
12
0
40
80
120
160
Square Root Of Frequency In Hz1/2
(c)
(e)
(d)
(b)
(a)
Phase Difference, Δ ϕ (Degree) 
Square Root of Modulation Frequency, √(f) (Hz1/2)
-4
0
4
8
12
0
40
80
120
160
Square Root Of Frequency In Hz1/2
(c)
(e)
(d)
(b)
(a)
Phase Difference, Δ ϕ (Degree) 
Square Root of Modulation Frequency, √(f) (Hz1/2)
 
Fig. 24 Measured phase curves for PVD TiCuN coatings on steel disks with thicknesses of 
11.7 µm (a), 10.0 µm (b), 5.3 µm (c), 3.2 µm (d), and 1.8 µm (e) 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
157
 
The coating composition was determined by GDOES analysis as Ti: 84–89%, 
Cu: 0.4-1.0%, N: 8-13%. The coating thicknesses d were measured by ball 
cratering and the numerical results from the photothermal analysis are summarized 
in Table 2. More details of sample preparation and analysis were published 
elsewhere [Goc04]. 
Table 2 Numerical results from a photothermal analysis of PVD TiCuN coatings 
 
d (μm) 
 
11.7 
10.0 
5.3 
3.2 
1.8 
R 
-0.3 
-0.28 
-0.275 
-0.275 
-0.275 
α (m2 s-1) 
2.55 
2.77 
2.55 
2.79 
2.54 
eL (W s½ m-2 K-1) 
7135 
7370 
7540 
7540 
7540 
κ (W m-1 K-1) 
11.4 
12.3 
12.0 
12.6 
12.0 
 
For the above method of determining the coating thermal parameters, the 
substrate’s thermal parameters and the layer thickness must be known. The 
method is applicable only for one-dimensional thermal wave propagation. 
Furthermore, the coatings must be opaque to the excitation and detection 
wavelengths. Another assumption about the coating-substrate interface is that the 
heat flow and the temperature must be continuous, otherwise a thermal contact 
resistance arises and the thermal reflection coefficient will become complex 
[Pre06]. A thermal contact resistance, which is detectable by significant deviations 
from typical phase curves, indicates a possible layer delamination. 
5   Summary 
The Collaborative Research Center SFB-TR4 has pursued the development of 
novel hard films to be used as coatings for molds for the replication of complex 
optics. Coatings for use in the precision pressing of glass and the injection 
molding of plastics were developed. Nanocrystalline PVD Ti-Ni-N and Ti-Cu-N 
coatings and thin sol-gel ZrO2 coatings were developed and tested as new 
protective coatings for glass pressing molds. For mold coatings to be employed in 
the injection molding of plastics, thick sol-gel silica based coatings were 
developed and tested as an alternative for traditional electroless nickel coatings. 
By using hybrid organic-inorganic sol-gels, thick, crack-free coatings could be 
produced. Micromachining with diamond tools was used to create complex 
geometries in the coatings while in their pre-ceramic state. Conversion of the sol-
gel films to their final ceramic state was achieved by heat treatment and ion 
irradiation. 
 

158 
G. Goch et al.
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”. Funding from the 
National Science Foundation through Grant Nos. OISE-0352377 and OISE-0128050 is 
gratefully acknowledged. Portions of this work were performed at the Center for Integrated 
Nanotechnologies, a US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Nanoscale 
Science Research Center operated jointly by Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories.  
References 
[Alm90] Almeida, R.M., Pantano, C.G.: Structural investigation of silica gel films by 
infrared spectroscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 68, 4225–4232 (1990) 
[Bra01] 
Bradley, D.C., Mehrotra, R.C., Rothwell, I.P., Singh, A.A.: Alkoxo and Aryloxo 
Derivatives of Metals. Academic Press, Boston (2001) 
[Ben04] 
Bengelsdorff, S., Stock, H.-R., Zoch, H.-W., Grimme, D., Preuß, W., 
Brinksmeier, E.: Abscheidung von diamantbearbeitbaren Titan-Nickel-Nitrid-
Schichten für Abformwerkzeuge. Tagungsband zum 7. Werkstofftechnischen 
Kolloquium in Chemnitz, Schriftenreihe Werkstoffe und werkstofftechnische 
Anwendungen. Band 18, 256–262 (2004) ISBN 3-00-013553-7, ISSN 1439-
1597 
[Ben82] 
Bennett, C.A., Patty, R.R.: Thermal wave interferometry: A potential application 
of the photoacoustic effect. Appl. Optics 21(1), 49–54 (1982) 
[Beu96] 
Beuth, J.L., Klingbeil, N.W.: Cracking of thin films bonded to elastic-plastic 
substrates. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 44(9), 1411–1428 (1996) 
[Bri90] 
Brinker, C.J., Scherer, G.W.: Sol-Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of 
Sol-Gel Processing, ch. 3. Academic Press, Boston (1990) 
[Dat05] 
Datchary, W., Mehner, A., Zoch, H.-W., Lucca, D.A., Klopfstein, M.J., 
Ghisleni, R., Grimme, D., Brinksmeier, E.: High precision diamond machining 
of hybrid sol-gel coatings. J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 35, 245–251 (2005) 
[Gal02] 
Gallardo, J., Durán, A., Di Martino, D., Almeida, R.M.: Structure of inorganic 
and hybrid SiO2 sol-gel coatings studied by variable incidence infrared 
spectroscopy. J. Non-cryst. Solids 298, 219–225 (2002) 
[Ghi07] 
Ghisleni, R., Lucca, D.A., Nastasi, M., Shao, L., Wang, Y.Q., Dong, J., Mehner, 
A.: Effects of electronic stopping on the irradiation-induced changes in hybrid 
modified silicate thin films. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 257, 581–584 (2007) 
[Ghi08] 
Ghisleni, R., Lucca, D.A., Wang, Y.Q., Lee, J.-K., Nastasi, M., Dong, J., 
Mehner, A.: Ion irradiation effects on surface mechanical behavior and 
shrinkage of hybrid sol-gel derived silicate thin films. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. 
B 266, 2453–2456 (2008) 
[Gri04] 
Grimme, D., Preuß, W., Brinksmeier, E., Bengelsdorff, S., Stock, H.-R., Mayr, 
P.: Technologische Grundlagenuntersuchungen zur Bearbeitung neuartiger 
schleif- und polierbarer PVD-Hartstoffschichten. HTM 59, 291–297 (2004) 
[Goc04] 
Goch, G., Prekel, H., Patzelt, S., Ströbel, G., Lucca, D.A., Stock, H.R., Mehner, 
A.: Non-destructive and non-contact determination of layer thickness and 
thermal properties of PVD and sol-gel layers by photothermal methods. CIRP 
Ann.-Manuf. Techn. 53, 471–474 (2004) 
[He01] 
He, J.L., Setsuhara, Y., Shimizu, I., Miyake, S.: Structure refinement and 
hardness enhancement of titanium nitride films by addition of copper. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 137, 38–42 (2001) 

Deposition, Machining and Measuring of Novel Hard Coatings 
159
 
[Hut92] 
Hutchinson, J.W., Suo, Z.: Mixed Mode Cracking in Layered Materials. 
Chapter V. Cracking of Pre-tensioned Films. In: Advances in Applied 
Mechanics, vol. 29, pp. 132–137. Academic Press, Boston (1992) 
[Ile79] 
Ller, R.K.: The Chemistry of Silica. Wiley, New York (1979) 
[Izu89] 
Izumi, K., Murakami, M., Deguchi, T., Morita, A., Tohge, N., Minami, T.: 
Zirconia coatings on stainless-steel sheets from organozirconium compounds. J. 
American Ceramic Soc. 72, 1465–1468 (1989) 
[Luc04] 
Lucca, D.A., Klopfstein, M.J., Ghisleni, R., Gude, A., Mehner, A., Datchary, 
W.: Investigation of sol-gel derived ZrO2 thin films by nanoindentation. CIRP 
Ann.-Manuf. Techn. 53, 475–478 (2004) 
[Luc07] 
Lucca, D.A., Ghisleni, R., Nastasi, M., Shao, L., Wang, Y.Q., Dong, J., Mehner, 
A.: Effects of ion implantation on surface mechanical properties of sol-gel 
derived TEOS/MTES thin films. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 257, 577–580 (2007) 
[Luc08] 
Lucca, D.A., Ghisleni, R., Lee, J.-K., Wang, Y.Q., Nastasi, M., Dong, J., 
Mehner, A.: Effects of ion irradiation on the structural transformation of sol-gel 
derived TEOS/MTES thin films. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 266, 2457–2460 (2008) 
[Luc10] 
Lucca, D.A., Qi, Y., Harriman, T.A., Prenzel, T., Wang, Y.Q., Nastasi, M., 
Dong, J., Mehner, A.: Effects of ion irradiation on the mechanical properties of 
SiNawOxCyHz sol-gel derived thin films. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 268, 2926–
2929 (2010) 
[Mar82] 
Marschall, D.B., Noma, T., Evans, A.G.: A simple method for determining 
elastic-modulus-to-hardness ratios using Knoop indentation measurements. J. 
Am. Ceram. Soc. 65(10), 175–176 (1982) 
[Meh97] Mehner, A., Klümper-Westkamp, H., Hoffmann, F., Mayr, P.: Crystallization 
and residual stress formation of sol-gel-derived zirconia films. Thin Solid 
Films 308-309, 363–368 (1997) 
[Meh99] Mehner, A.: Sinterung und Kristallisation nasschemisch abgeschiedener ZrO2-
Filme. Dissertation. Shaker-Verlag, Aachen (1999) 
[Meh05] Mehner, A., Datchary, W., Bleil, N., Zoch, H.-W., Klopfstein, M.J., Lucca, 
D.A.: The influence of sol-gel processing parameters on crack formation, 
microstructure, density and hardness of sol-gel derived zirconia films. J. Sol-Gel 
Sci. Technol. 36, 25–32 (2005) 
[Meh06] Mehner, A., Zoch, H.-W., Datchary, W., Pongs, G., Kunzmann, H.: Sol-gel 
coatings for high precision optical molds. CIRP Ann.-Manuf. Techn. 56, 589–
592 (2006) 
[Meh07] Mehner, A., Dong, J., Zoch, H.-W., Brinksmeier, E., Grimme, D., Lucca, D., 
Ghisleni, R., Michaeli, W., Kleiber, F.: Diamond Machinable Sol-Gel SiOxCy-
Coatings for High Precision Optical Molds. In: Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference THE Coatings in Manufacturing Engineering 2007, 
Hannover, May 25-26, pp. 55–64 (2007); Berichte aus dem IFW Band 10/2007 
[Meh10a] Mehner, A., Dong, J., Prenzel, T., Datchary, W., Lucca, D.A.: Mechanical and 
chemical properties of thick hybrid sol-gel silica coatings from acid and base 
catalyzed sols. J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 54, 355–362 (2010) 
[Meh10b] Mehner, A., Dong, J., Hoja, T., Prenzel, T., Mutlugünes, Y., Brinksmeier, E., 
Lucca, D.A., Klaiber, F.: Diamond machinable sol-gel silica based hybrid 
coatings for high precision optical molds. Key Eng. Mat. 438, 65–72 (2010) 
[Myu03] Myung, H.S., Lee, H.M., Shaginyan, L.R., Han, J.G.: Microstructure and 
mechanical properties of Cu doped TiN superhard nanocomposite coatings. Surf. 
Coat. Technol. 163-164, 591–596 (2003) 

160 
G. Goch et al.
 
[Pat98] 
Paterson, M.J., Paterson, P.J.K., Ben-Nissan, B.: The dependence of structural 
and mechanical properties on film thickness in sol-gel zirconia films. J. Mater. 
Res. 13, 388–395 (1998) 
[Piv97] 
Pivin, J.C., Colombo, P.: Ceramic coatings by ion irradiation of polycarbosilanes 
and polysioxanes: Part I conversion mechanism. J. Mater. Sci. 32, 6163–6173 
(1997) 
[Piv03] 
Pivin, J.C., Colombo, P., Martucci, A., Sorarù, G.D., Pippel, E., Sendova-
Vassileva, M.: Ion beam induced conversion of Si-based polymers and gels 
layers into ceramics coatings. J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 26, 251–255 (2003) 
[Pre06] 
Prekel, H., Klopfstein, M.J., Giesselbach, M., Patzelt, S., Ghisleni, R., Lucca, 
D.A., Goch, G., Stock, H.R.: Photothermal investigation of Ti-Cu-N and T Ni N 
PVD Films. CIRP Ann.-Manuf. Techn. 55, 585–588 (2006) 
[Qi10] 
Qi, Y., Prenzel, T., Harriman, T.A., Wang, Y.Q., Lucca, D.A., Williams, D., 
Nastasi, M., Dong, J., Mehner, A.: Investigation of hydrogen concentration and 
hardness of ion irradiated organically modified silicate thin films. Nucl. Instrum. 
Meth. B 268, 1997–2000 (1999) 
[Ros76] 
Rosencwaig, A., Gersho, A.: Theory of the photoacoustic effect with solids. J. 
Appl. Phys. 47, 64–69 (1976) 
[Rie05] 
Rieser, D., Spieß, G., Manns, P.: Untersuchungen zum Klebe- und 
Abriebverhalten 
von 
Formenwerkstoffen 
und 
Beschichtungen 
für 
die 
Glasheißverarbeitung 
(AiF-Nr. 
13508N). 
In: 
Deutsche 
Glastechnische 
Gesellschaft -DGG-, Frankfurt/Main: 79. Glastechnische Tagung. Programm 
und Referate. CD-ROM: Würzburg, Mai 23-25. DGG, Offenbach (2005) ISBN: 
3-921089-43-3 
[Sch97] 
Scherer, G.W.: Sintering of sol-gel films. J. Sol.-Gel. Sci. Technol. 8, 353–363 
(1997) 
[Tan02] 
Taniike, A., Kubota, N., Takeuchi, M., Furuyama, Y., Kitamura, A.: Ion-
irradiation induced hydrogen loss from polyethylene film. J. Appl. Phys. 92, 
6489–6495 (2002) 
[Tra99] 
Trakhtenber, L.S., Rubshtein, A.P., Levin, A.D.: Radiation-induced release of 
hydrogen from C:H films: basic regularities and mechanism. Diam. Relat. 
Mater. 8, 2164–2168 (1999) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 161–178. 
springerlink.com                                                         © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical 
Surfaces 
Gert Goch, Robert Schmitt, Stefan Patzelt, Stephan Stürwald,  
and Andreas Tausendfreund* 
Abstract. Measurements of the form and the roughness during the machining 
process or the replication process with molds is still difficult and highly 
inaccurate. An adequate roughness measuring system is based on the analysis of 
the scattered speckle intensity distribution, emerging from the workpiece surface. 
This contribution covers the theoretical description of the scattered light 
measuring process, which is based on the scalar Kirchhoff theory and a ray tracing 
model of the light propagation in an optical fiber considering physical optics. 
Highest accuracy in optical, non tactile measurement of form deviations of 
molds or the molded optics in the machine is achieved by interferometry. A phase 
shifting digital holographic measurement method is described in more detail. This 
comprises an automated alignment set-up including the features of auto focusing 
and subsequent refocusing, the use of computer generated holograms (CGHs) as 
well as different approaches for a systematic determination and evaluation of form 
deviations. 
1   Introduction 
The geometrical form and the surface roughness mainly characterize the quality of 
ultra-precision machined, optical molds and optical parts. Until today it is often 
difficult and highly inaccurate to measure the form and the roughness during the 
ultra-precision machining process or the replication process with molds. The 
workpiece has to be measured outside the machine tool with an external 
measuring system. Tool wear during machining increases the roughness, and 
finally leads to a poor surface quality. A second machining process with a new 
diamond cutting tool is required. In the case of a post-process measurement the 
workpiece has to be aligned exactly at the same position as during the first 
                                                           
Gert Goch · Stefan Patzelt · Andreas Tausendfreund 
Bremen Institute for Metrology, Automation and Quality Science BIMAQ,  
University of Bremen, Linzer Straße 13, 28359 Bremen, Germany 
 
Robert Schmitt · Stephan Stürwald 
Fraunhofer Institute for Production Technology IPT, Steinbachstraße 17, 52074,  
Aachen, Germany 

162 
G. Goch et al.
 
machining process, which is at least time-consuming or even impossible. This 
results in a strong demand for measuring systems that allow form and roughness 
characterization while the workpiece is still clamped inside the machine tool, 
either in a process discrete manner (in-situ) or during the machining operation 
itself (in-process).  
An adequate roughness measuring system is based on the analysis of the 
scattered speckle intensity distribution, emerging from the workpiece surface. It 
operates fast and contact-free at a working distance of at least some centimeters 
with a measuring range from Sq = 1 nm to Sq = 150 nm. It preferably 
characterizes specularly reflecting surfaces with possibly anisotropic topography 
in an in-process operation mode. This contribution covers the theoretical 
description of the scattered light measuring process, which is based on the scalar 
Kirchhoff theory, and a ray tracing model of the light propagation in an optical 
fiber considering physical optics. 
Form testing interferometry permits fast, non-tactile and full-field quantitative 
phase imaging for testing optical components in manufacturing. To reduce the 
influence of vibrations under manufacturing conditions, it is most common to use 
the FT-based spatial carrier phase measurement technique (SCPM) which requires 
only a single interferogram recording. The utilization of digital holographic 
interferometry with relatively new spatial phase-shifting methods operating in the 
position space offers higher robustness under production conditions. Therefore, 
phase-shifting digital holography is applied in machine integrated interferometric 
form testing of optical lenses. Digital holographic interferometry (DHI) allows 
altering the focus numerically by propagating the complex wave. Especially for 
compensation of deformations or displacements and for long-term investigations 
in a machine, a reliable numerical readjustment of the focus is of particular 
interest in digital holographic microscopy. The concept of numerical parametric 
lenses is another key feature in DHI and used to correct aberrations in the 
reconstructed wave front caused by the set-up to measure form deviations of 
reflective, optical surfaces. 
2   Roughness Measurement  
In contrast to topographic methods for surface roughness measurement (e. g. 
stylus and autofocusing profilometers, white light interferometers), light scattering 
techniques show real in-process capabilities. Early investigations resulted in a 
measuring device based on the measurement of the specularly reflected and the 
diffusely scattered light component, detected under a certain angle in order to 
monitor the roughness changes during grinding [Pet65]. The major problem of this 
device is the dependence of the measuring result on maladjustment, emerging 
from the waviness of the surface, for example. In-process measuring methods 
based on the diffuseness of scattered light are less sensitive to maladjustment 
[Bro84, Lee87]. They assume a strong correlation between the surface height and 
the surface slope distribution. This is usually correct for specific manufacturing 
processes [Pet79], but leads to difficulties when a comparative characterization of 
surfaces produced by different processes is required. The power spectrum of a 
rough surface can be obtained from the angular distribution of scattered light 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
163
 
[Thw80]. With respect to in-process applications, this ARS-method (ARS = angle 
resolved scattering) requires a very high dynamic range of the detector, and it is 
limited to rather smooth optical surfaces (root mean square of the surface heights 
Sq << light wavelength λ). A survey of state-of-the-art light scattering techniques 
for a roughness characterization can be found in [Vor81, Whi94, Ben99]. 
However, all of them are additionally influenced by the correlation length and the 
shape of the autocorrelation function of the surface [Bro84].  
The theoretical analysis of the speckle methods shows that only the root mean 
square (rms) of the surface heights influences the measuring results [Leh99]. 
Furthermore, speckle measuring techniques enable large and varying working 
distances up to 100 mm. The following describes the latest approach of a 
measuring technique, which is based on roughness dependent partially developed 
speckle patterns [Leh00].  
2.1   Roughness Measuring System 
A smooth surface (Sq < λ/4) is illuminated with a fully developed static speckle 
pattern of a few millimeters in diameter. The statistical properties of the reflected 
and scattered speckle intensities contain essential informations about the surface 
roughness. The measuring principle results in a roughness-dependent spatial 
intensity modulation of the scattered speckle field. This principle has been 
introduced theoretically and was validated experimentally for transmitting isotropic 
surfaces [Yos90, Bas95]. A theoretical extension of the method to reflecting and 
possibly anisotropic surfaces can be found in [Leh99]. A diffuser plate and a spatial 
filter optic generate the static illumination speckle pattern, which results in a quite 
expanded set-up of about 30 cm. The demand for a compact and robust measuring 
device required further investigation concerning the miniaturized generation of a 
static, fully developed illumination speckle pattern.  
Laser
Lens f1
Fixed Multimode Fiber
Beamsplitter Cube
Workpiece
Oberservation Plane
Static Illumination Speckle Pattern 
Scattered
Speckle Pattern
Lens f2
′x
′y
′′
y
′′
x
ξ
η
u
v
x
y
 
Fig. 1 Roughness measuring set-up 

164 
G. Goch et al.
 
With the latest approach [Pat10] an optical multimode step-index fiber fixed in 
a small ceramic tube replaces the diffuser plate and the spatial filter. Mode 
dispersion within the optical fiber leads to a speckled intensity distribution, which 
illuminates the workpiece (Figure 1). The biased wave front is very sensitive to 
surface irregularities in the nanometer range, which results in a roughness 
dependent speckle intensity modulation in the u -v -observation plane. The fiber 
optical measuring set-up consists of only a few low-cost components and expands 
only about 10 cm. The resulting illumination speckle pattern cannot be 
distinguished from a speckle pattern produced by a diffuser plate and is fully 
compatible for roughness measurements. A software design tool based on 
different mathematical models of the light propagation and light scattering 
processes simulates the measuring process. This enables a fast and cost effective 
tuning and optimization of the optical measuring process parameters, e.g. light 
wavelength, optical fiber specifications, focal lengths of the lenses, optical path 
lengths, surface roughness and lateral correlation length. 
2.2   Simulation of the Scattered Light Measuring Process 
The numerical model of the fiber optical roughness measuring process separates 
the light path into three sections [Pat10]. The calculation of the light propagation 
from the laser (ξ -η -plane) to the optical fiber front ( x - y -plane) and from the 
fiber end ( ′x - 'y -plane) via the workpiece surface to the detector (u -v -plane) is 
based on the scalar Kirchhoff theory [Goo96]. The scalar electrical field 
distribution of the collimated laser beam is 
ξ η
ξ η
=
⋅
0
( , , )
( , )
ikz
E
z
E
e
,        with 
ξ
η
ξ η


+


−




=
⋅
2
2
2
0
0
( , )
L
R
E
E
e
, 
(1) 
where 
ξ η
0( , )
E
 is the Gaussian amplitude distribution of the beam cross section 
with the radius 
L
R . According to the scalar Kirchhoff theory the lens with the 
focal length 
1f  performs a Fourier transformation of the incident light, which 
leads to the electrical field 
π ξ
η
λ
ξ η
ξ η
−
⋅+ ⋅
=
=
⋅

1
2
(
)
1( , ,
0)
( , , )
i
x
y
f
E x y z
E
z e
d d                          (2) 
in the back focal plane or at the optical fiber front face, respectively. The focused 
beam with the wavelength λ  and the beam waist radius 
λ
π
=
⋅
⋅
1
(
)/(
)
w
L
r
f
R
 
enters the optical fiber according to Snell’s law 
α
α′
=
⋅
0
0
sin
sin
n
, with the fiber 
core refractive index n .  

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
165
 
S1
S2
S3
αc
Fiber Core
Fiber Cladding
Protective Cover
c
n
cl
n
α′0
x-y-plane
x´-y´-plane
Collimated Laser Beam
z
α0
cr

Nr

Lr

N
a
a)
0
y
x
y
x
y

0r
ϕ0
β
γγ
0
y
h
0
x
β′

0
a
′
0
a
′′
0
a
0
x
h
b)
 
Fig. 2 Laser beam coupling into an optical fiber a) axial section and b) transverse section 
The light propagation within the waveguide and the electrical field distribution 
at the optical fiber end face follow ray tracing methods and wave optics. 
Depending on the entrance position of a light beam at the fiber front face, the 
incidence angle and the physical properties of the optical fiber ray tracing enables 
to calculate the light path length within the fiber and the exit position of a light 
beam in the 
′x - 'y -plane (Figure 2.a). The fiber core guides light beams due to 
internal total reflections at the core-cladding interface, if the incidence angle is 
less than a critical angle 
c
α  (S1, S2 and S3 in Figure 2.a). The following 
considers a beam that enters an optical fiber of the length L , the core radius cr  
and the refractive index 
c
n  at the position 
=
=
=




0
0
0
(
,
,
0)
r
x
y
h z
 with the 
incidence angle α
α
≤
0
c  and the azimuth angle ϕ0  between the incidence plane 
and the 
- -
x z plane (Figure 2.b). According to Snell’s law the refracted beam 
includes the angle α
α
−
′ =
1
0
0
sin
(sin
/
)
c
n
 with the optical z -axis and the angle 
(
)
γ
−
=

1
sin
/ c
h r
 with the surface normal of the core-cladding boundary. The 
beam undergoes 
α
γ
γ


′
⋅
−
⋅
+
=


⋅
⋅



0
0
tan
cos
ceil
2
cos
c
c
L
r
x
N
r
                                 (3) 
internal total reflections at the core-cladding interface, where „ceil“ denotes that 
the computational result of the expression within curved brackets must be rounded 
up to the nearest integer. Finally, a beam propagates in the direction 
α
ϕ
ϕ
α
ϕ
ϕ
α
′ ⋅
+
⋅Δ




′
=
⋅
+
⋅Δ




′



0
0
0
0
0
sin
cos(
)
sin
sin(
)
cos
N
N
a
N
    ,    with 
ϕ
γ
Δ
=
° −
180
2 ,                   (4) 
towards the optical fiber end face. To calculate the position of the beam exit 
=
=

(
,
,
)
L
L
L
L
r
x
y z
L  at the optical fiber end face, it is necessary to know the position 

166 
G. Goch et al.
 
vector 
=

(
,
,
)
N
N
N
N
r
x
y
z
 of the last internal reflection point at the boundary 
surface: 
ϕ
=
⋅cos
N
c
N
x
r
, 
ϕ
=
⋅sin
N
c
N
y
r
, 
γ
α
⋅
−
⋅
⋅
−
=
′
0
0
(2
1)
cos
tan
c
N
N
r
x
z
,                (5) 
with ϕ
γ
ϕ
ϕ
=
+
+
−
⋅Δ
0
(
)
(
1)
N
N
. The coordinates of the beam exit point result 
from a vector addition of Eq.(4) and Eq.(5): 
α
ϕ
ϕ
α
ϕ
ϕ
′
+
⋅
⋅
+
⋅Δ




′
=
+
⋅
=
+
⋅
⋅
+
⋅Δ









0
0
0
0
sin
cos(
)
sin
sin(
)
N
N
L
N
N
N
N
N
x
c
N
r
r
c
a
y
c
N
L
, with 
α
−
=
′0
(
)
cos
N
N
L z
c
.      (6) 
The electrical field distribution 
′
′
=
2( ,
,
)
E
x y z
L  in the 'x - 'y -plane follows from the 
in-phase superposition of all wavelet amplitudes with the same exit coordinates 
Lr  
with respect to the geometric optical path lengths. The calculations of the 
electrical field distributions at the workpiece surface and in the observation plane 
are based on the scalar Kirchhoff theory. The second lens with the focal length 2f  
(Figure 1) performs an inverse Fourier transformation of 
2
E : 
π
λ
⋅
+ ⋅
=
⋅

2
2
( ' ''
' '')
3
2
( '', '')
( ', ')
'
'
i
x x
y y
f
E
x
y
E
x y
e
dx dy ,                             (7) 
which describes a static illumination speckle pattern with both a well defined 
diameter and a well defined mean speckle size. The interaction of this biased wave 
front with the surface height distribution 
′′
′′
(
,
)
w
h
x y
 of the reflecting workpiece 
topography leads to a phase modulation φ
′′
′′
(
,
)
x y
 of the incident field 
3
E : 
φ
′′ ′′
′′
′′
′′
′′
=
⋅
(
,
)
4
3
(
,
)
(
,
)
i
x y
E
x y
E
x y
e
, with 
π
φ
λ
′′
′′
′′
′′
= −
⋅
4
(
,
)
(
,
)
w
x y
h
x y
.               (8) 
Finally, the electrical field in the u -v -observation plane at a distance a  from the 
workpiece (Figure ) follows from Eq.(8) and the Fresnel diffraction integral 
[Goo96]: 
π


′′
′′
−
+
−


−
′′
′′
′′
′′
=
⋅

2
2
0
(
)
(
)
2
5
4
( , )
(
,
)
d
d
2
ik
ika
u x
v y
a
S
ike
E u v
E
x y
e
x
y
a
.                     (9) 
5
E  describes the same static speckle patter as 
3
E  according to Eq.(7) with an 
additional intensity modulation of the single speckles depending on the rms of the 
surface heights 
′′
′′
(
,
)
w
h
x y
. According to the convolution theorem, the convolution 
integral Eq.(9) can easily be implemented in Matlab by applying fast Fourier 
transform algorithms. 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
167
 
2.3   Results of Simulations and Measurements 
Figure 3 shows calculated scattered intensity distributions for three different 
smooth objects as a result of the simulations described above. As readily can be 
seen, the illumination speckle pattern is the same for all measuring process 
simulations. However, the speckle intensity modulation increases with the surface 
roughness. 
 
Sq = 1 nm
Sq = 10 nm
Sq = 20 nm
 
Fig. 3 Calculated scattered speckle patterns for three different smooth objects 
An appropriate optical roughness parameter Ropt characterizes the mean 
speckle size within scattered light intensity distributions according to Figure 3. 
The determination of such a parameter is based on the calculation of a two-
dimensional discrete speckle intensity autocorrelation function (ACF) [Pat06]. 
The ACF gradient near to the ACF maximum increases as the speckle intensities 
become more modulated. Figure 4 presents the connection of the optical 
roughness parameter Ropt with the Sq-roughness of different isotropic rough 
model surfaces in the range between Sq = 1 nm and Sq = 100 nm (squares in 
Figure 4). 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
Sq / µm
Ropt / Arbitrary Units
Simulation
Messung
PM022b
Measurement
 
Fig. 4 Optical roughness values Ropt as a result of measuring process simulations and 
measurements 

168 
G. Goch et al.
 
Measured Ropt values (circles) from an experimental set-up according to 
Figure 1 and the parameter values of the measuring process simulation are in a 
good agreement with the calculated Ropt values. This encourages to design and 
assemble a corresponding, compact measuring device (Figure 5.a), which has been 
integrated into an ultra-precision machine tool to perform in-situ roughness 
measurements (Figure 5.b). 
Optical Fiber
from Laser
Fixed
Multimode
Fiber
CCD
CCD
Workpiece
Workpiece
a)
b)
1 cm
1 cm
 
Fig. 5 Compact measuring device for in-situ roughness measurements a) as a sketch and b) 
integrated into a machine tool 
3   Interferometrical Form Measurements 
Phase shifting techniques find widespread application to interferometric form 
testing in ultra precise manufacturing of spherical and aspherical lenses as the 
accuracy is in the nanometer range. Up to the present a variety of systems and 
algorithms for phase-shifting methods have been developed for non-destructive 
testing and quality control of optically smooth and both reflective and transparent 
samples ([Mal07], [Rob93], [Kre05]). Quality inspection of ultra precise mould 
inserts and manufactured optics is performed outside the manufacturing machine 
using phase-shifting methods. The correction of local form deviations is imprecise 
as the manufactured optics or the mould inserts have to be repositioned in the 
machine tool. A promising way to overcome this problem is a machine integrated 
measurement system (Figure 12). Thus for the manufacturing of mould inserts in 
optical quality as well as for machine-integrated measurements for quality control 
of optics a closed loop process chain allows a faster manufacturing process and 
less iterative reworking. The direct integration of phase shifting interferometers 
into the production environment is difficult because of their sensitivity to external 
influences. One major disturbing influence is caused by vibrations [Dro95]. The 
algorithms given here are primarily intended to be used in a machine environment 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
169
 
where vibrations, acoustic noise and air turbulences are unavoidable. Thus 
different spatial phase-shifting techniques which require only one off-axis 
interferogram are considered. For a sustainable application of the measurement 
technology in production the minimization of investment costs is also an 
important challenge. Thus a cost intensive actuated mirror to perform temporal 
phase shifting is then not required. Furthermore, by applying a numerical 
readjustment of the focus, no mechanical focus adjustment is needed and the 
effective axial resolution can be enhanced numerically by post processing of 
complex wave fronts without narrowing the field of view leading to a loss of 
information around the focus plane by blurring. 
3.1   Set-Up of Measurement System 
For DHI, a variety of different set-ups can be realized. Figure 6 illustrates the 
schematic set-up for digital holographic quantitative phase contrast intererometry 
for transmission (Figure 6.a) and incident imaging mode (Figure 6.b). In incident 
light mode, the investigated reflective surface is illuminated through the 
measurement objective with the light of a coherent light source (HeNe laser, 
λ = 632.8 nm). In combination with a tube lens the same measurement objective 
images the object onto an image capturing device (CCD sensor). 
Here, the object wave is superimposed with a coherent "reference wave" that is 
slightly tilted by a beam splitter to generate digital "off-axis" holograms [Kre05]. 
The reference wave is formed by a collimated wave which passes an identical tube 
lens in order to generate equally shaped wave fronts (Linnik arrangement). Due to 
geometrical restrictions, a Linnik set-up is realized without a second tube lens as 
the slightly tilted incoupling beam splitter is located between the objective lens 
and the imaging tube lens. For both arrangements, the holograms which are 
formed by the superposition of the object and reference wave are captured by the 
CCD image sensor and transferred to an image processing system for the 
numerical reconstruction of the digital holograms. 
 
Fig. 6 Digital holographic imaging modes: a) transmission light arrangement, b) incident 
light arrangement; O: object wave, R: reference wave, MO: microscope objective, BS: 
beam splitter, L: lens, CCD: digital image sensor. 

170 
G. Goch et al.
 
3.2   Spatial Phase Shifting Techniques Operating in the Position 
Space 
In an interferometer set-up as depicted in Figure 6, a reference wave R(x,y) and an 
object wave O(x,y) are superimposed in the plane (x,y) of the image recording 
device, which leads to the interferogram equation [Mal07]: 
(
)
(
)
(
)
)
,
(
)
,
(
cos
)
,
(
1
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
,
2
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
I
y
x
I
y
x
R
y
x
O
y
x
I
O
k
R
R
O
k
φ
φ
γ
−
+
⋅
+
=
+
=
. 
 
(10) 
With IO (x,y)=|O(x,y)|2 and IR (x,y)=|R (x,y)|2 denoting the intensities of the two 
waves and γ(x,y) the interferogram modulation. In presence of a sample in the 
optical path of O, the phase distribution represents the sum φO(x,y)= 
φO0 (x,y)+φS (x,y) where φO0 designates the pure object wave phase and φS  the 
optical path length induced by the sample.  
3.2.1   Spatial Phase Shifting 
In case of spatial phase shifting the reference plane wave and the object wave are 
in off-axis geometry. This latter terminology refers to the fact that the reference 
wave arrives at the camera with a slight angle in relation to the object wave 
(Figure 7.a). The resulting carrier fringes of the reference wave can be described 
as φR(x,y)=xβx(x,y)+yβy(x,y)+C. The parameters βx and βy denote the spatial 
gradient of the phase difference between O and R. C represents a constant phase 
offset. In this way a spatial carrier fringe pattern is generated. For the 
reconstruction of the object wave phase from the spatial phase shifted 
interferograms a method is applied which has been developed for digital 
holographic microscopy [Lie04]. The principle is based on utilization of 
intensities of adjacent pixels within a region of interest (ROI, Figure 7.b) around 
an interferogram pixel to solve an equation system from which the complex object 
wave can be obtained including phase and amplitude. The utilized algorithm is 
based on the assumption that only the phase difference ΔφI(x,y)=φR,k(x,y)-φO(x,y) 
between the object and reference wave varies rapidly spatially in the 
interferogram. Additionally, because of the spatial phase-shifting algorithm, the 
object wave must be assumed to be constant within an area of approximately 
5×5 pixels around a given point of interest in the interferogram. These 
requirements can be fulfilled by a specimen with a smooth surface or an adequate 
relation between the magnification of the used optical system and the image 
recording device. Therefore, the magnification has to be chosen in such a way  
that the smallest imaged structures of the sample, which are restricted by the 
resolution of the optical imaging system because of the Abbe criterion, are 
oversampled by the CCD sensor. In this way the lateral resolution of the 
reconstructed holographic phase contrast images is not decreased by the spatial 
phase-shifting algorithm. 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
171
 
 
    
C0(νx,νy)
Mδ(νx,νy)
M-δ(νx,νy)
νx
νy
(c)
 
Fig. 7 a) Formation of an interferogram on a CCD-camera and b) zoom of an interferogram 
with a ROI of 3×3 pixels. c): Fourier transform of an off-axis interferogram (b) with 
characteristic, indicated components. 
For areas without a sample, ΔφI(x,y) can be approximated by a mathematical 
model [Lie04]: 
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
,
y
x
y
x
y
x
O
k
R
I
φ
φ
ϕ
−
=
Δ
)
(
2
2
2
y
L
x
L
y
K
x
K
y
x
y
x
+
+
+
= π
. (11) 
The parameters Kx, Ky in Eq.(11) describe the divergence of the object wave and 
the properties of the microscope lens normally applied in digital holographic 
microscopy. The factors Lx, Ly describe the linear phase difference between O and 
R that is due to the off-axis geometry of the experimental set-up. For quantitative 
phase 
measurements 
from Ik(x,y) the complex object wave 
O(x,y)= 
|O(x,y)| exp(i·ΔφS(x,y)) can be calculated for each pixel by solving a set of 
equations that is obtained by inserting Eq.(11) into Equation (10) (for details see 
[Lie04]). The parameters Kx, Ky, Lx, Ly in Eq.(11) cannot be obtained directly from 
the geometry of the set-up in Figure 6 with adequate accuracy. Thus they are fitted 
in an area of the hologram without a sample by an iterative fitting process [Car04]. 
3.2.2   FT-Based Algorithm 
The Fourier transform (FT) based spatial phase-shifting algorithm, also known as 
SCPM-method, is a widely known and robust method for phase retrieval and 
described in ([Kre05], [Kre86], [Bon86]). Applying a Hann window function 
h1(x,y) and the Fourier transform to a spatial phase shifted interferogram I(x,y) 
with carrier fringes in x-direction, the partitions in the frequency domain can be 
written as:  
)
,
B(
)
,
(
M
 
)
,
(
M
)
,
(
C
y)]
FT[I(x,
y)]
(x,
FT[h
y)]
I(x,
y)
(x,
FT[h
y
x
y
x
y
x
y
x
0
1
1
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
ν
δ
δ
+
+
+
=
∗
=
⋅
−
. 
 
(12) 
Here, * is the symbol for convolution and C0 denotes the zero order in the Fourier 
domain which is located in the center (Figure 7.c). The parameters Mδ and M-δ 
indicate the information of the structure shifted with the carrier fringe frequency δ 
and -δ from the zero order. The component B represents the background. The 
algorithm locates the identical and symmetric components Mδ and M-δ, eliminates 
M-δ and shifts Mδ to the origin. Afterwards the inverse Fourier transform is applied 

172 
G. Goch et al.
 
to the modified Fourier transform (Figure 7.c) and the phase (modulo 2π) is 
obtained by  
(
)
)]
(M
[
)]/
(M
[
(x,y)
φ
δ
δ
O
1
1
FT
Re
FT
Im
arctan
−
−
=
. 
(13) 
3.3   Phase Retrieval and Interpretation 
After determining the phase difference ΔφS(x,y) induced by the specimen, the 2π 
ambiguity is removed by a line by line phase unwrapping process [Kre05] in case 
of the algorithms operating in the position space. For the FT-based algorithm a 
phase unwrapping algorithm operating in the frequency domain is often utilized 
[Sch03]. The unwrapped phase distributions represent a quantitative phase 
contrast image. For incident light mode as depicted in Figure 6.b the topography 
of a reflective specimen zs can be calculated from the phase distribution ΔφS(x,y): 
)
,
(
4
)
,
(
y
x
y
x
z
S
S
ϕ
π
λ Δ
=
. 
 
 
           (14) 
For quantitative determination of the form errors, Zernike polynoms are usually 
utilized [Mal07]. A recently introduced alternative for aspheres with little dynamic 
are Forbes-polynoms [For07]. Since a Zernike representation needs a relatively 
long computation time and is relatively complex in higher orders, we propose the 
application of the more intuitive Forbes polynomial basis. These are generated by 
normalizing the transverse variable in the standardized representation of aspheres 
to u=r/rmax 
3.4   Propagation of the Complex Object Wave 
Although the presented reconstruction methods permit a sharply focused object 
wave during the recording of the hologram, which facilitates the experimental 
alignment, subsequent propagation and thus focusing is of particular interest. The 
previously mentioned diffraction-based propagation methods can be applied on 
the reconstructed complex object wave. The reconstruction of the digital hologram 
in a plane different to the hologram plane is realized by utilizing the Fresnel 
diffraction integral. In the case of defocused imaging of the sample, the 
reconstructed object wave in the hologram plane O(x,y,z0) is propagated for the 
distance d to the focused image plane that is located at the autofocus position 
d=dAF by a convolution-based method [Sch02]: 
[
]
(
)
(
)






+
×
Γ
×
Γ
=
=
−
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
exp
)
,
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
(
)
,
,
(
η
ξ
πd
i
z
y
x
O
y
x
FFT
FFT
A
Y
X
d
z
Y
X
O
H
I
     
(15) 
where ГI and ГH denote a wavefront and A(d) a constant complex function. The 
notation FFT denotes a Fourier transform operation. Fourier transform, x and y 
represent the spatial and ξ and η the spectral coordinates. The algorithm preserves 
a constant image scale, and therefore it is particularly suitable for the 
determination of the image definition. The reconstructed object wave in the 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
173
 
hologram plane O(x,y,z0) is often distorted by aberrations in the optical system. 
The concept of numerical parametric lenses (NPL) is a common feature in DHM 
to achieve optimized wavefront reconstruction by introducing the factors ГI and 
ГH  [Col06]. 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Left: recorded hologram. Right: propagated complex wave to sharp image plane 
3.5   Autofocus Algorithms 
For evaluation and quantification of image sharpness, various methods and 
applications exist. Common passive optical autofocusing techniques, which are 
applied e.g. in compact camera photography and bright field microscopy, perform 
a determination and maximisation of the image sharpness while scanning the 
imaging system or the stage mechanically [Geu00]. In subsequent digital 
holographic autofocusing, instead of mechanical scanning this procedure is done 
numerically by the variation of the distance z in Eq.(15) for the propagation of the 
reconstructed complex object wave O (Figure 8). 
Analogous to common autofocusing techniques, the determination of the 
autofocus position requires a robust algorithm for the determination of the image 
definition. Particularly suitable algorithms for the determination of the image 
sharpness of the reconstructed amplitude distributions are given by the 
determination of the logarithmically weighted cumulated Fourier spectra 
(logarithmic power spectrum). The focus value fPS(z) in dependence on the 
propagation distance z is calculated with Eq. (16), where x’ and y’ denote the 
position in the fourier domain: 
[
]
[
]

+
=
'
,'
)
,
,
(
1
log
)
(
y
x
PS
z
y
x
O
FFT
z
f
. 
 
 
(16) 
Another approach is the SMD-method (Sum Modulus Difference): 


−
=
−
=






∂
∂
+






∂
∂
=
1
0
2
2
1
0
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
)
(
m
y
n
x
SMD
y
z
y
x
O
x
z
y
x
O
z
f
. 
 
(17) 

174 
G. Goch et al.
 
A further alternative is given by the Laplace operator:
 
(
)
2
2
1
0
1
0
)
,
,
(
)
(
z
y
x
O
z
f
m
x
n
x
LP
∇
=


−
=
−
=
. 
 
(18) 
As a last method to compare the image focus (Figure 9), we introduce the variance 
of the pixel values of the reconstructed and propagated wave as a metric: 
[
]
)
,
,
(
)
(
z
y
x
O
Var
z
fVar
=
. 
 
 
(19) 
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0,75
0,80
0,84
0,89
0,94
0,99
1,04
1,09
 
 
normed focus value fd(z)
propagation distance z / mm
 fdGra
 fdSP
 fdLP
fdVar
 
Fig. 9 Focus values of unwrapped phase distributions of the specimen in Figure 11: A clear 
dip in the center demonstrates the global minimum of the focus algorithms except the 
variance fdVar . 
3.5.1   Strategy for Search of Focus Plane 
The determination of the extrema in the focus value curves within the full 
propagation interval Az = [-10 cm, 10 cm] is very inefficient. In order to speed up 
the process of locating the extrema without loosing accuracy, a climbing-search 
strategy [He03] is implemented. In a first step, the whole propagation range is 
scanned with a large step size for a rough determination of the location of the 
extremum. In the second step, the interval between the nearest neighbours to the 
detected extremum is scanned with the smallest step size chosen with respect to 
the depth of field of the imaging system. This process is illustrated in Figure 10. 
The thin solid graph represents the schematically normalized focus value function 
of a pure phase object obtained by scanning the full interval. First, the climbing-
search-strategy scans the full interval with a large step size (dashed vertical lines). 
The neighbouring positions to the minimal focus value define the scan range for 
the second scanning with the smallest step size available (solid vertical lines, see 
also Figure 11 for demonstration). 
 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
175
 
0
2
4
6
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
normed focus value fd(e(x,y)) / a.u.
Propagation distance d / mm
1st  sampling
2nd sampling
0
2
4
6
0,6
0,8
1,0
normed focus value fd(φπx,y)) / a.u.
Propagation distance d / mm
1st  sampling
2nd sampling
 
Fig. 10 Schematic illustration of the "Climbing-Search" iteration strategy 
d=0mm
d=8mm
d=-8mm
(a)
(b)
(c)
0 rad
5 rad
 
Fig. 11 Amplitude and phase distribution of structures on a reflective optical surface with a 
height of 50 nm: Reconstructed wave front in the hologram plane (a), propagated wave to a 
plane with maximum image sharpness (b) and backward propagated image (c).  
       
 
Fig. 12 Machine integrated interferometric measurement of an optical surface in a polishing 
machine (left) and integrated mold testing for replication of plastic optics (right) 
3.6   Automated Adjustment of Set-Up 
For automation of an interferometric measurement system, a hexapod with it’s 6 
degrees of freedom in positioning is also suitable for set-ups with an integrated 
CGH (Computer Generated Hologram), that allow the measurement of aspheres 

176 
G. Goch et al.
 
and even freeform surfaces. By applying the two-dimensional FFT of an 
interferogram, a fine adjustment of the set-up can easily be realised by 
determining the center of mass of the first order. Common strategies for an 
automated aligning are univariate and multivariate optimisation methods like 
simplex optimisation, statistical optimisation, simulated annealing and neural 
networks [Mis00]. 
4   Conclusion 
A combination of mathematical formalisms from the scalar Kirchhoff theory and 
from ray tracing methods describes optical wavelet propagations in free space and 
within an optical fiber. The implementation of the corresponding algorithms in 
Matlab results in a design tool for a scattered light roughness measuring process. 
Simulations already lead to improvements of the integral roughness measuring 
method. The resolution concerning the roughness measurement within a range 
from Rq = 1 nm to Rq = 50 nm was significantly enhanced due to a short laser 
wavelength of λ  = 405 nm. Furthermore, it is possible to estimate the smallest 
illumination spot diameter as a function of the lateral correlation length of the 
rough surface that enables both a sufficient roughness characterization and a high 
lateral resolution. The simulations result in a compact measuring system according 
to the fiber optical set-up design. The overall length of about 100 mm enables the 
device to be integrated into ultra-precision machine tools and to perform in-situ or 
in-process roughness measurements. 
The utilization of digital holographic interferometry in combination with new 
spatial phase-shifting methods allows higher robustness. The feature of numerical 
refocusing in a post-processing step permits faster measurements without need of 
mechanical focusing. The polynomial basis of Forbes enables a more intuitively 
interpretation of form errors for aspheres. 
 
Acknowledgement. The authors like to thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for 
funding this work as a part of the Transregional Collaborative Research Center SFB/TR4 
“Process Chains for the Replication of Complex Optical Elements”. 
References 
[Bas95] 
Basano, L., Leporatti, S., Ottonello, P., Palestini, V., Rolandi, R.: Measurements 
of Surface Roughness: Use of a CCD Camera to Correlate Doubly Scattered 
Speckle Patterns. Applied Optics 34, 7286–7290 (1995) 
[Ben99] 
Bennett, J.M., Mattsson, L.: Introduction to Surface Roughness and Scattering. 
Optical Society of America, 2nd edn., Washington (1999) 
[Bon86] 
Bone, D.J., Bachor, H.-A., Sandeman, R.J.: Fringe-pattern analysis using a 2-D 
Fourier transform. Appl. Opt. 25, 1653–1660 (1986) 
[Bro84] 
Brodmann, R., Gast, T., Thurn, G.: An Optical Instrument for Measuring the 
Surface Roughness in Production Control. Annals of the CIRP 33(1), 403–406 
(1984) 

In-situ and In-process Metrology for Optical Surfaces 
177
 
[Car04] 
Carl, D., Kemper, B., Wernicke, G., von Bally, G.: Parameter-optimized digital 
holographic microscope for high resolution living-cell analysis. Appl. Opt. 43, 
6536–6544 (2004) 
[Col06] 
Colomb, T., Montfort, F., Kühn, J., Aspert, N., Cuche, E., Marian, A., Charrière, 
F., Bourquin, S., Marquet, P., Depeursinge, C.: Numerical parametric lens for 
shifting, magnification, and complete aberration compensation in digital 
holographic microscopy. JOSA A 23(12), 3177–3190 (2006) 
[Dro95] 
de Droot, P.J.: Vibration in phase shifting interferometry. J. Opt. Soc. 
Am. 12(2), 354–365 (1995) 
[For07] 
Forbes, G.W.: Shape specification for axially symmetric optical surfaces. Optics 
Express 15(8), 5218–5226 (2007) 
[Geu00] 
Geusebroek, J.-M., Cornelissen, F., Smeulders, A.W.M., Geerts, H.: Robust 
autofocusing in microscopy. Cytometry 39, 1 (2000) 
[Goo96] Goodman, J.W.: Introduction to Fourier Optics, 2nd edn. McGraw-Hill, New 
York (1996) 
[He03] 
He, J., Zhou, R., Hong, Z.: Modified fast climbing search auto-focus algorithm 
with adaptive step size searching technique for digital camera. IEEE 
Transactions on Consumer Electronics 49, 257 (2003) 
[Kre05] 
Kreis, T.: Handbook of Holographic Interferometry: Optical and Digital 
Methods. Akademie Verlag, Berlin (2005) 
[Kre86] 
Kreis, T.: Digital holographic interference-phase measurement using the 
fouriertransform method. J. Opt. Soc. Am., A 3, 847–855 (1986) 
[Lee87] 
Lee, C.S., Kim, S.W., Yim, D.Y.: An In-Process Measurement Technique Using 
Laser for Non-Contact Monitoring of Surface Roughness and Form Accuracy of 
Ground Surfaces. Annals of the CIRP 36(1), 425–428 (1987) 
[Leh00] 
Lehmann, P., Goch, G.: Comparison of Conventional Light Scattering and 
Speckle Techniques Concerning an In-Process Characterization of Engineered 
Surfaces. Annals of the CIRP 49(1), 419–422 (2000) 
[Leh99] 
Lehmann, P.: Surface-Roughness Measurement Based on the Intensity 
Correlation Function of Scattered Light under Speckle-Pattern Illumination. 
Applied Optics 38(7), 1144–1152 (1999) 
[Lie04] 
Liebling, M., Blu, T., Unser, M.: Complex-Wave Retrieval from a Single Off-
Axis Hologram. J. Opt. Soc. Am., A 21(3), 367–377 (2004) 
[Mal07] 
Malacara, D.: Optical shop testing, pp. 547–655. Wiley, New Jersey (2007) 
[Mis00] 
Mischo, H., Bitte, F., Pfeifer, T.: Model-based optimization of interferometers 
for testing aspherical surfaces. Accepted as Oral Presentation for Laser 
Interferometry X: Applications at the SPIE 2000 Annual Meeting, San Diego, 
USA (2000)  
[Pat10] 
Patzelt, S.: Simulation und experimentelle Erprobung parametrisch-optischer 
Rauheitsmessprozesse auf der Basis von kohärentem Streulicht und Speckle-
Korrelationsverfahren, Dissertation Universität Bremen, Prof. Dr.-Ing. G. Goch 
Forschungsberichte über Messtechnik, Automatisierung, Qualitätswissenschaft 
und Energiesysteme, vol. 4. Mainz-Verlag, Aachen (2010) 
[Pat06] 
Patzelt, S., Horn, F., Goch, G.: Fast Integral Optical Roughness Measurement of 
Specular Reflecting Surfaces in the Nanometer Range. In: XVIII IMEKO World 
Congress, Metrology for a Sustainable Development, Rio de Janeiro (2006); 
CD-ROM: TC2-4  
[Pet79] 
Peters, J., Vanherck, P., Sastrodinoto, M.: Assessment of Surface Topology 
Analysis Techniques. Annals of the CIRP 28(2), 539–554 (1979) 

178 
G. Goch et al.
 
[Pet65] 
Peters, J.: Messung des Mittenrauhwertes zylindrischer Teile. VDI-Berichte 90, 
27–31 (1965) 
[Rob93] 
Robinson, D.W., Reid, G.T.: Interferogram Analysis. IOP Publishing, 
Philadelphia (1993) 
[Sch02] 
Schnars, U., Jüptner, W.: Digital recording and numerical reconstruction of 
holograms. Meas. Sci. Technol. 13, R85–R101 (2002) 
[Sch03] 
Schofield, M.A., Zhu, Y.: Fast phase unwrapping algorithm for interferometric 
applications. Optical Letters 28(14) (2003) 
[Thw80] Thwaite, E.G.: Power Spectra of Rough Surfaces Obtained by Optical Fourier 
Transformation. Annals of the CIRP 29(1), 419–422 (1980) 
[Vor81] 
Vorburger, T.V., Teague, E.C.: Optical Techniques for On-Line Measurement of 
Surface Topography. Precision Engineering 3, 61–83 (1981) 
[Whi94] Whitehouse, D.J., Bowen, D.K., Venkatesh, V.C., Lonardo, P., Brown, C.A.: 
Gloss and Surface Topography. Annals of the CIRP 43(2), 541–549 (1994) 
[Yos90] 
Yoshimura, T., Kazuo, K., Nakagawa, K.: Surface Roughness Dependence of 
the Intensity Correlation Function under Speckle Pattern Illumination. Journal of 
the Optical Society of America 7(12), 2254–2259 (1990) 

E. Brinksmeier et al. (Eds.): Fabrication of Complex Optical Components, LNPE, pp. 179–206. 
springerlink.com                                                         © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Metrology Past, Present and Future with 
Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
David Whitehouse* 
Abstract. Aspects of the measurement and manufacture of mainly optical 
components from early times, the present and the future are described. Two 
instrumental types having the best pedigree and most potential are singled out 
namely the stylus method and optical methods with, in the latter case, scanning 
white light interferometry. Critical issues are highlighted and some examples of 
future requirements and possible developments are given. 
1   Introduction 
This chapter is concerned with the development of the metrology aspects of 
manufacture with reference to optics and to the geometry and how the geometry 
affects the performance. The investigation of surfaces is an old technology 
Leonardo da Vinci, Amonton and Coulomb all delved into surface behaviour 
before this century. However, their investigations were largely subjective and not 
much use quantitatively. Polishing is the foundation of optical functionality and 
this forms the background to the early part of the chapter. 
1.1   Early Reference to the Manufacture 
According to Scott [1] and Singer [2] the earliest reference to the polishing of 
glass is from 782 B.C. from Nimrud in Assyria in the form of a small vessel and 
the first reference to a polished lens is in a play by Aristophanes in 434 BC. 
However the art of cutting and polishing natural crystal for jewellery, seals and 
burning glasses goes back much further probably as far back as 4000 BC. 
The changing of shape by rubbing two surfaces together to make a sharp edge 
tool probably led to the art of polishing. An adjunct to this which may be even 
earlier is that of engraving or the marking of objects by scratching a soft material 
by one which is harder which predates any form of painting [3] mainly because of 
the availability of the implement: a hard object is much more available than paint. 
One early mention of ‘graving’ or engraving is in the Book of Exodus where 
                                                           
David Whitehouse 
University of Warwick, 171, Cromwell Lane, Burton Green, Coventry, CV4 8AN, England 

180 
D. Whitehouse
 
Moses says: [4] ‘Take two onyx stones and grave on them the names of the 
children of Israel‘. So the interaction of two objects for the benefit of mankind in 
survival as well as cosmetics and beauty has played an important role in human 
development. 
1.2   Materials 
Glass has long been the preferred material in optical applications because of its 
transparency. It is however not as easy to work as metals because of the fact that 
at normal temperatures and on the usual scale of size it does not yield but obeys 
Hooke’s Law until it fails. Glass is also difficult to handle because it cannot be 
clamped in the way of metals and it is not magnetic, so it is usually held by a wax 
of some sort. There are also constraints when using glass for optical purposes as 
distinct from purely ornamental because the geometric form has to be largely 
preserved at the same time as the smoothness is generated. 
2   Manufacture 
The generation of a curved surface on a piece of glass to make a lens or a mirror 
blank is different. Grinding causes the tool to wear as well as the workpiece so 
that the tool has continuously to be renewed. There is a way of generating a curve 
on glass without the use of a tool but just some abrasive. Just rubbing two pieces 
of material together invokes the ‘Central Limit Theorem‘ of statistics which 
basically says that if the generation mechanism is sufficiently random then 
Gaussian statistics will describe the geometry produced. Thus in three dimensions 
the random abrasion of grains between two contacting bodies will produce a curve 
on both one positive and the other negative i.e. one concave and one convex and 
both spherical. This is because the law describing the position of the coordinates 
x, y, z on the component is Gaussian. 
Thus 
܎(ܠ, ܡ, ܢ) =  ۱ܗܖܛܜ × ܍ܠܘ(െ
ܠ૛ାܡ૛ାܢ૛
૛ો૛
) 
 
          (1) 
from which it will be observed that the argument describing the spatial phase i.e. 
the position, is the formula for a sphere. 
Rubbing two pieces of glass together always produces a concave surface and a 
convex surface of the same curvature but opposite sign. Whitworth (see [5]) 
developed a technique which avoided this seemingly impossible phenomenon and 
in the process provided a method for generating optical flat surfaces. This he 
achieved by using three pieces of glass rather than the two mentioned above. By 
sequentially rubbing the three pieces in pairs it was easily possible to cancel out 
the tendency to produce curves. The result of the exercise is that three flat pieces 
emerge rather than two curved ones: an example of really clever, yet simple, 
thinking. 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
181
 
2.1   Requirements of Manufacture 
While it is obvious that curved surfaces are a prerequisite for producing an optical 
system it is also a requirement that the surfaces so produced are smooth so that 
there is no light scatter. For this reason polishing is used but there is another 
requirement that is not so obvious which is that the actual lens has to be circular so 
that it can be properly fitted into the body of the instrument. This requirement was 
one of the reasons for the development of instruments for measuring roundness in 
the early 1950s by R. E. Reason of Taylor Hobson. 
3   Instrumentation 
3.1   Subjective Early Methods 
The obvious methods are the eye and the fingernail: the former for optical 
assessment and the latter mainly for the assessment of roughness for applications 
involving mechanical action as in gears and cams. 
3.2   Early Optical Methods of Measuring Roughness 
The simplest method is Lambert’s method [6] in which the polished object is tilted 
at an acute angle until the reflection appears to be specular i.e. the source of light 
can be seen in the surface. This is the effect seen in the distance on a road which 
has a slight convex curvature. When the light scattered from the peaks of the road 
roughness has a path difference from those in the valleys of about λ/4, where λ is 
the wavelength of light then effective reflection occurs. 
This angle 
ીۺ ൎ܉ܚ܋ܛܑܖ(
ૃ
ૡ܀ܜ)  
 
 
         (2) 
can be estimated by eye from which some idea of 
 the peak to valley roughness 
of the surface i.e. the road, can be found. View 2 in the top two parts of figure 1 
are the plan view of the profiles shown above. 
Another early method relies on gathering all the scattered light called the ‘Total 
Integrated Scatter’ (TIS) where 
܂۷܁ ൎ(
૝ૈ܀૝
ૃ)૛   
 
                 (3) 
The schematic diagram of this is shown in Figure 1. From this TIS value the root 
mean square roughness 
can be estimated. A purely comparative method based 
on gloss is shown in Figure 2 in which the scattered light from a source is picked 
up by two or more detectors at different angles one being the specular angle and 
the other being at some arbitrary angle to it. 

182 
D. Whitehouse
 
 
Fig. 1 Lambert’s law 
 
Fig. 2 The Total Integrated Scattering of an Integrating sphere; See for example [6] 
 
Fig. 3 The Basis of the Gloss meter; See for example [6] 
 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
183
 
The surface quality is estimated by taking the ratio 
ܚ܉ܜܑܗ= 
ۯି۰
ۯା۰  
 
 
 
      (4) 
When the surface is perfectly smooth all the light gets reflected into A and the 
ratio is unity whereas if the surface is rough then the light scattered into A is the 
same as B and the ratio is zero. This method is simple and cheap but it is a 
comparator and is useful therefore only for progressing the quality of the surface 
as it is being finished. 
3.3   Early Stylus Methods of Measuring Roughness 
In the current century perhaps the first attempt to make an instrument was 
Tomlinson’s in 1919 [7] at the NPL He devised a crude lever system which 
magnified the surface profile mechanically by a factor of about 20:1. This gave 
him just enough magnification to be able to see the surface detail but nothing big 
enough to work on. 
The man who really started surface instrumentation was Schmaltz who in 1929 
developed the first stylus instrument and began experimenting with optical methods. 
His philosophy was very simple. He had seen men in the production 
departments of some large firms e.g. General Motors and Ford, scratching surfaces 
with the fingernail to assess the toughness and sometimes viewing the surface 
obliquely under strip lighting. Schmaltz’s idea was to replace the fingernail with 
the stylus and the eye by imaging optics [8]. 
Neither instrument was practical but nevertheless they stimulated Dr. Abbott of 
General Motors in 1936 [9] to advance the technology by making the output from 
the probe electrical so that substantial magnifications could be achieved. This output 
was put on a meter for all to see. It still lacked a permanent record for use on the 
shop floor. It was Mr. R. E. Reason of Taylor Hobson in 1939 who completed the 
jigsaw by adding on a chart recorder: hence the birth of the profile graph which was 
enabled by having a tracking mechanism to move the stylus across the surface. He 
also wrote the first book on the design of stylus instruments [10]. 
Figure 4 gives the basic instrument: 
 
Fig. 4 Side Acting Gauge 

184 
D. Whitehouse
 
3.4   Early Optical Methods of Measuring Form 
Placing the test surface on a flat reference surface and illuminating this by a 
collimated beam of monochromatic light produces Newton’s rings (actually 
Hooke’s). The sagital drop h corresponding to the radius of ring ‘r’ is 
ܐ= 
ܚ૛
૛܀ିܐ ൎ 
ܚ૛
૛܀= 
ܕૃ
૛ܖ  
 
 
           (5) 
From which R can be estimated although it has to be said that this method is 
sometimes used to find the wavelength of the source rather than the radius of the 
curved part. 
3.5    Early Methods of Measuring Curvature by Contact Methods: 
Spherometer Method 
In this method a three footed frame is rested on a flat surface and a probe situated 
in the centre of the frame is zeroed. The frame is then put onto the test surface and 
the probe adjusted until it makes contact with the test surface upon which the 
amount by which it has been adjusted is recorded. See Figure 6. If this is ‘h’ and 
the distance from the probe to the feet is ‘r‘ then the estimate of the radius of 
curvature of the test piece is given by 
܀ ൎ 
ܚ૛
૛ܐ   
 
 
        (6) 
Notice that this is the same basic technique as the Newton’s ring method: 
 
Fig. 5 Spherometer for measuring curvature 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
185
 
4   Present and Future Surfaces and Methods 
There are a number of aspects to this discussion which make it difficult to single 
out individual developments. There are for example improvements in existing 
methods, new methods of measurement, new ideas about what to measure, 
analytical methods which improve the capability of existing methods, the changes 
brought about by developments in conditions such as miniaturization etc. It is not 
possible to deal with every aspect of improvement or change for example in 
detectors or sources of energy such as in optics so trends only will be considered. 
Also, the question of timescale needs to be clarified because the subject of 
engineering metrology with respect to surfaces is basically only about 75 years old 
so the concept of ‘past’ and ‘present‘ is somewhat arbitrary: many basic 
requirements such as characterization and filtering were implicit at the start and 
are still developing. Only major shifts can be discussed. Central to this section is 
the realization that one of the main problems is that there has been a great increase 
in the number and types of surface which now need to be measured when 
compared with earlier times and the need to deal with much smaller scales of size. 
For example structured, patterned and free form surfaces, which require new ways 
of characterizing, processing, as well as measurement. Not the least of the 
problems has been the need to develop new manufacturing techniques which have 
been addressed very successfully in the research project reported above. All of 
these considerations have meant a rethink in the way surface metrology is 
approached. However, despite all the changes, the basic types of instrument still 
preferred are the stylus method and various forms of the optical method. Why not 
just one method? 
4.1   Stylus versus Optical Instruments 
The question is often asked why the stylus method is used at all when excellent 
non contact optical methods are now available. The first reason is obvious which 
is that if the function of the part is mechanical then ideally the method of 
measurement should also be mechanical so measuring gears and cams for example 
should be with a stylus. By the same token optical applications should use optical 
means of measurement. These are demonstrations of a rule of metrology which 
says that to get optimum results i.e. high fidelity, the metrology should wherever 
possible match the function. There is a case when this rule appears to be violated 
in optical applications which is when the angles of the profile of the component to 
be measured are very high. In these instances optically focused spots onto the 
surface from the instrument tend to dissipate light away from the normal if the 
surface is tilted at the point of incidence so that fidelity of the measurement is 
impaired. This is an optical consequence of the laws of physics and has nothing to 
do with the instrument. Figure 11 shows regions 1, 2 and 3 of high slope on an 
aspheric mould which require a stylus method: here slopes of 80 degrees can be 
found and would be unsuitable for measurement optically. 
 

186 
D. Whitehouse
 
Damaging the component by the stylus, which can be a potential problem in 
cosmetic applications in optics or when measuring delicate thin films, can be 
mainly avoided by consideration of the forces involved and knowledge of the 
material properties of the component. As a general rule to decide whether a mark 
caused by the stylus is possible use can be made of the ‘Stylus Damage Prevention 
Index’ ψ devised by Whitehouse. 
ψ = 1
π( W
H3 )
1
3 × ( E
R)
2
3
1
1.112  
 
 
       (7) 
It emerges that the damage index so defined ψ has to lie between acceptable limits 
if no damage is to be done. This criterion is derived in reference [11]. 
In this formula W is the load, H is the hardness of the material being measured 
and can be seen from the formula that it is the dominant factor, R is the radius of 
the tip of the stylus and E is the elastic modulus. 
For ψ >1 there can be damage because the elastic pressure is greater than the 
hardness. 
For ψ < 1 there is no damage. 
In fact the difficult parameters above are W and H. W is the effective mass of 
the pick-up as it traverses the surface. The problem is that it should include the 
dynamic forces as well as static imposed on the surface by the stylus. The 
maximum value of the dynamic force is 2 W where W is the rest weight. This 
force acts in the valleys so damage, if any, is due to the stylus will be a maximum 
in the valleys – not the peaks. 
Table 1 Stylus instrument versus optical instrument 
Stylus method  
 
 
              Optical method 
Possible damage 
 
 
              No damage √ 
Measures geometry √ 
 
              Measures optical path 
Tip dimension and angle independent √               Tip resolution and angle dependent 
Stylus can break                                                   Probe cannot be broken √ 
Insensitive to tilt of workpiece √                         Limited tilt only allowed 
Relatively slow speed 
 
              Can be very fast scan √ 
Removes unwanted debris and coolant √             Measures everything good and bad 
Can be used to measure physical parameters       Only optical path as well as geometry for 
example hardness and friction√ 
Roughness calibration accepted at all scales √     Difficult to calibrate by standards 
Temporal and spatial influence/dynamic             Spatial influence/geometric effects 
 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
187
 
The other difficult parameter is the value of H. Unfortunately most people think 
that the bulk value of H should be used in calculations like this i.e. that value of 
hardness obtained when the surface is indented by tens of micrometers. This value 
of hardness is incorrect. The value of hardness should be the skin hardness. This is 
the value obtained when the indentation is fractions of a micrometre. In such cases 
the effective hardness is two or three times the bulk value. For copper for example 
it could easily be 300 VPN rather than the bulk value of 100 VPN, where VPN is 
the Vickers Hardness Number. 
Taking these factors into account and bearing in mind the sometimes improper 
use of a skid it is found that the stylus rarely causes damage. If there is any doubt 
then one preventative measure which can always be made is to lower the dynamic 
force by reducing the speed of traverse of the system. A comparison of the two 
basic methods is given in Table 1 below in which a tick √ indicates the advantage. 
On balance it is seen that they are about equal in usefulness: which is good or bad 
depends on the application as will be seen. For a good explanation of optical 
behaviour at a surface see Ogilvy [12]. 
4.2   Texture and Form 
Traditionally the texture has been measured separately from the form, usually two 
instruments are used, one for the form and one for the texture, the problem being 
that the form is invariably of much greater size so that getting a probe to 
encompass the one invariably means that the much finer detail of the texture is lost 
and if the texture is measured the extent of the form which can be covered is much 
too small to be useful. A useful instrument which involved using some of the best 
features of stylus methods as well as optics has been developed called the Form 
Talysurf. This uses a straight line datum to measure the form and the texture at the 
same time as shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Fig. 6 Form Talysurf showing the principle of using one measurement for form and texture 
It can be seen that the traverse allows the roughness and a portion of the form 
in this case an arc of a circle to be measured. The key to the technique is to have a 
mechanical pick up and an optical transducer. In figure 7 the key optical element 

188 
D. Whitehouse
 
is a cylindrical grating which rotates about a precision pivot and is illuminated by 
means of a collimated laser beam from a low power laser diode. Specially 
designed optics interrogates the diffraction patterns generated. The arcuate 
movement is detected and also the changes from normal incidence of the probe on 
the surface compensated for. This arrangement allows a very high resolution and a 
wide range probe movement to be achieved. 
To be useful a range to resolution of 106 is considered to be a minimum 
requirement. Such a system has the considerable advantage of not only measuring 
two features simultaneously but the instrument only has to be calibrated once 
rather than having two calibration procedures when two separate instruments are 
used. This is the basis of an ‘integrated’ measurement system. 
 
Fig. 7 Wide range stylus system with high resolution (Taylor Hobson PGI system) 
There are various types of stylus which can be used to measure the form of 
optical components. Two materials are common, one, traditionally, is a jewel such 
as ruby or sapphire and the other is silicon nitride. For small moulds and concave 
optics a 300 μm ruby ball is often used. Silicon nitride balls of typically 800 μm 
radius can be used for measuring diamond turned materials such as germanium. 
This has the added advantage that it attenuates incipient resonances sometimes 
generated when measuring certain plastics. For texture as well as form a 
conisphere shape stylus is now often used. This has a spherical tip merging into a 
cone and is often made of diamond. The tip can have a radius of 1 μm, 2 μm or 5 
μm radius and the choice of a cone angle. Typical of these are 30°, 40° or 90° 
angle depending upon the application. It should be remembered that the angle of 
the cone shoulder can integrate out detail as well as the tip itself so for fine texture 
measurement a 30 degree angle of cone should be used in addition to a 1 or 2 μm 
tip radius. Acute angle styli are suitable for measuring optical parts with high 
angles such as micro-lens arrays and small aspheric moulds. However, this type of 
stylus should be used with care because it is fragile. The 40 degree stylus is more 
robust. See figure 8. 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
189
 
 
Fig. 8 A 2 µm tip 40 ° angle diamond stylus 
The vertical range of measurement can always be increased simply by 
lengthening the stylus arm. A maximum length of no more than about 240 mm is 
recommended. 
4.3   High Slope Surfaces 
This facility extends to the modern and future in the measurement of high 
performance optics which require large range measurements as well as high 
resolution. One example is the measurement of aspheric lens moulds which are 
used in a variety of consumer applications such as cell phone camera lenses and 
optical storage devices. These are typically between 1 to 5 mm in diameter and 
have very high angle sides and require non spherical geometry in the most 
inaccessible places. Angles of up to about 80° can be accommodated thereby 
enabling ‘blu-ray’ i.e. short wave optics and their moulds to be measured. 
Examples are given in Figures 9, 10 and 11 of form and texture. 
 
Fig. 9 Typical area of a diffractive lens measured using stylus instrument 

190 
D. Whitehouse
 
 
Fig. 10 Form and texture on an Asphero-Diffractive element 
 
Fig. 11 Regions on an aspheric mould most suited to being assessed using stylus methods 
4.4    New Surfaces – New Challenges 
Figure 12 shows three new types of surface which have to be measured today 
which are being investigated and controlled by stylus and optical methods. These 
are structured, patterned and freeform surfaces. 
Structured and patterned surfaces such as Fresnel lens, retro-reflectors, micro 
abrasive surfaces etc. are well known.  Two of these are shown in figure 12 (a) 
and (b). 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
191
 
 
Fig. 12 New surface challenges (a) structured surfaces, (b) patterned surfaces and (c) free 
form surfaces 
4.5   Free Form Surfaces 
Figure 13 shows one of the basic philosophies behind using free form optical 
systems. Rather than using a complex system of simple elements to achieve an 
optical wavefront it is possible, at least in principle, to replace them with fewer or 
even just one complex element calculated to give the same result. These surfaces  
 

192 
D. Whitehouse
 
are usually described as free form and are non Euclidean in the sense that there is 
no deterministic formula with which to descibe them: the curvatures vary from 
point to point. Some complicated shapes are shown in figure 14. Providing the 
slopes are not severe these surfaces can be measured using optical methods such 
as the white lght interfermeter as will be seen, but for large slope surfaces the 
stylus method is used. One example of a freeform mirror is shown in Figure 15. It 
is used in the head-up display in which a thin film transistor generates a pattern 
which is projected onto the windshield of a car or aircraft. 
 
Fig. 13 Optical free form surfaces concept of use 
 
Fig. 14 Some complex shapes of mirrors 
 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
193
 
Often free form optics combine with conformal optical systems which are used 
in missile and aicraft systems. In these an optical sensor has to look through a 
surface skin which has to have a shape which conforms to a specific external 
requirement such as minimum aerodynamic drag. The very fact that the window 
shape is determined by factors which are not optical means that there are serious 
aberations at the detector which have to be remedied by another optical element 
having a complex freeform shape or by software modification of the signal after 
being received. 
 
Fig. 15 Head-up display using a freeform mirror 
4.6   Optical Trends 
Whereas stylus methods are robust they tend to be slow but optical methods, on 
the other hand, are fast but are much more sensitive to extraneous effects. They 
have therefore preferred applications of useage. Optical methods have more 
options for improvement of performance. Amongst these are confocal methods 
and white light interferometry which will be descibed briefly below. There are, of 
course, many other possibilities. 
4.7   Confocal Optics 
A confocal optical system is one which has a pinhole positioned near to the 
specimen under test such that it restricts the light, which is not exactly in focus on 
the object, from hitting the detector and thereby increases the signal to noise ratio 
of the system. It is a very simple but elegant way of making images clear and well 
contrasted. Figure 16 shows two embodiments of the principle. Figure 16 (a) 
illustrates the configuration for viewing an opaque surface and Figure 16 (b) 

194 
D. Whitehouse
 
shows the corresponding configuration for a partly transparent surface. It is clear 
from this figure where the term confocal comes from: it derives from the 
symmetry between the optical systems to the right and to the left of the object. 
 
 
Fig. 16 Confocal optical system (a) for opaque object (b) for a semi transparent or phase 
object 
 
Fig. 17 Digital confocal microscope based on micro mirrors [13] 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
195
 
An interesting variant on the basic confocal instrument has been proposed by 
Tiftikci in Holland who has designed what is in effect a digital confocal 
microscope. See Figure 17. 
Tiftikci uses a DMDTM (Digital micro-mirror device) as a virtual illumination 
pinhole array and a CCD as a virtual detector pinhole array. The point illumination 
and point detection are enabled by controlling precisely the DMD and CCD pixel 
scans. The use of the micro-mirror makes the mechanical movements of the x, y 
scanning unnecessary thereby reducing possible sources of vibration [13]. 
Confocal methods are widely used in biology and engineering because of the very 
high clarity of the image produced but as the lateral range is increased the 
resolution tends to decrease, a factor which does not occur significantly when 
using interferometric methods. This is just one reason for the dramatic increase in 
the use of the scanning white light interferometer which is singled out below as 
probably the most useful optical instrument at present in use for measuring 
surfaces, films and coatings. There are many other admirable optical techniques 
such as holography, speckle, heterodyne and moiré, to name but a few, which are 
widely used but only for limited applications and which do not appear to have as 
much potential as the broad band method. For a description of the other methods 
and their application see for example reference [14]. 
 
 
Fig. 18 Fringe patterns as a function of bandwidth and measurement mode (OPD= Optical 
path differenced between the arms of the interferometer) 
 

196 
D. Whitehouse
 
4.8   Scanning White Light Interferometer 
This type of instrument has grown in popularity due to the fact that it can be used 
as an absolute measure of length. A schematic view of an instrument is shown in 
Figure 19. It is an interference microscope in which the objective is an 
interferometer which has one or two arms of the interferometer in the line of the 
microscope tube thereby obeying Abbe’s principle. In this form a Mirau 
interferometer is the objective. When the reference mirror situated above the semi-
silvered mirror is the same distance as the specimen the optical path difference 
between the two is zero and the fringe contract is a maximum. If a monochromatic 
laser source is used the fringe contrast does not degenerate substantially as the 
specimen is moved away as seen in Figure 18 (a) but if a white light source is used 
as shown in Figure 19 then the fringe contrast  becomes a function of the optical 
path difference as seen in Figure 18 (c). The function describing the decay is the 
coherence function (reciprocal bandwidth of the source) and the distance over 
which it decays to an arbitrarily small value say 1/e is called the coherence length. 
The important point is that the position of the maximum contrast acts as a 
reference from which any position of the specimen within the coherence length  
 
 
Fig. 19 Schematic diagram of SWLI system 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
197
 
can be directly evaluated by the value of the fringe contrast at that point. 
Measurement of phase within each fringe can also be used with extra refinement 
but with a smaller range. The measurement is taken by moving the objective 
vertically while recording the intensity pattern at each pixel of the camera. With 
the wide band source this type of microscope is referred to as a Scanning White 
Light Interferometer (SWLI). 
 
 
Fig. 20 White light Scanning Interferometers (SWLI) (a) Mirau (b) Michelson 
Interferometer Objectives 
 
Fig. 21 Shows the use of a scanning white light interferometer for microlens applications 

198 
D. Whitehouse
 
Two forms of interferometry objective for use in the scanning white light 
interferometer are the Mirau type used for relatively small vertical range but high 
resolution and the Michelson interferometer used for the larger range. See Figure 
20. Taken together there is the basis of a very useful instrument for covering small 
and large optical components when incorporating a wide range XY scan, as seen 
in Figure 22. The depixilated has been obtained with a mould measured with a 
white light interferometer. 
5   Miniaturization 
One requirement for modern metrology is to incorporate it into the manufacture so 
that the cycle time between checking the geometrical features and ordering the 
correction is minimized. Jiang has attempted to achieve this by means of a 
miniature interferometric system in which an optical probe is fixed to the machine 
tool such as a diamond turnig lathe and a novel scanner picks up the signal from 
the part (Figure 22). The innovation here is having two interferometers in parallel: 
both having a common path via a fibre optic cable from the processor to the probe 
thereby minimizing environmental effects. Scanning is achieved by means of 
phase grating and a tunable laser. The former is fixed in space within the probe 
such that the zero order diffraction impinges on a reference mirror and acts as the 
datum whereas the first order diffrection is focused onto the component under test. 
As the wavelength of the tunable laser is changed so the first order spot traverses 
the part thereby replacing the conventional stylus scan and so considerably 
increasing the speed with which the data is picked up. [15] 
 
 
Fig. 22 The increasing requirement for small versatile and robust instrumentation an 
example using wavelength division scanning via blazed grating [15] 
This translation from laser wavelength to spatial position on the surface 
represent an intermediate step between the stylus or optical probe producing a 
high fidelity signal with a traversing unit, having a simple optical scan which is 
cheap and fast but delivers relatively crude information. 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
199
 
6   Software and Mathematical Enhancement 
Perhaps one of the most significant advance in instrumention in recent years has 
been the use of software to improve not only the performance of instruments but 
also their control. There is no longer a willingness to spend many hours setting up 
and taking measurements as was the norm in the past. Nowadays there is a 
growing requirement to take mass measurements automatically and to evaluate the 
measurement statistics at the same time and if necessary take remedial action in 
the production cycle. There are a number of ways in which software can help to 
improve the performance of instruments. Some of these are: 
a) Look up libraries for identifying specific features from within noisy 
signals 
b) Neural networks for learning to deal with slightly different surfaces 
c) Algorithms for: 
i. Robustness to identify and remove freaks 
ii. Stitching techniques to extend the lateral areal range of the 
instruments 
iii. Mathematical techniques for establishing references and for 
improving the signals to noise ratio 
d) Simulations for pointing out new directions and to help to verify potential 
techniques 
A few examples follow below. 
6.1   Improved Resolution of Detail in Substrates 
The capability of the white light interferometer can be extended to some extent by 
analytical methods as reported by de Groot. [16] Semiconductor features such as 
transistor gates and line widths and etch depths of binary gratings are of the order 
of a few hundred nm down to tens of nm and can therefore be well below the 
Rayleigh criterion for resolution 61λ/NA so unresolved features of this kind 
cannot be measured directly as height objects in the usual way by interference 
microscopy. De Groot asserts that measurement of such depths and widths are 
possible once it is understood that features of this kind do affect 3D images and 
that once the nature of the interaction has been quantified then measuring an 
image can lead to an estimation of the size and geometry of the unresolved 
features. 
As an example he considers a typical component shown in Figure 23: 

200 
D. Whitehouse
 
 
Fig. 23 Sub-resolution measurement with white light interferometry 
For example line widths and etch depths are of the order of a few hundred nm 
down to tens of nm and can therefore be well below the Rayleigh criterion for 
resolution 0.61λ/NA so unresolved features of this kind cannot be measured 
directly as height objects in the usual way by interference microscopy. De Groot 
asserts that measurement of such depths and widths are possible once it is 
understood that features of this kind do affect 3D images and that once the nature 
of the interaction has been quantified then measuring an image can lead to an 
estimation of the size and geometry of the unresolved features. 
The apparatus consisted of a white light LED of mean wavelength 570nm as 
part of a white light interferometer with added polarizer: the linearly polarized 
light being an important factor because it increases sensitivity to specific 
geometric features for example depth of etches. A computer records intensity 
Interferograms for each pixel as a function of scan position so that height can be 
deduced. De Groot prefers to use the frequency domain analysis to implement the 
 
 
Fig. 24 Rigorously coupled wave analysis (RCWA) (after [19]) 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
201
 
'Rigorous Coupled Wave Analysis' (RCWA) method [17]. This is based on the 
work of Moharam et al [18] on binary gratings. 
Figure 24 shows how the RCWA prediction of step height (ordinate axis) - 
which should be measured on the interferometer, actually relates to the unresolved 
etched line depth. 
6.2   Thick and Thin Film Measurement 
In the field of scanning white light interferometry it is well known that films of 
optical thickness in excess of the coherence length (reciprocal bandwidth) may be 
measured by taking advantage of the fact that such films exhibit interference 
maxima corresponding to each interface. However for thin films the interference 
maxima overlap and Mansfield has devised an ingenious scheme based on what he 
calls the ‘Helical Complex Field’ (HCF) which allows thin film thickness to be 
evaluated [20]. (See the CCI Taylor Hobson system.) This is an example of the 
use of field theory to help resolve difficult optical problems. Further work in this 
area suggests that the surface roughness at the interfaces may also be evaluated. 
This type of work is especially pertinent due to the fact that very thin films and 
coatings are becoming ever more important in nano technology. 
6.3   Reference Fitting for Free Form Moulds 
One of the biggest problems facing the new generation of optical parts particularly 
of the free form variety is the difficulty of measuring deviations from the usually  
 
 
Fig. 25 Free-form fitting (a) ideal position (b) transformed to new position (c) initial fitting 
result (d) final fitting result (after [21]) 

202 
D. Whitehouse
 
empirically determined accepted shape. This is because the equation of the shape 
is unknown and cannot therefore be operated on by a well defined linear 
procedure. It is not known, for example where the probe, here assumed to be of 
the stylus type, will make contact at any point. For this reason methods are being 
explored which are partially iterative in nature and which also make use of some 
useful properties of two dimensional splines e. g. NURBS [21]. Splines have the 
inherent property of minimizing the potential energy of the reference shape and so 
make a reasonably plausible reference from which to judge the manufactured part. 
An example is shown in Figure 25. 
7    Other Issues 
One factor which causes trouble now and more significantly in the future is when 
there is a mixture of geometries of different scales of size on any one component. 
This then requires nano as well as micro measurement such as is the case when it 
is required to look at molecular or atomic detail on a millimetre sized component 
or cases when all scales of size need to be examined. The NPL and PTB have 
endeavoured to solve this measurement problem by developing prototype 
instruments to cover the micro, nano and atomic ranges all with one instrument. 
An example is shown in Figure 26. 
Yacoot and Koenders [22] have incorporated an X ray interferometer with an 
atomic force microscope (AFM) and an optical interferometer. 
 
 
Fig. 26 Combined SPM and x-ray and optical interferometers (After Yacoot and Koenders 
[22]) 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
203
 
In operation both X ray and optical interferometers have servos that allow their 
interferometers to increment fringe by fringe or to be held at zero of the respective 
fringe. When both servos are used together any displacements of the X ray 
interferometer causes a corresponding displacement of the moving mirror of the 
optical interferometer. Consequently, this mirror can be moved in displacements 
equal to either a discrete number of optical fringes (158 nm since it has a double 
pass configuration) or a discrete number of X ray fringes of 0.192 nm which is the 
lattice spacing of the 220 plane of silicon. The problems associated with non 
linearity in the optical interferometer are avoided because any sub optical fringe 
displacements are using the X ray interferometer with the optical interferometer 
following in slave mode and always remaining locked on to a zero point crossing 
of an optical fringe. 
Another practical case is where there is a mixture of large macro geometry, 
very fine surface finish, complicated shapes and extreme problems in tolerancing 
and assembly. The Webb telescope is an example of this situation. This telescope 
is intended to be a replacement for the Hubble space telescope due in about 2014 
or thereabouts and has can be seen in Figure 27 the primary mirror is huge being 
6.5 metre in diameter and being made up of 18 hexagonal sub-mirrors each of 
which will have to fit together precisely and have the correct roughness, shape and 
figure. The solution to this measurement problem is still being worked on but it 
illustrates one point of future metrology which is that more and more scales of size 
of features will be present on any one component and will have to be evaluated in 
parallel and in-situ. 
 
 
Fig. 27 Webb Telescope – complex integrated optical system 

204 
D. Whitehouse
 
Also, areal measurement of surfaces is proving to be invaluable for functional 
prediction well as for process control but there will be a need for advanced 
stitching techniques to cater for the large optical elements being visualized in the 
future and which are likely to be made up of multiple complex elements. 
Figure 28 shows an unlikely but interesting attempt by Chen et al [23] to make 
use of any way of tapping into cheap but possibly effective technology. Basically 
the system consists of a mobile robot, an industrial control computer system, a 
machine vision positioning and navigation system linked to the Global Positioning 
Satellite system. The robot has four wheels two of which are castors and two are 
drive wheels which can be orientated to direct the path of the robot when on the 
surface. This has been developed in the first instance to polish very large free-
form surfaces but could incorporate a metrology system. Irrespective of whether 
or not it is successful in helping the manufacturing process the use of inertial 
navigation for positioning is a case of  metrology controlling the polishing and 
hence the function of large optical parts of the future. It seems that the thread 
between the past, the present and the future is assured. 
 
Fig. 29 GPS guidance for help in manufacture and measuring large scale freeform optical 
parts 
8   Conclusions 
It has only been possible to consider a few aspects of the metrology and 
manufacture of optical parts. The first point is that there has been a move away 
from simple components such as spheres and planes to structured and freeform 
surfaces. At the same time there has been a move towards multiple miniature 
arrays of surfaces which present quite different measurement and manufacturing 
problems. Yet another swing has been towards components which have many 
factors of differing scales of size to be measured. These problems are stretching 

Metrology Past, Present and Future with Reference to Optics and Manufacture 
205
 
the metrology community. However there has been progress in metrology 
instruments. The stylus method, which now has a very large dynamic range and 
high resolution, can routinely measure roughness, shape and curvature at very 
large surface angles. 
Many optical, semiconductor and ceramic parts can be measured with non-
contact methods but especially with white light interferometers. These continue to 
advance measurement technology. Thin multiple films will soon be measured for 
thickness as well as roughness at the interfaces. 
Possibly the greatest potential is in the use of software and mathematical 
procedures for improving the performance of instruments as well as enabling fully 
automated measurements. 
References 
[1] 
Scott, R.M.: Optical Manufacturing. In: Kingslake, R. (ed.) Applied Optics, vol. III, 
ch. 2. Academic Press, London (1965) 
[2] 
Singer, C., Holmyard, E.J., Hall, A.R., Williams, T.I.: A History of Technology, 
vol. II, 336 p. Oxford University press, London (1956) 
[3] 
Britain, A., Wolpert, S., Langford, L.M.: Engraving on Precious metals, ix p. NAG 
press, London (1958) 
[4] 
Exodus. xxvii, 11  
[5] 
Whitehouse, D.J.: Handbook of surface Metrology. Inst. of Physics publishing, 
Bristol and Philadelphia (1994) 
[6] 
Whitehouse, D.J.: Surfaces and their measurement, Hermes Penton Science, vol. 7. 
Hermes Penton Science, London (2002); Tomlinson, P.: NPL research report, 
National Physical Laboratory, UK (1919) 
[7] 
Schmalz, G.: Z. VDI 73, 144–161 (1929)  
[8] 
Abbott, J., Firestone, A.: A new profilograph measures roughness of finely finished 
and ground surfaces. Autom. Ind., 204 (1933) 
[9] 
Reason, R.E., Hopkins, Garrott: Rep. Rank Organisation (1944) 
[10] 
Whitehouse, D.J.: Stylus Damage Protection Index. Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. 214(pt. 
C), 975 (2000) 
[11] 
Ogilvy, J.A.: Theory of wave scattering from random rough surfaces. Adam Hilger, 
Bristol (1991) 
[12] 
Tiftikci, K.A.: Development and verification of a micro-mirror based high accuracy 
confocal microscope. Ph. D. Thesis Eindhoven University of Technology (2005) 
[13] 
Whitehouse, D.J.: Handbook of surface and nano metrology, 2nd edn. Taylor & 
Francis, London (2010) 
[14] 
Jiang, X., Whitehouse, D.J.: Miniaturized optical Measurement methods for Surface 
Nanometrology. Annals CIRP 55(1), 577–580 (2006) 
[15] 
de Groot, P., de Lega, X.C., Leisener, J., Darwin, M.: Metrology of optically 
unresolved features using interferometric surface profiling and RCWA modelling. 
O.S.A. Optics Express 16(6), 3970 (2008) 
[16] 
de Groot, P., Deck, L.: Surface profiling by analysis of white light interferograms in 
the spatial frequency domain. J. Mod. Opt. 42, 389–401 (1995) 
[17] 
Moharam, M.G., Grann, E.B., Pommet, D.A.: Formulation for stable and efficient 
implementation of the rigorous coupled wave analysis of binary gratings. J. Opt. 
Soc. Am. 12, 1068–1076 (1995) 

206 
D. Whitehouse
 
[18] 
Raymond, C.J.: Scatterometry for semiconductor metrology. In: Deibold, A.J. (ed.) 
Handbook of Silicon Semiconductor Metrology. Marcel Decker Inc., New York 
(2001) 
[19] 
Mansfield, D.: The distorted Helix: thin film extraction from scanning white light 
interferometry. In: Proc. SPIE, vol. 2186 (2006) 
[20] 
Zhang, X., Jiang, X., Scott, P.J.: A new free-form Surface Fitting Method for 
Precision Coordinate Metrology. In: 11th International Conference on the 
Metrology and Properties of Surfaces, Huddersfield UK, pp. 261–266 (2007); FIG 
2, p. 264 
[21] 
Yacoot, A., Koenders, L.: From nanometre to miilimetre: a feasibility study of the 
combination of scanning probe microscopy and a combined optical and x-ray 
interferometer. Meas. Sci. Technol. 14, N 59–N 63 (2003) 
[22] 
Chen, G., et al.: Researching of a wheeled small polishing robot for large free form 
surfaces and its kinematics. In: ICFDM, Tianjin P.R. China (September 2008) 

Author Index
Becker, Peter
1
Behrens, Barbara
99
Brecher, Christian
41, 99
Brinksmeier, Ekkard
67, 85, 99
Dambon, Olaf
99, 119
Dong, Juan
67
Dukwen, Julia
119
Georgiadis, Kyriakos
119
Gl¨abe, Ralf
67
Goch, Gert
133, 161
Hoffmann, Franz
67
Hollstegge, Daniel
119
H¨unten, Martin
119
Klink, Andreas
85
Klocke, Fritz
85, 99, 119
Lindemann, Dominik
41
Lucca, Don
133
Mehner, Andreas
133
Merz, Michael
41
Michaeli, Walter
13, 25
Osmer, Jens
67
Patzelt, Stefan
161
Prekel, Helmut
133
Preuß, Werner
41, 53
Riemer, Oltmann
85, 99
Schmitt, Robert
1, 161
Sch¨onemann, Lars
53
Sch¨ongart, Maximilian
13
Schulte, Heiko
85, 99
Schwade, Max
85
Stock, Heinz-Rolf
133
St¨urwald, Stephan
161
Tausendfreund, Andreas
161
Tuecks, Roland
99
Waechter, Daniel
99
Walach, Paul
25
Wang, Fei
119
Wenzel, Christian
41, 99
Whitehouse, David
179
Yi, Allen Y.
119
Zoch, Hans-Werner
133
Zunke, Richard
99

