
 
Falling in Love Again
Simple Steps to Renewing the Passion in
your Relationship
 
by Elizabeth Reese

 
© Triple L Publishing 2013 
All rights reserved. No portion of this
book may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, of by any information storage
and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publisher.
Legal notice: This ebook is intended for
personal growth and development. It is
not intended to take the place of
professional counseling. Neither the
author, nor the publisher assumes any
responsibility for errors, omissions, or
contrary interpretations of the subject
matter herein. The purchaser of this

publication assumes responsibility for
the use of this information. Adherence to
all applicable laws and regulations,
federal, state, and local, governing
professional licensing, business
practices, advertising, and all other
aspects of doing business in the United
States or any other jurisdiction is the
sole responsibility of the reader and/or
purchaser. The author and published
assume no responsibility or liability
whatsoever on the behalf of any
purchaser of reader of these materials.

Table of contents
Introduction
Remember the Couple you Once Were
Creating a Running Dialogue with the
Person you Love
Get Excited to See or Talk to Each
Other
What Happened to Curiosity?
Life is a drag, right? RIGHT?
Breaking Bad Habits
Dating All Over Again!
Planning is Half the Battle, and Most of

the Success
Themes and Circumstances
Dating on a Small Budget
Set Realistic Goals
The Nuts & Bolts of Falling in Love
Again
Conversation Starters
Create Space and Trust
Listen Without Prejudice
Rediscover the Uniqueness of Your
Partner
Awesome Ideas for Date Night
Communicating on Another (Loving,
Respectful) Level
Maintaining Your Relationship’s “In

Love” Capacity

Introduction
             With divorces at an all-time
high, it seems as if more and more
couples are simply throwing in the
proverbial towel, instead of rebuilding
the love and passion that once existed in
their relationships. Long term
commitments, marriages and
partnerships all go through rough times,
but at the end of the day it is important to
remember why you love someone, and
how deeply you felt for them in the
beginning of your relationship. You can

get that fire back in both of your eyes,
but it is going to take some work on both
of your parts. Simply loving one another
is not enough to keep a happy
relationship at the forefront of your
lives. Being in love with someone will
make you feel as if you would move
heaven and earth to be near them, while
never letting anything – or anyone – else
get in the way.


Remember the
Couple you Once
Were
             Although you may not be as
young as you used to be, you are both
still the same person you once were.
Sure, you may have more
responsibilities like kids, finances,
pressuring careers and family
obligations, but at the end of the day you
both still bare the same names and

characteristics as your younger
counterparts. You deserve to be just as
happy as you were then now, and you
should not let anything stand in your way
of obtaining that happiness.
             In an effort to fall in love again,
all you have to do is sit down with your
love and discuss the past, and what you
have learned from it. For instance, make
a list of all the things you used to do
when you were first in love, and how
they made you feel so excited and
connected. Did you go to the movies or
the beach? Did you drive on Sundays or

walk in the park at dusk? Without
making baseless excuses, determine
what is stopping you from doing those
things now. Simply assigning excuses
like “We don’t have time” or “We have
kids now” or “Life is different now” is
more damaging than helpful, so try
creating solutions instead! You DO have
time; you simply have to make it a
priority. Life is only different because
you made it that way, and chose to
ignore your relationship as a result. You
do not have to maintain that difference,
as you can fall in love again just as

easily.

Creating a Running
Dialogue with the
Person you Love
             Remember when you first
started dating, and you wanted to know
everything about each other? Some
couples, especially those who are in
lengthy relationships, believe that they
know everything they could possibly
know about their significant other. The
fact is, things change throughout the
years, and both sides of the relationship

evolve in their likes and dislikes. It is
important to talk with your partner about
the things they are interested in now, not
when you first started dating. What are
their interests? Do they like to work out,
and would you want to also? Do they
like a new style of music that they had
not previously entertained?
             There is a long running
misconception with long-term
relationships that causes more harm than
good to the two people involved. For
whatever reason, when one person takes
an interest in something new, the other

attacks him or her for “changing” or “not
being yourself” instead of supporting
their latest interest. This type of
backlash can lead to arguments and
misunderstandings, instead of sharing
interests like you used to when you first
started dating.
             Remember then? When you
would do things and go to events simply
because the other person enjoyed it?
What happened? When did you stop
supporting your partner’s interests? Do
you even know what they are interested
in any more, or are you just certain that

you do not share those interests?
             Taking the time to create a
dialogue with your partner will allow
you to understand why they are
interested in certain books, events,
issues or even music. Ask about their
current likes and dislikes, and support
their opinions. You do not have to agree
with everything they do or say. Instead,
remember the younger couple who
actually wanted to know what made
their partner tick
             Open your mind and your heart
to the people you and your partner have

become. The two of you have been
through so much together, that it is more
than worth noting the great alliance you
have created. It is time to reflect on the
past as a delight, or as a learning
experience, and move on to begin the
process of falling in love all over again.

Get Excited to See or
Talk to Each Other
             History plays a large role in
reminding each other of your past
feelings of excitement. Remember how
excited you would be to go on a date
with one another, primping and smiling
the entire time? What happened to your
excitement? Don’t you want your partner
to view you as the beautiful, energetic
person you were all those years ago?
Certainly appearances change, but
confidence in your love and relationship

should not.
             Sharing your days and nights,
thoughts and emotions with the person
you love should be effortless, and
exciting. Knowing that you are going to
get a release, and allow someone else to
help you enjoy your successes is an
amazing feeling. The problem is, for
most long-term couples, that they often
look to someone else for their
excitement and celebration, instead of
each other. Do you call your best friend
first when you have good news, instead
of your partner? Are you on the horn

with a family member to relay your
excitement before your partner? It is
time to regain the excitement the two of
you used to share, and enjoy being the
first to know everything that makes each
of your world’s go around again.

What Happened to
Curiosity?
             When couples begin dating,
they often think “What will happen if we
do this together?” Granted, the outcome
is not always good, but at least it
satisfied your curiosity. Only you and
your beloved know why neither one of
you will ever go white water rafting
again, and that is an absolutely a
wonderful thing to share! Don’t you want
to explore more? Aren’t you curious
about what the world has to offer you

two now?
             With ever-evolving times come
changes to everyone’s lifestyle. Since
you have begun dating the love of your
life chances are you have experimented
with different wardrobes, different
interior decorating ideas, and have
possibly even purchased different cars
or switched jobs. If that is the case, ask
yourself what has changed in your
relationship? Has it been suspended in
time, because you are both too busy to
explore the changes? When you are
curious about other things, including

vacation spots, clothing, and even
restaurants, what is it that stops you from
being curious about where your
relationship can go from here?

Life is a drag, right?
RIGHT?
             If only that were true, it would
make more sense of your stagnant
relationship. Couples often seek out
circumstances that keep them from truly
loving each other every, single day.
Whether it is an ailing parent, or 87 little
league games in a row, the excuses begin
to mount up uncontrollably, until they
have buried any semblance of true love
within your home.

             To be fair, life is hard. There
are a number of things that keep you
from day dreaming about your partner
each day, and chances are those things
are important. Mortgages, healthcare,
insurance and budgets all drive the way
you think logically each day. It is
perfectly fine that you are being
responsible adults. In fact, it is
absolutely a top priority in life to
maintain an above water approach to
your finances to insure that you and your
family enjoy a safe and stable home
together. The good news is, it does not

cost a single dime to fall in love with
your partner again.

Breaking Bad Habits
             If there is one thing we all share
in this world, it is bad habits. Bad habits
come in a number of forms, and for the
purposes of this eBook, we are going to
focus on bad habits in a relationship.
Bad habits are formed from relationship
patterns. They can be things as simple as
using one of the vehicles in the home, but
never filling up the gas tank, to complex
habits like charging over-budget items
without mentioning it to your partner.
             Each of these bad habits carries

their own consequence, which leads to
distrust, anger and arguments. It is
incredibly hard to feel in love, when the
door is always swinging in anger in the
opposite direction, isn’t it?
             Other bad habits can include
not mentioning that you have to work
late, or that you will not be home a
certain night of the week, leaving the
other to their own devices without
notice. Certainly everyone in the
relationship is grown up, but what
happened to common courtesy? What
happened to respecting the time of the

person you love?
             Bad habits are created through
a lack of energy or concern on the
offender’s part. If you are willing to
leave your partner in a car with a gas
light on, possibly subjecting him or her
to an awful situation, you have
absolutely stopped respecting their time
or commitments.
             Most disrupted relationships
lean towards the old adage that one
person is taking the other for granted.
This description alone is created from
bad habits. Are you the one who is

picking up the other’s laundry off the
floor every morning? Are you the one
who is constantly buying groceries, or
filling up the gas tank, because the other
never does? Are you the one who never
reports a later arrival, or an early
engagement, but simply expects the other
one to bend every time they question
your calendar? These are all bad habits,
and it is important to break them before
you can move forward with falling in
love again. These are monumental
barriers, if only symbolically, that need
to be torn down before a renewed love

can unfold.
             Think of it this way. How many
times have you asked your beloved to
pick up their clothes? How many times
have they asked you to put gas in the
car? How many times have you or your
partner neglected to call the other when
running later, even when the request has
been made over and over again? Why
are both of you perpetuating bad habits,
when you know that the other one is
unhappy with their existence? Do you
just not care? Are you punishing him or
her? Does it get you anywhere?

             It is unlikely that any bad habits
that are shared in a relationship leads to
results. This is a huge point of contention
in relationships, and it is absolutely
something both sides need to work on.
The problem is, you cannot “work on it”
by yelling at the other person. Breaking
bad habits must happen with a calm
conversation, and may even require a
list of things to work on going forward.
Bad habits, as they say, are hard to
break. However, if you want to fall in
love again, you will both start acting like
none of them exist, just like when you

first started dating, and keep it that way. 

Dating All Over
Again!
             To truly appreciate the essence
of falling in love all over again, you are
going to have to start dating all over
again! The goal is not to make you feel
rushed or obligated, it is to return the
butterflies you used to feel each time you
were scheduled to spend the evening
with the person you love. Wouldn’t it be
nice to get that excitement and energy
back? You can, with a few tips and

ideas that the both of you will need to
work on going forward.

Planning is Half the
Battle, and Most of
the Success
             Truth is, you two are not simply
going to fall head over heels in love
with each other again, without planning
the time you are going to spend
reintroducing yourself to happiness. This
means you are going to have to plan to
spend time together.
             This can be accomplished in a
number of ways, and the first is to

physically sit down with your separate
and combined calendars. Which days of
the week are easiest to get away from
work early, or meet up after a long day
at the office? It is important not to
schedule dates when you are going to
have to cancel, or when you will be
rushed to make the engagement. Set
realistic goals in order to keep the
disappointment level to a minimum. If
you are going to consistently break the
date, there is going to come a time when
you just stop making them, and that is
counterproductive.


Themes and
Circumstances
             When you are planning to open
yourselves up for a night of blissful
enjoyment, consider the themes and
circumstances that surround your current
life, and mix them in with older themes
and circumstances that got you this point.
             Your current, daily
circumstances will deliver different
dating opportunities. If you are already
dropping the kids off to insure your date

goes off without a hitch, look for
engagements, parks and date
opportunities near the sitter’s house.
Create a reality in which you are
maximizing your time together on your
date, instead of driving halfway across
the city to press thirty minutes of
combined time together. Use your
imagination to set up the dates, and
consider meeting each other during lunch
if you both work in the city. You do not
have to plan the perfect date, with the
perfect outfit on the perfect, sunny day.
What you do have to do is actually plan

to see each other regularly, and discuss
nothing but the two of you during your
commitment.
             When you are thinking
thematically, consider creating ideas for
each other that will be a surprise. It does
not have to be a huge, glorious event, but
it can be returning to the place you first
met or first kissed. It can be reliving a
funny incident that the two of you
witnessed a decade before, or returning
to the place where you first decided this
was going to be forever; your proposal
site.

             Organize your dates based on
all of the things you love about each
other. For some it is the first day of
spring, and for others it is the music that
plays from a church on Sundays. Since
the two of you have been together for so
long, you know exactly what it is that
sends you back to your dating years, so
take advantage of it! Get dressed up and
go to the theater, or stay up all night
watching old movies like you used to.
Create a simple theme for you date
nights, and live in the moment each and
every time.

             Some great ways to become
immersed in the theme of the evening is
to set up old pictures of the two of you
from days gone by, whether it was high
school, college, or an event three years
ago. With the availability of movies and
music through digital downloads, it is
possible to recapture all of the fun you
actually had on those dates, like playing
the songs you danced to on prom night,
or at your wedding. You can relive the
first movie you two ever attended
together, and dance and cuddle each
other to the whimsical soundtrack that

seemed to define your young love at the
time. If technology provides anything
positive in this world, it is the ability to
transform your evening into a beautiful
night that happened long ago. Take
advantage of it, and download all of
your favorite images, music and movies
today to help transform your dates into
themes from the past. 
             Dates should be an opportunity
to rendezvous with your loved one, not a
place where you spend the entire time
complaining about work, politics or
family. It is the perfect time to release

yourself from all the stressors around
you, and simply fall in love with the
person sitting across from you again.
Open yourself up to the positivity that
falling in love again provides. You are
happier, healthier and even the people
around you will notice a certain pep in
your step that accompanies a return from
lunch with your love. Use it to make
yourself a better person, who thinks
happier thoughts and projects a positive
influence on those around you.

Dating on a Small
Budget
             Small budgets are perfect for
creating intimate encounters. If a big
fancy meal is out of the question, why
not go out for ice cream instead? Coffee
and cake are a perfect for light and fun
discussions, and can even be made at
home and transported out to your deck or
porch to enjoy date night without leaving
your house.
             Walks in the park, and bicycle

riding or hiking on a trail are all
typically free, and they are also a great
way to connect physically, while
remaining healthy. When smaller budgets
come into play, couples can spend more
time focusing on each other, instead of
being interrupted by a waiter every six
minutes. Look at the bright side of your
intimacy, and not at the luxuries you
cannot afford right now.
             Look for free concerts, art fairs,
and museum gallery openings that
provide a fun environment for the two of
you to share, without spending any

money at all. During your virtually free
dates, discuss one big date you would
like to enjoy together, while planning
and saving for it. By the time it comes
around on your calendar, the two of you
will be bursting at the seams to attend
the engagement!
             Other money saving ideas can
be brought to life with the help of friends
and family members. If you cannot afford
a sitter to insure that your date nights are
fulfilled once a month, invite your family
members to be a part of you and your
partner reinventing your love for one

another. For instance, if you talk to your
siblings, parents or in laws about what
the two of you are trying to accomplish
with your date nights, they will be
excited and supportive of your love for
one another. This support, love and
admiration for your commitment to your
relationship can be supplied through free
babysitting, and the extension of meal or
dessert preparations. Everyone who
loves you and your partner will want to
help the two of you fall in love again, so
let them help by lending you a caravan
for a weekend trip, or extending

workshop invitations, and allow you to
return the favors later.
             Ask for money or restaurant and
entertainment gift cards when you
celebrate birthdays or holidays and save
up for special dates in between.
Consider skipping the coffee shop in the
mornings, and storing that couple bucks
away each day to purchase your
partner’s favorite bottle of wine or
flowers. Take your lunch to work a few
days out of the week, and save the
money you would have spent over the
month to enjoy premier tickets to a play,

or a higher end restaurant the two of you
have been dreaming about going to.
             Do not let money stand in the
way of you and your loved one having a
wonderful time, at least once a month. If
that means taking your laptop onto the
back porch and playing songs from the
last concert you both enjoyed so much
over a couple of beers or homemade
lattes, so be it. At least you are together,
and you are reintroducing some of your
most splendid memories to your current
life.

Set Realistic Goals
             The grand reality of life is that
not everything can happen all of the time.
If you set realistic goals and
opportunities for the two of you to share
time together, you have to understand
that at some point, something is going to
get in the way. Sick kids, last minute
meetings and flat tires all happen to the
best people, when they least expect it.
However, when you realistically
approach the planning process you both
have to know that a seventy percent

success rate is more likely than a one
hundred percent success rate. Give each
other a little room, and do not have a
meltdown if something gets in the way.
As long as you are not openly sabotaging
the other’s efforts, you cannot help what
happens along the way.
             That ideology goes for the
planning process too. You cannot expect
one person to be the one who does all of
the traveling, or all of the planning.
Realistically, this needs to be a
combined effort to insure that everyone
is on the same page. Bounce ideas off of

each other, and consider how much time
you actually have to fulfill your dating
desires. Can you spend the entire day
having a picnic, reading and sharing
emotionally fulfilling time with each
other? Great! Find a remote place, pack
a bag and blanket and enjoy. If it rains,
take the same idea and move it inside.
You do not have to cancel your
commitment because of the weather. You
simply have to change its direction as a
result. The important thing is that you are
together, and you are working hard to
make your relationship spark into a full

flame again. Just remain smart about
what you plan, and how you proceed
with those plans. Taking a realistic
approach to dating makes more sense
than canceling two out of three times and
it also avoids hurt feelings. Think again,
and show your partner the love and
respect they deserve at all times.
             Keep in mind that not every
date is going to be a one hundred percent
success, and transform your marriage
every time you meet for date night. It is
possible that you do not get the same
“totally fun” experience you got out of it

ten years ago and that is completely
okay. Take it in, and use it as a learning
experience. If you got a great cup of
coffee out of it, and some fun
conversation with your love, great!
Dating again is not the equivalent of a
magical process. You are not going to be
transformed to a mystical land where
everything is rainbows and butterflies.
             You are, however, making an
effort to spend time with the person you
love, while enjoying something or some
place that you have always loved
together. Take what you can get out of it,

and appreciate it.

The Nuts & Bolts
of Falling in Love
Again
             Falling in love again is not
going to happen on its own, but with a
few tips you will be on your way to
engaging each other with fire in your
eyes in no time. The first step in getting
in regaining your love is to start talking
to each other. Sounds easy enough, right?
You would be surprised.


Conversation Starters
             Conversations in a relationship
usually start in passing with a
suggestion. A simple question like “Hey,
would you like to go to the theater?” can
turn into a series of calendar checks and
excuses as to why you let a play you
both love slip by unattended.
             Real conversation starters
should be about the two of you
reconnecting, not actually planning dates
in passing. There are a number of
conversation starters that can get you

heading in the right direction.
- What is your funniest memory of our
relationship?
- What is your favorite thing about me?
- I remember you wearing a certain
dress/suit/outfit...Do you remember?
- What is the happiest you have ever
been?
- What would your house look like if you
lived alone?
- What was your most beautiful or
amazing moment last week?
- What is the most afraid you have ever

been?
- If you had three months off beginning
tomorrow, how would you spend it?
- If you could volunteer instead of work,
what would you devote your time to?
- If you could learn to do anything, what
would it be?
- What do you dream about doing?
- Which goals do you want to fulfill?
- What is your favorite memory about the
two of us?
- What is your greatest need right now?
- When you think of me, what makes you

smile? What makes you laugh?
- What is your idea of the best trip we
could ever take together?
- I love it when you call me....
- I love it when you...
- What is the one thing you hope our kids
never find out about us?
- If we could spend 24 uninterrupted
hours together, what would you want to
do with them?
- What is the one thing you never want to
say, “I wish we would have...” about?
             These conversations can go

anywhere, and lead to an expansive
conversation that leads to more
questions and answers. The person who
plans the date should be the one who
initiates the questions, and gets the ball
rolling, so plan ahead and have a few
questions ready for date night. Before
you know it, you two will be up all night
talking like teenagers and June...and so
the relighting begins.

Create Space and
Trust
             Part of regaining the love that
has dwindled over the years is forgetting
a lot of things that pushed the two of you
apart. The best relationships are those
that have the shortest memories.
Although it is easier said than done, now
is the perfect opportunity to create
space, and redevelop trust.
             Start by giving your loved one
the space they enjoyed when you first

started dating. There certainly may be
restrictions to this ideology, based on
your circumstances and responsibilities,
but it is possible. In order to light the
fires of love again, show your partner
that you trust their judgment and want
him or her to go out with friends from
time to time. In fact, giving someone
space could simply mean actually
allowing him or her to have their own
space. Often when people live together,
personal space becomes entangled,
which means you can begin to feel
crowded or overwhelmed that you have

very little privacy or time to yourself.
             Take a look at your
relationship, and determine exactly what
boundaries exist in your home. If there
aren’t any, you are going to want to start
there. Create a place for each of you,
where you are off limits while you enjoy
your time alone. This should not be
considered a hiding place, per se, it
should be considered a respected area.
Do not abuse this idea, or it will become
counterproductive.
             If being social is a big thing for
both of you, allow the other to take a

couple days out of town with each of
their sets of friends or family. If the guy
in your life loves to golf, set him free on
a golf trip for a couple days with the
boys. If the girl in your life loves
shopping, send her with a friend to the
closest big city for a night or two, and
let her enjoy the space.
             When you provide your loved
one with space to enjoy their lives
without you, it means you trust him or
her to do exactly that. The old
expression, absence makes the heart
grow fonder is certainly in play here, so

use it to get excited about your partner’s
return. In order to be happy in your
relationship, you have to be happy with
yourself. Allow each other the time to
be.

Listen Without
Prejudice
             When two people are in a
lengthy relationship, they often reserve
certain conversations for a time when
they know their partner is in a good
mood. The idea behind this strategy is
that he or she thinks they know exactly
what the other one is going to say in
response.
             This happens because most
long-term relationships have

communication issues that stem from not
listening to what the other is saying, but
planning a response instead. In fact, most
partners hardly give their loved one the
floor at all, without interjecting at each
and every turn with their opinions or
thoughts, before he or she is even able to
finish.
             In order to regain the love and
respect you once had, it is important to
listen to your partner from beginning to
end. If one person says, “I don’t feel like
you find me attractive anymore” the
response should not be “That’s

ridiculous.” Instead, let the other person
explain why they feel that way.
Diminishing the other person’s feelings
and capacity to complete their thoughts
is disheartening and disrespectful. Even
if you do not like where the conversation
is heading, you cannot simply cut it off
by interrupting. It isn’t fair to the other
person, and it isn’t fair to you. How are
you ever going to find out what the other
person is thinking, or how they feel
about something, if you do not let them
finish their thoughts?
             Listen to your partner as if they

are making a Supreme Court argument,
knowing that you will get your turn when
he or she is finished. It is really the least
you can do for each other to help
increase your communication efforts.

Rediscover the
Uniqueness of Your
Partner
             When you first met your
partner, you loved a million different
things about him or her. Their smile,
their ideas, or the way they wore their
hair. You loved how they were
unaffected by what other people thought,
and respected the fact that they learned
Mandarin or French in college.
             The truth is, the person you love

has a spectacular amount of talent, and at
one point in life you appreciated it and
possibly even flaunted it while traveling
or while around your friends. Each
person has unique qualities that they
love about themselves and each other, so
embrace them!
             No one likes to feel as if they
are being taken advantage of, but love
being appreciated. Rekindling your love
can start with reminding your partner of
all the things you loved about him or her
when you first started dating. This is
different for everyone, but it could be as

simple as a phrase you used to say to
one another. It is always okay to ask
your partner what they miss about you
most, or which quality attracted them to
you in the first place. Once you begin to
reminisce about those things – no matter
how small or large – start doing them
again. Simple gestures go a long way,
and it is time to rediscover the thousands
of reasons that set both of your hearts
ablaze all those years ago.

Awesome Ideas
for Date Night
There are a number of awesome date
night ideas that will allow the two of
you to dress up or dress down,
depending on your moods, while
enjoying the company of others or
simply the company of each other. 
- Go Dancing
- Play Board Games over Beers
- Volunteer

- Art Gallery Openings/Museum Visits
- Go to the Zoo
- Go for a Bike Ride
- Go Bowling
- Play Bingo
- Go See a Band
- Go to a Game – Professional or
Amateur
- Go to a Restaurant You Have Not
Tried
- Rent DVDs & Get Chinese Food
- Grab a Bottle of Wine, a Baguette and

Cheese and Sit Outside Under the Stars
- Ride Go-Carts & Play Video Games
- Go on a Pub Crawl
- Go to a Festival
- Exercise & Fitness Classes
- Cooking Classes
- Make Each Other’s Favorite Meal
- Give Each Other Massages of Your
Choice
- Visit Tourist Attractions in Your Own
City
- Go Camping/Hiking/Rock Climbing

             Check your local paper for
seasonal events like hay rides at a
pumpkin patch, or wild flowers in
bloom at your local state park. There are
a lot of things going on in your own city
that you probably pass on every year, so
make an effort to engage in your
community while spending time with
your loved one.

Communicating
on Another
(Loving,
Respectful) Level
             Just as the “conversation
starters” provide the perfect opportunity
to delve into your partner’s thoughts,
ideas and desires, everyday
conversations can serve as a gateway to
happiness. Positive communication

techniques are often overlooked in
lengthy relationships, and are replaced
with demands for action. Instead of
requesting that your loved one proceed
in one direction – for whatever reason –
conversations begin with awful, negative
tone setting phrases “I told you to...” or
“I said to do THIS not THAT...”
             Nothing sets the tone of how the
morning, afternoon or evening is going to
proceed like as conversation that
proceeds it does. It is important for you
and your partner to express yourselves
with respect and love, and not through

demands or angry phrases. For instance,
it is much easier to say, “I would love it
if you would make that (fish, pasta, etc.)
dish we enjoy so much sometime this
week” instead of “You NEVER cook! I
always have to do it!”
             Likewise, when you are
requesting the help of your loved one, in
an effort to make life easier or to get you
out of a scheduling jam, it is better
received as a request, not a demand. To
follow are a couple of applications
where a demand and request are made
separately, regarding the same scenario.

Which one would you rather be
approached with?
             “You have to pick the kids up
on Thursday” or “Would you mind
helping me out this week, and picking
the kids up from school on Thursday? I
would really appreciate it.”
             “You need to do laundry,
because I’m sick of being the only one
who does it!” or “Hey, hon: would you
mind throwing a load of laundry in
before you head out this morning? Thank
you!”
             It isn’t what you say, it’s how

you say it. Think about how you would
like to be talked to, and return the
sentiment to the person you love. There
is absolutely no reason why each and
every request you make should not be
accompanied by the words “please” and
“thank you”. In fact, you will be amazed
at how infectious your positive and
considerate tone will become. Your
partner will be hard pressed to say no to
your request, let alone counter it with
reasons why he or she cannot
accommodate it, when asked nicely –
with a genuine concern for their time and

effort.
             One way to begin experiencing
this positivity is to express gratitude for
the small things that happen around the
house. There are a number of things that
happen in your home that you may
simply take for granted, like emptying
the dishwasher – or even starting it!
When you thank your partner for
something as small as preparing dinner,
clearing the dishwasher, or putting the
kids to bed, they will take notice of your
appreciation. It may seem like a very
small thing, but saying “thank you for

making dinner” provides a tremendous
approach to respecting the roles each of
you perform within the home. The tiny,
two word phrase can make all the
difference in how things happen around
your home. When someone feels
appreciated, they often want to step up
their participation in an effort to
continue receiving accolades.
             If do not already thank your
loved one for each and everything they
do, you should start. No deed, idea or
action is too small to be honored with
your appreciation through the simple

words of please and thank you. Next
time you ask your partner to pass you a
pen, or the ketchup, simply add the
words “please” behind it, followed by a
“thank you” when you receive it. It will
make you feel good, and it will help
them feel appreciated. It really is the
small things that empower relationships,
so make them happen all day, every day.

Maintaining Your
Relationship’s “In
Love” Capacity
             It should go without saying that
a relationship is always under
construction. No matter how great things
are now, there are going to be times
going forward where arguments,
misunderstandings and hurt feelings are
going to unfold. There are also going to
be times when you have to make

unpleasant decisions or deliver bad
news to one another, so maintaining
strength and perseverance are key
components to building your relationship
at all times.
             The first step to maintaining
your in love status is to work as a team,
in good times and bad. Each person
should rely on the other to be their
support system not only during tough
times, but during great times. You should
be the first person your partner calls
with great and exciting news. You
should also be the first person they

consult when you are confused,
exhausted or simply need a motivational
pep talk. There’s a difference between
being codependent, and being in love, so
do not let anyone make you feel like you
are lost without your partner’s advice.
As an adult, you should be confident in
your ability to make your own decisions,
and to expect a positive result once you
have enacted it. However, it is also
healthy to include your partner in your
daily life, and the conversations and
supportive values that encircle it.
             Couples who are excited to see

or talk to each other, and share fun quips
and anecdotes throughout the day
become mutually satisfied with sharing
time with their partner. This means the
two of you can spend more time
together, while looking forward to that
time while you are apart.
             When you are spending time
together, or planning your next date, do
not let petty and trivial things get in the
way – even if they are out of your
control. Nothing turns a potentially fun
night into a disaster of an evening than
complaints and excuses about its

successfulness. For instance, if you are
committed to the rebirth of your
relationship, you will make timely
reservations to insure that you get into
the restaurant you two have been so
excited to try for the past month. Simply
showing up and being relegated to a two
hour wait list or being turned away
altogether can really turn a positive
approach to the evening into a blame
game of not following through with the
process.
             The same goes for events and

sitters. Be sure to plan ahead to insure
that date nights are in the book, and
tickets are in hand, so are not
disappointed – or worse, disappointing
your partner – as a result. When you are
on your way to these events, start up a
fun conversation in the car with a great
exercise to get light and fun
conversations underway. Talk about
your top ten anything, including movies,
bands, songs, vacation trips or potential
vacation spots – in case you two ever
win the lottery. Each of these things will
allow you to connect with your love

about something other than car payments
and daycare, and can help you dream
together. Once the date starts, there is no
room to talk about work, in-laws or
lines at the bank. It all about the two of
you, and what makes you happy about
your time together.
             The idea of rekindling your
love is not creating a path of change for
your loved one. That is to say if your
partner is always late, chances are he or
she is going to be late on date nights too.
Do not let it get you down, simply build
in a little time padding if reservations or

events are at risk as a result of their
tardiness. Falling in love again means
falling in love again with the person who
never remembers to bring a sweater,
even though she or he complains that the
restaurant you are going to is always
freezing cold. For occasions like these,
or if you have planned something that
may subject you to the elements, there is
no reason to ruin the surprise, simply ask
the other person to bring a jacket, or
keep an umbrella in the car.
             Successfully rekindling your
love means trying new things, while

delving into all of your past loves. With
the internet available on nearly every
device individuals own these days,
search for events, concerts, comedy
shows and sporting events that each of
you can enjoy as if you were ten years
younger. Search for themes of past
loving experiences, or wear an outfit that
your partner absolutely loves for you to
wear as a surprise. Decide together
whether your next date is going to be one
where you dress to the nines, or wear
tennis shoes and t-shirts, so everyone is
on the same page and comfortable about

the events of the evening. Surprises
should be fun and exciting, not
overwhelming and daunting. Keep in
mind that if you and your partner have
been together for years, you know
exactly what they are afraid of and what
they enjoy. Be sure that the rekindling
phase isn’t one where you are trying to
change who they are, but one where you
enjoy exactly the person they have
become, and the couple you are as a
result.
             Work on your relationship in
between date nights by leaving each

other nice notes that say “I love you”.
Pack them a lunch in the morning, before
they head off for a long day. Be
supportive of long hours or unexpected
business travel, and start saying
“please” and “thank you” more – even
with the smallest opportunity. When you
start asking your partner to do things,
instead of telling them, they will
immediately provide the same respect
and compassion in return.
             Your love will continue to
grow by being nurtured. Sometimes it
may appear that the grass is greener on

the other side of the fence, but couples
will find that when they successfully
water their own lawns, they become the
brightest relationship in their
neighborhood.

 
 
 
Thank you purchasing my book.
If you feel “Falling in Love Again –
Simple Steps to Renewing the Passion
in your Relationship” was helpful to
you, please leave a review at Amazon,
so it can help others too. For any other
comments or feedback, please don't
hesitate to contact me through
www.fallinginloveagain.info.
From the same author:
“5 Secrets to Maintaining a Healthy

Relationship” 
 

