file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
THE GATES OF CREATION
Philip Jose Farmer
I
Thousands of years ago, the lords had used drugs, electron-ics, hypnotism, and psychotechniques to 
do without sleep. Their bod-ies stayed fresh and vigorous, their eyes unclouded, for days and 
nights, for months. But their minds eventually crumbled. Halluci-nations, unbounded anger, and an 
unreasonable sense of doom gripped them. Some went mad forever and had to be killed or 
im-prisoned.
It was then that the Lords found that even they, makers of uni-verses, owners of a science that 
put them only one step below the gods, must dream. The unconscious mind, denied communication with 
the sleeping conscious, revolted. Its weapon was madness, with which it toppled the pillars of 
reason.
So, all Lords now slept and dreamed.
Robert Wolff, once called Jadawin, Lord of the Planet of Many Levels, of a world that was 
constructed like a Tower of Babylon, dreamed.
He dreamed that a six-pointed star had drifted through a window into his bedroom. Whirling, it 
hung in the air above the foot of his bed. It was a pandoogaluz, one of the ancient symbols of the 
religion in which the Lords no longer believed. Wolff, who tended to think mostly in English, 
thought of it as a hexaculum. It was a six-sided star, its center glowing white, each of its 
facets flashing a ray, a scar-let, an orange, an azure, a purple, a black, and a yellow. The 
hex-aculum pulsed like the heart of the sun, and the rays javelined out, raking his eyelids 
lightly. The beams scratched the skin as a house cat might extend a claw to wake its sleeping 
master with the tiniest sting.
"What do you want?" Wolff said, and knew he was dreaming. The hexaculum was a danger; even the 
shadows that formed between its beams were thick with evil. And he knew that the hexaculum had 
been sent by his father, Urizen, whom he had not seen for two thou-sand years. "Jadawin!"
The voice was silent, the words formed by the six rays, which now bent and coiled and writhed like 
snakes of fire. The letters into which they shaped themselves were of the ancient alphabet, the 
original writing of the Lords. He saw them glowing before him, yet he under-stood them not so much 
through the eye as through a voice that spoke deep within him. It was as if the colors reached 
into the center of his mind and evoked a long-dead voice. The voice was deep, so deep it vibrated 
his innermost being, whirled it, and threatened to bend it into nightmare figures that would 
forever keep their shape.
"Wake up, Jadawin!" his father's voice said. By these words, Wolff knew that the flashing-rayed 
hexaculum was not only in his mind but existed in reality. His eyes opened, and he stared up at 
the concave ceiling, self-luminous with a soft and shifting light, veined with red, black, yellow, 
and green. He put out his left hand to touch Chryseis, his wife, and found that her side of the 
bed was empty. 
At this, he sat upright and looked to left and right and saw that she was not in the room. He 
called, "Chryseis!" Then he saw the glit-tering pulsing six-rayed object that hung six feet above 
the edge of his bed. Out of it came, in sound, not fire, his father's voice.
"Jadawin, my son, my enemy! Do not look for the lesser being you have honored by making your mate. 
She is gone and will not be back."
Wolff stood up and then sprang out of bed. How had this thing gotten into his supposedly 
impregnable castle? Long before it had reached the bedroom in the center of the castle, alarms 
should have wakened him, massive doors should have slid shut throughout the enormous building, 
laser beams should have been triggered in the many halls, ready to cut down intruders, the hundred 
different traps should have been set. The hexaculum should have been shattered, slashed, burned, 
exploded, crushed, drowned.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (1 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
But not a single light shone on the great wall across the room, the wall that seemed only an 
arabesqued decoration but was the alarm and control diagram-panel of the castle. It glimmered 
quietly as if an uninvited guest were not within a million miles.
The voice of Urizen, his father, laughed, and said, "You did not think you could keep the Lord of 
Lords out with your puny weapons, did you? Jadawin, I could kill you now where you stand gaping so 
foolishly, so pale and quivering and filmed in sweat."
"Chryseis!" Wolff cried out again.
"Chryseis is gone. She is no longer safe in your bed and in your universe. She has been taken as 
quickly and as silently as a thief steals a jewel."
"What do you want, Father?" Wolff asked.
"I want you to come after her. Try to get her back."
Wolff bellowed, leaped up onto the bed, and launched himself over its edge at the hexaculum. For 
that moment, he forgot all reason and caution, which had told him that the object could be fatal. 
His hands gripped the many-colored glowing thing. They closed on air and came together and he was 
standing on the floor, looking up above him at the space where the hexaculum had been. Even as his 
hands touched the area filled by the starred polyhedron, it had vanished.
So, perhaps, it had not been physical. Perhaps it had after all been a projection stirred in him 
by some means.
He did not believe so. It was a configuration of energies, of fields momentarily held together and 
transmitted from some remote place. The projector might be in the universe next door or it might 
be a million universes away. The distance did not matter. What did matter was that Urizen had 
penetrated the walls of Wolff's personal world. And he had spirited Chryseis away.
Wolff did not expect any more word from his father. Urizen had not indicated where he had taken 
Chryseis, how Wolff was to find her, or what would be done to Chryseis. Yet Wolff knew what he had 
to do. Somehow, he would have to locate the hidden self-enclosed cosmos of his father. Then he 
would have to find the gate that would give entrance to the pocket universe. At the same time that 
he got ac-cess, he would have to detect and avoid the traps set for him by Urizen. If he succeeded 
in doing this-and the probabilities were very low-he would have to get to Urizen and kill him. 
Only thus could he rescue Chryseis.
This was the multimillennia-old pattern of the game played among the Lords. Wolff himself, as 
Jadawin, the seventh son of Urizen, had survived 10,000 years of the deadly amusement. But he had 
managed to do so largely by being content with staying in his own universe. Unlike many of the 
Lords, he had not grown tired of the world he had created. He had enjoyed it-although it had been 
a cruel enjoy-ment, he had to admit now. Not only had he exploited the natives of his world for 
his own purposes, he had set up defenses that had snared more than one Lord-male and female, some 
his own brothers and sisters-and the trapped ones had died slowly and horribly. Wolff felt 
contrition for what he had done to the inhabitants of his planet. For the Lords he had killed and 
tortured, he suffered no guilt. They knew what they were doing when they came into his world, and 
if they had beaten his defenses, they would have given him a painful time before he died.
Then Lord Vannax had succeeded in hurling him into the universe of Earth, although at the cost of 
being taken along with Jadawin. A third Lord, Arwoor, had moved in to possess Jadawin's world.
Jadawin's memory of his former life had been repressed by the shock of dispossession, of being 
cast weaponless into an alien uni-verse and without the means to return to his own world; Jadawin 
had become a blank, a tabula rasa. Adopted by a Kentuckian named Wolff, the amnesiac Jadawin had 
taken the name of Robert Wolff. Not until he was sixty-six years old did he discover what had 
hap-pened before the time that he had stumbled down a Kentucky moun-tain. He had retired from a 
lifetime of teaching Latin, Greek, and Hebrew to the Phoenix area of Arizona. And there, while 
looking through a newly built house for sale, he had begun the series of ad-ventures that took him 
through a "gate" back into the universe he had created and had ruled as Lord for 10,000 years.
There he had fought his way up from the lowest level of the monoplanet, an Earth-sized Tower of 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (2 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Babylon, to the palace-castle of Lord Arwoor. There he had met and fallen in love with Chryseis, 
one of his own semicreations. And he had become the Lord again, but not the same Lord as the one 
who had left it. He had become human.
His tears, loosed by his anguish at the loss of Chryseis and the ter-ror of what could happen to 
her, were proof of his humanity. No Lord shed tears over another living being, although it was 
said that Urizen had cried with joy when he had trapped two of his sons some thousands of years 
ago.
No time-waster, Wolff set about doing what had to be done. First, he must make sure that someone 
occupied the castle while he was gone. He did not want to repeat what had happened the last time 
he had left this world. On returning, he had found another Lord in his place. Now there was only 
one man who was capable of filling his shoes and whom he could trust. That was Kickaha (born Paul 
Janus Finnegan in Terre Haute, Indiana, Earth). It was Kickaha who had given him the horn that had 
enabled him to get back into this world.
Kickaha had given him the indispensable help that had permitted him to regain his Lordship.
The horn!
With that, he would be able to track down Urizen's world and gain entrance to it! He strode across 
the chrysoprase floor to the wall and swung down a section of the wall, carved in the semblance of 
a giant eagless of this planet. He stopped and gasped with shock. The hiding place no longer had a 
horn to hide. The hollowed out part in which the horn had lain was empty.
So, Urizen had not only taken Chryseis but he had stolen the an-cient Horn of Shambarimen.
So be it. Wolff would weep over Chryseis but he would spend no time in useless mourning for an 
artifact, no matter how treasured.
He walked swiftly through the halls, noting that none of the alarms were triggered. All slept as 
if this were just another day in the quiet but happy times since Wolff had regained possession of 
the pal-ace on top of the world. He could not help shivering. He had always feared his father. Now 
that he had such evidence of his father's vast powers, he dreaded him even more. But he did not 
fear to go after him. He would track him down and kill him or die trying.
In one of the colossal control rooms, he seated himself before a pagoda-shaped console. He set a 
control which would automatically bring him, in sequence, views of all the places on this planet 
where he had set videos. There were ten thousand of these on each of the four lower levels, 
disguised as rocks or trees. They had been placed to allow him to see what was happening in 
various key areas. For two hours he sat while the screen flashed views. Then, knowing that he 
could be there for several days, he plugged in the eidolon of Kickaha and left the viewer. Now, if 
Kickaha were seen, the screen would lock on the scene and an alarm would notify Wolff.
He placed ten more consoles in operation. These automatically began to scan throughout the cosmos 
of the "parallel" universes to detect and identify them. The records were seventy years old, so it 
was to be presumed that universes created since then would swell the known number of one thousand 
and eight. It was these that Wolff was interested in. Urizen no longer lived in the original one 
of Gardazrintah, where Wolff had been raised with many of his brothers, sisters, and cousins. In 
fact, Urizen, who grew tired of entire worlds as swiftly as a spoiled child became weary with new 
toys, had moved three tunes since leaving Gardazrintah. And the chances were that he was now in a 
fourth and this last one had to be identified and pene-trated.
Even when all had been recorded, he could not be sure that his fa-ther's universe was located. If 
a universe were entirely sealed off, it was undetectable. A universe could be found only through 
the "gates," each of which gave off a unique frequency. If Urizen wanted to make it really 
difficult for Wolff to find him, he could set up an on-off-on gate. This would open at regular 
intervals or at random times, depending upon Urizen's choice. And if it happened not to open at 
the time that Wolff's scanner was searching that "parallel corridor," it would not be detected. As 
far as the scanners were con-cerned, that area would be an "empty" one.
However, Urizen wanted him to come after him and so should not make it too difficult or impossible 
for him to do so.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (3 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Lords must eat. Wolff had a light breakfast served by a talos, one of the half-protein robots, 
looking like knights in armor, of which he had over a thousand. Then he shaved and showered in a 
room carved out of a single emerald. Afterwards, he clothed himself. He wore cor-duroy shoes, 
tight-fitting corduroy trousers, a corduroy short-sleeved shirt, open at the neck but with a 
collar that curved up in back, a broad belt of mammoth leather, and a golden chain around his 
neck. From the chain hung a red jade image of Shambarimen, given to him by the great artist and 
artificer of the Lords, when he, Wolff, had been a boy of ten. The red of the jade was the only 
bright color of his garments, the rest being a thrush-brown. When in the castle, he dressed simply 
or not at all. Only during the rare occasions when he went down to the lower levels for state 
ceremonies did he dress in the magnificent robes and complex hat of a Lord. In most of his 
descents, he went incognito, clad in the garments or nongarments of the local natives.
He left the walls of the castle to go out onto one of the hundreds of great balcony-gardens. There 
was an Eye sitting in a tree, a raven large as a bald eagle. He was one of the few survivors of 
the on-slaught on the castle when Wolff had taken this world back from Ar-woor. Now that Arwoor 
was dead, the ravens had transferred their loyalty to Wolff.
Wolff told the raven that he was to fly out and look for Kickaha. He would inform other Eyes of 
the Lord of his mission and also tell the eagles of Podarge. They must inform Kickaha that he was 
wanted at once. If Kickaha did get their message and came to the castle, only to find Wolff gone, 
he was to remain there as Lord pro tem. If, after a reasonable interval, Wolff did not return, 
Kickaha could then do whatever he wanted.
He knew that Kickaha would come after him and that it was no use forbidding him to do so.
The raven flew off, happy to have a mission. Wolff went back into the castle. The viewers were 
still searching, without success, for Kickaha. But the gate-finders, needing only microseconds to 
scan and identify, had gone through all the universes and were already on their sixth sweep. He 
allowed them to continue on the chance that some gates might be intermittent and the search scan 
and gate on-state had not coincided. The results of the first five searches were on paper, printed 
in the classical ideographs of the ancient language.
There were thirty-five new universes. Of these, only one had a sin-gle gate.
Wolff had the spectral image of this placed upon a screen. It was a six-pointed star with the 
center red instead of white as he had seen it. Red for danger.
As plainly as if Urizen had told him, he knew that this was the gate to Urizen's world. Here I am. 
Come and get me-if you dare.
He visualized his father's face, the handsome falcon features with large eyes like wet black 
diamonds. Lords were ageless, their bodies held in the physiological grip of the first twenty-five 
years of life. But emotions were stronger even than the science of the Lords-working with their 
ally, time, they slashed away at the rocks of flesh. And the last time he had seen his father, he 
had seen the lines of hate. God alone knew how deep they were now, since it was evident that 
Urizen had not ceased to hate.
As Jadawin, Wolff had returned his father's enmity. But he had not been like so many of his 
brothers and sisters in trying to kill him. Wolff had just not wanted to have anything at all to 
do with him. Now, he loathed him because of what he had done to innocent Chryseis. Now, he meant 
to slay him.
The fabrication of a gate which would match the frequency-image of the hexaculum-entrance to 
Urizen's world was automatic. Even so, it took twenty-two hours for the machines to finish the 
device. By then, the planetary viewers had all reported in. Kickaha was not in their line of 
sight. This did not mean that the elusive fellow was not on the planet. He could be just outside 
the scope of the viewers or he could be a hundred thousand places elsewhere. The planet had even 
more land area than Earth, and the viewers covered only a tiny part of it. Thus, it might be a 
long long time before Kickaha was appre-hended.
Wolff decided not to waste any time. The second the matching hexaculum was finished, he went into 
action. He ate a light meal and drank water, since he did not know how long he might have to do 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (4 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
without either once he stepped through the gate. He armed himself with a beamer, a knife, a bow, 
and a quiverful of arrows. The primi-tive weapons might seem curious arms to take along in view of 
the highly technological death-dispensers he would have to face. But it was one of the ironies of 
the Lords' technology that the set-ups in which they operated sometimes permitted such weapons to 
be effec-tive.
Actually, he did not expect to be able to use any of his arms. He knew too well the many types of 
traps the Lords had used.
"And now," Wolff said, "it must be done. There is no use waiting any longer."
He walked into the narrow space inside the matching hexaculum. Wind whistled and tore at him. 
Blackness. A sense as of great hands gripping him. All in a dizzying flash.
He was standing upon grass, giant fronds at a distance from him, a blue sea close by, a red sky 
above, hugging the island and the rim of the sea. There was light from every quarter of the 
heavens and no sun. His clothes were still upon his body, although he had felt as if they were 
being ripped off when he had gone through the gate. More-over, his weapons were still with him.
Certainly, this was not the interior of Urizen's stronghold. Or, if it were, it was the most 
unconventional dwelling-place of a Lord that he had ever seen.
He turned to see the hexaculum which had received him. It was not there. Instead, a tall wide 
hexagon of purplish metal rose from a broad flat boulder. He remembered now that something had 
pushed him out through it and that he had had to take several steps to keep from falling. The 
energy that had shoved him had caused him to pass out of it and a few paces from the boulder.
Urizen had set another gate within his hexaculum and had shunted him off to this place, wherever 
it was. Why Urizen had done so would become apparent quickly enough.
Wolff knew what would happen if he tried to walk back through the gate. Nevertheless, not being 
one to take things for granted, he did attempt it. With ease, he stepped out on the other side 
upon the boulder.
It was a one-way gate, just as he had expected.
Somebody coughed behind him, and he whirled, his beamer ready.
II
THE LAND ENDED ABRUPTLY AGAINST THE SEA WITH NO INTERVENING beach. The animal had just emerged 
from the sea and was only a few feet from him. It squatted like a toad on huge webbed feet, its 
colum-nar legs folded as if they were boneless. The torso was humanoid and sheathed in fat, with a 
belly that protruded like that of a Thanks-giving goose. The neck was long and supple. At its end 
was a human head, but the nose was flat and had long narrow nostrils. Tendrils of red flesh 
sprouted out around the mouth. The eyes were very large and moss-green. There were no ears. The 
pate was covered, like the face and body, with a dark-blue oily fur.
"Jadawin!" the creature said. It spoke in the ancient language of the Lords. "Jadawin! Don't kill 
me! Don't you know me?"
Wolff was shocked but not so much that he forgot to look behind him. This creature could be trying 
to distract him.
"Jadawin! Don't you recognize your own brother!"
Wolff did not know him. The frog-seal body, lack of ears, blue fur, and squashed long-slitted nose 
made identification too difficult. And there was Time. If he had really called this thing brother, 
it must have been millennia ago.
That voice. It dug away at the layers of dusty memory, like a dog after an old bone. It scraped 
away level after level, it...
He shook his head and glanced behind him and at the feathery vegetation. "Who are you?" he asked.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (5 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
The creature whined, and by this he knew that his brother-if it were his brother-must have been 
imprisoned in that body for a long long time. No Lord whined.
"Are you going to deny me? Are you like the others? They'd have nothing to do with me. They mocked 
at me, they spat upon me, they drove me away with kicks and laughs. They said. . ."
It clapped its flippers together and twisted its face and large tears ran from the moss-green eyes 
and down the blue cheeks. "Oh, Jadawin, don't be like the rest! You were always my favorite, my 
be-loved! Don't be cruel like them!"
The others, Wolff thought. There had been others. How long ago?
Impatiently, he said, "Let's not play games-whoever you are. Your name!"
The creature rose on its boneless legs, muscles raising the fat that coated them, and took a step 
forward. Wolff did not back away, but he held the beamer steady. "That's far enough. Your name."
The creature stopped, but its tears kept on flowing. "You are as bad as the others. You think of 
nobody but yourself; you don't care what's happened to me. Doesn't my suffering and loneliness and 
agonies all this time-oh, this immeasurable time-touch you at all?"
"It might if I knew who you were," Wolff said. "And what's hap-pened to you."
"Oh, Lord of the Lords! My own brother!"
It advanced another giant splayfoot, the wetness squishing from out under the webs. It held out a 
flipper as if beseeching a tender hand. Then it stopped, and the eyes flicked at a spot just to 
one side of Wolff. He jumped to his left and whirled, the beamer pointing to cover both the 
creature and whoever might have been behind him. There was no one.
And, as the thing had planned, it leaped for Wolff at the same time that Wolff jumped and turned. 
Its legs uncoiled like a catapult released and shot it forward. If Wolff had only turned, he would 
have been knocked down. Standing to one side, he escaped all but the tip of the thing's right 
flipper. Even that, striking his left shoulder and arm, was enough to send him staggering numbly 
to one side, making him drop the beamer. Wolff was enormously solid and pow-erful himself, with 
muscles and nerve impulses raised to twice their natural strength and speed by the Lords' science. 
If he had been a normal Earthman, he would have been crippled forever in his arm, and he would not 
have been able to escape the second leap of the creature.
Squalling with fury and disappointment, it landed on the spot where Wolff had been, sank on its 
legs as if they were springs, spun, and launched itself at Wolff again. All this was done with 
such swift-ness that the creature looked as if it were an actor in a speeded-up film.
Wolff had succeeded in regaining his balance. He jumped.out for the beamer. The shadow of the 
creature passed over him; its shriek-ing was so loud it seemed as if its lips were pressed against 
his ear. Then he had the beamer in his hands, had rolled over and over, and was up on his feet. By 
then the thing had propelled itself again to-wards him. Wolff reversed the beamer, and using his 
right hand, brought the light but practically indestructible metal stock down on top of the 
creature's head. The impact of the huge body hurled him backward; he rolled away. The sea-thing 
was lying motionless on its face, blood welling from its seal-like scalp.
Hands clapped, and he turned to see two human beings thirty yards away inland, under the shadow of 
a frond. They were male and female, dressed in the magnificent clothes of Lords. They walked 
to-wards him, their hands empty of weapons. Their only arms were swords in crude leather, or fish-
skin, scabbards. Despite this seeming powerlessness, Wolff did not relax his guard. When they had 
ap-proached within twenty yards of him, he told them to stop. The crea-ture groaned and moved its 
head but made no effort to sit up. Wolff moved away from it to be outside its range of leap.
"Jadawin!" the woman called. She had a lovely contralto voice which stirred his heart and his 
memory. Although he had not seen her in five hundred or more years, he knew her then.
"Vala!" he said. "What are you doing here?" The question was rhetorical; he knew she must have 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (6 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
also been trapped by their father. And now he recognized the man. He was Rintrah, one of his 
brothers. Vala, his sister, and Rintrah, his brother, had fallen into the same snare.
Vala smiled at him, and his heart sprang again. She was of all women he had known the most 
beautiful, with two exceptions. His lovely Chryseis and his other sister, Anana the Bright, 
surpassed her. But he had never loved Anana as he had Vala. Just as he had never hated Anana as he 
had Vala.
Vala applauded again, and said, "Well done, Jadawin! You have lost none of your skill or wits. 
That thing is dangerous, even if detest-able. It cringes and whines and tries to gain your trust, 
and then, bang! It's at your throat! It almost killed Rintrah when he first came here and would 
have if I had not struck it unconscious with a rock. So, you see, I, too, have dealt with it."
"And why did you not kill it then?" Wolff said.
Rintrah smiled and said, "Don't you know your own little brother, Jadawin? That creature is your 
beloved, your cute little Theotormon."
Wolff said, "God! Theotormon! Who did this to him?"
Neither of the two answered, nor was an answer needed. This was Urizen's world; only he could have 
refashioned their brother thus.
Theotormon groaned and sat up. One flipper placed over the bloody spot on his head, he rocked back 
and forth and moaned. His lichen-green eyes glared at Wolff, and he silently mouthed vitupera-tion 
he did not dare voice.
Wolff said, "You're not trying to tell me you spared his life be-cause of fraternal sentiment? I 
know you better than that."
Vala laughed and said, "Of course not! I thought he could be used later on. He knows this little 
planet well, since he has been here such a long long time. He is a coward, brother Jadawin. He did 
not have the courage to test his life in the maze of Urizen; he stayed upon this island and became 
as one of the degenerate natives. Our father tired of waiting for him to summon up a nonexistent 
manhood. To punish him for his lack of bravery, he caught him and took him off to his stronghold, 
Appirmatzum. There he reshaped him, made him into this disgusting sea-thing. Even then, Theotormon 
did not dare to go through the gates into Urizen's palace. He stayed here and lived as a hermit, 
hating and despising himself, hating all other living beings, especially Lords.
"He lives upon the fruit of the islands, the birds and fish and other sea-things he can catch. He 
eats them raw, and he kills the natives and eats them when he gets a chance. Not that they don't 
deserve their fate. They are the sons and daughters of other Lords who, like Theotormon, were 
craven. They lived out their miserable lives upon this planet, had babies, raised these, and then 
died.
"Urizen did to them as he did to Theotormon. He took them to Appirmatzum, made them into loathsome 
shapes, and brought them back here. Our father thought that surely the monstering of them would 
make them hate him so much they would then test the trap-door planets, try to get into 
Appirmatzum, and revenge themselves. But they were cowards all. They preferred to live on, even in 
their stomach-turning metamorphosis, rather than die as true Lords."
Wolff said, "I have much to learn about this little arrangement of our father. But how do I know 
that I can trust you?"
Again Vala laughed. "All of us who have fallen into Urizen's traps are upon this island. Most of 
us have been here only a few weeks, al-though Luvah has been here for half a year."
"Who are the others?"
"Some of your brothers and cousins. Besides Rintrah and Luvah, there are two other brothers, Enion 
and Ariston. And your cousins Tharmas and Palamabron."
She laughed merrily and pointed at the red sky and said, "All, all snared by our father! All 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (7 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
gathered together again after a heartrending absence of millennia. A happy family reunion such as 
mortals could not imagine."
"I can imagine," Wolff said. "You still have not answered my question about trust."
"We have all sworn to a common-front truce," Rintrah said. "We need each other, so we must put 
aside our natural enmity and work together. Only thus will it be possible to defeat Urizen."
"There hasn't been a common-front truce for as long as I can remember," Wolff said. "I remember 
Mother telling me that there had been one once, four thousand years before I was born, when the 
Black Sellers threatened the Lords. Urizen has performed two mira-cles. He has trapped eight Lords 
all at once, and he has forced a truce. May this be his downfall."
Wolff then said that he would swear to the truce. By the name of the Father of all Lords, the 
great Eponym Los, he swore to observe all the rules of the peace-agreement until such time as all 
agreed to abandon it or all were dead but one. He knew even as he took the oath that the others 
could not be relied upon not to betray him. He knew that Rintrah and Vala were aware of this and 
trusted him no more than he did them. But at least they would all be working to-gether for a 
while. And it was not likely that any would lightly break truce. Only when a great opportunity and 
strong likelihood of escap-ing punishment coincided would any do so.
Theotormon whined, "Jadawin. My own brother. My favorite brother, he who said he would always love 
me and protect me. You are like the others. You want to hurt me, to kill me. Your own little 
brother."
Vala spat at him and said, "You filthy craven beast! You are no Lord nor brother of ours. Why do 
you not dive to the deeps and there drown yourself, take your fearfulness and treachery out of our 
sight and the sight of all beings that breathe air? Let the fish feed upon your fat carcass, 
though even they may vomit you forth."
Crouching, extending a flipper, Theotormon shuffled towards Wolff. "Jadawin. You don't know how 
I've suffered. Is there no pity in you for me? I always thought you, at least, had what these 
others lacked. You had a warm heart, a compassion, that these soulless monsters lacked."
"You tried to kill me," Wolff said. "And you would try again if you thought you had a good chance 
of doing it."
"No, no," Theotormon said, attempting to smile. "You misun-derstood me entirely. I thought you 
would hate me because I loved even a base life more than I did a death as a Lord. I wanted to take 
your weapons away so you couldn't hurt me. Then I would have ex-plained what had happened to me, 
how I came to be this way. You would have understood then. You would have pitied me and loved me 
as you did when you were a boy in the palace of our father and I was your infant brother. That is 
all I wanted to do, explain to you and be loved again, not hated. I meant you no harm. By the name 
of Los, I swear it."
"I will see you later," Wolff said. "Now, for the present, be gone."
Theotormon walked away spraddle-legged. When he had reached the edge of the island, he turned and 
shouted obscenities and abuse at Wolff. Wolff raised his beamer, although he meant only to scare 
Theotormon. The thing squawked and leaped like a giant frog out over the water, his rubbery legs 
and webbed toes trailing behind him. He went into the water and did not come up again. Wolff asked 
Vala how long he could stay under the surface.
"I do not know. Perhaps half an hour. But I doubt that he is hold-ing his breath. He is probably 
in one of the caverns that exist in the roots and bladders that form the base of this island."
She said that they must go to meet the others. While they walked through the frond-forest, she 
explained the physical facts of this world, as far as she knew them.
"You must have noticed how close the horizon is. This planet has a diameter of about 2170 miles." 
(About the size of Earth's moon, Wolff thought.) "Yet the gravity is only a little less than that 
of our home-planet." (Not much stronger than Earth's, Wolff thought.)
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (8 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"The gravity fades off abruptly above the atmosphere," she said, "and extends weakly through this 
universe. All the other planets have similar fields."
Wolff did not wonder at this. The Lords could do things with fields and gravitons that the 
terrestrials had never dreamed of as yet
"This planet is entirely covered with water."
"What about this island?" he said.
"It floats. Its origin is a plant which grows on the bottom of the sea. When it's half-grown, its 
bladder starts to fill with gas, produced by a bacterium. It unroots itself and floats to the 
surface. There it ex-tends roots or filaments, which meet with the filaments of others of its 
kind. Eventually, there's a solid mass of such plants. The upper part of the plant dies off, while 
the lower part continues to grow. The decaying upper part forms a soil. Birds add their excrement 
to it. They come to new islands from old islands, and bring seeds in their droppings. These 
produce the fronds you see and the other vegeta-tion." She pointed at a clump of bamboo-like 
plants. 
He asked, "Where did those rocks come from?" 
There were several whitish boulders, with a diameter of about twelve feet, beyond the bamboos.
"The gas bladder plants that form islands are only one of perhaps several thousand species. 
There's a type that attaches itself to sea-bottom rocks and that carries the rock to the surface 
when they're buoyant enough. The natives bring them in and place them on the is-lands if they're 
not too big. The white ones attract the garzhoo bird for some reason, and the natives kill the 
garzhoo or domesticate it." 
"What about the drinking water?" 
"It's a fresh-water ocean."
Wolff, glancing through a break in the wilderness of purplish, yellow-streaked fronds and waist-
high berry-burdened bushes, saw a tremendous black arc appear on the horizon. In sixty seconds, it 
had become a sphere and was climbing above the horizon.
"Our moon," she said. "Here, things are reversed. There is no sun; the light comes from the sky. 
So the moon provides night or ab-sence of light. It is a pale sort of night, but better than none.
"Later, you will see the planet of Appirmatzum. It is in the center of this universe, and around 
it the five secondary planets revolve. You will see them, too, all black and sky-filling like our 
moon."
Wolff asked how she knew so much about the structure of Urizen's world. She answered that 
Theotormon had given the information, though not willingly. He had learned much while a prisoner 
of Urizen. He had not wanted to part with the information, since he was a surly and selfish beast. 
But when his brothers, cousins, and sister had caught him, they had forced him to talk. 
"Most of the scars are healed up," she said. She laughed. 
Wolff wondered if Theotormon did not have good reasons after all for wanting to kill them. And he 
wondered how much of her story of their dealings with him was true. He would have to have a talk 
with Theotormon some tune, at a safe distance from him, of course.
Vala stopped talking and seized Wolff's arm. He started to jerk away, thinking that she meant to 
try some trick. But she was looking upwards with alarm and so was Rintrah.
III
THE FRONDS, SIXTY FEET HIGH, HAD HIDDEN THE OBJECT IN THE SKY. Now he saw a mass at least a 
quarter-mile wide, fifty feet thick, and almost a mile long floating fifty feet in the air. It was 
drifting with the wind, which came from an unknown quarter of the compass. In this world without 
sun, north, south, east, and west meant nothing.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (9 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"What is that?" he said.
"An island that floats in the air. Hurry. We have to get to the vil-lage before the attack 
starts."
Wolff set off after the others. From time to tune, he looked up through the fronds at the 
aeronesus. It was descending rather swiftly at the opposite end of the island. He caught up with 
Vala and asked her how the floater could be navigated. She replied that its inhabit-ants used 
valves in the giant bladders to release their hydrogen. This procedure required almost all the 
natives, since each bladder-valve was operated by hand. During a descent, they would all be 
occupied with the navigation.
"How do they steer it?"
"The bladders have vents. When the abutal want the island to go in one direction, they release gas 
from banks of bladders on the side opposite to that in which they want to go. They don't get much 
power thrust, but they're very skillful. Even so, they have to contend with the winds and don't 
always maneuver effectively. We've been at-tacked twice before by the abutal, and both times they 
missed our is-land. They'll drop sea-anchors-big stones on the ends of cables-to slow them down. 
The first attackers settled down close to our island instead of just above it and had to content 
themselves with an attack by sea. They failed."
She stopped, then said, "Oh, no! These must be the Ilmawir. Los help us."
At first, Wolff thought that the fifty craft that had launched from the floater were small 
airplanes. Then, as they circled to land against the wind, he saw that they were gliders. The 
wings, fifty feet long, were of some pale shimmering stuff and scalloped on the edges. A painted 
image of an eye with crossed swords above it was on the un-derside of each wing. The fuselage was 
an uncovered framework, and its structure and the rudder and ailerons were painted scarlet. The 
pilot sat in a wickerwork basket just forward of the monowings. The nose of the craft was rounded 
and had a long horn projecting to a length of about twenty feet in front of it. Like the horn of a 
narwhal, Wolff thought. As he later found out, the horns were taken from a giant fish.
A glider passed above them on a path which would make it land ahead of them. Wolff got a glimpse 
of the pilot. His red hair stood at least a foot high; the hair shone with some fixative oil. His 
face was painted like a red Indian's with red and green circles, and black chevrons ran down his 
neck and across his shoulders.
"The village is about a half-mile from here," Vala said. "On the extreme end of the island."
Wolff wondered why she was so concerned. What did a Lord care what happened to others? She 
explained that If the Ilmawir made a successful landing, they would kill every human being on the 
island. They would then plant some of their surplus people as a colony.
The island was not entirely flat. There were rises here and there, formed by the uneven growth of 
the bladders. Wolff climbed to the top of one and looked over the fronds. The abuta was down to 
fifty feet now, settling slowly and headed directly for the village. This was a group of about one 
hundred beehive-shaped huts, built of fronds. A wall twenty feet high surrounded the village. It 
looked as if it were constructed of stones, bamboo, fronds, and some dull gray poles that could be 
the bones of colossal sea-creatures.
Men and women were stationed behind the walls and several groups were out in the open. They were 
armed with spears and bows and arrows.
Beyond the village were docks built of bamboo. Along them and on the shore were boats of various 
builds and sizes. The floater's bot-tom was a dense tangle of thick roots. There were, however, 
open-ings in it, and from several of these large stones at the ends of cables of vegetable matter 
were dropped. The stones were white, gypsum- like, and carved into flat discs. They trailed in the 
sea as they were dragged along by the island, then struck the land. The cables of some caught 
under the docks.
Other anchors fell and struck against the walls of the village. They were snagged in the tangle of 
stuff forming the high-piled walls. They bumped along the grassless ground and slammed into the 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (10 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
sides of the huts. These collapsed under the impact of the stones. At the same time, arrows were 
shot, spears and rocks dropped, and flaming ob-jects cast from the hatches onto the people below. 
Some islanders were struck down; huts started to burn. The flaming objects ex-ploded, and a dense 
black smoke rose from them.
The defenders, however, were not helpless. From a large central building came men and women with 
curious devices. They lit and released them, and they rose swiftly towards the underpart of the 
floater. They caught in the tangle of roots and burned there. Then they exploded, and fire spread 
among the roots.
The roof of a hut lifted up and fell over to one side, like the roof of a trapdoor spider. The 
walls collapsed in orderly fashion out-wards, falling to the ground and forming a petal-figure. In 
the center of the hut was a catapult, a giant bow with an arrow made from the horns of the 
creature that had provided the booms on the noses of the gliders. To it were attached a number of 
flaming bladders. The bow was released, and the burning arrow shot upwards and buried it-self deep 
within the under part of the floater.
The catapult crew began to wind the string back. A man fell from an opening in the floater and was 
followed by ten more. They came down as if parachuting. Their descent was checked by a cluster of 
bladders attached to a harness around the shoulders and chest. An arrow caught the first abutal 
just before he struck the ground, and then three more of the ten behind him were transfixed.
The survivors landed untouched a few feet from the catapult. They unstrapped their harness, and 
the bladders rose away from them. By then, they were surrounded. They fought so fiercely, one got 
to the catapult, only to be run through with two spears.
The island-floater, driven by the wind, began to pass over the vil-lage. Other stones on cables 
had been dropped, and a few had caught in the tangle of the walls without breaking. Then ropes 
fell onto the fronds and the huge loops tightened around them.
Caught at the forward end, the floater swung around so that its bulk hung over this part of the 
surface island. By then, the gliders had made their landing, not all successfully. Because of the 
density of the vegetation, the crafts had to come down upon fronds. Some were flipped over; some 
crashed through several fronds before being caught and held. Some slipped down between the fronds 
and smashed into the tough thick bushes.
But from where he stood, Wolff could see at least twenty pilots, unhurt, who were now slipping 
through the jungle. And there had to be others.
He heard his name called. Vala had come back and was standing at the foot of the hill.
"What do you intend to do?" she said angrily. "You have to take sides, Jadawin, whether you want 
to or not. The abutal will kill you."
"You may be right," he said as he came down the hill. "I wanted to get some idea of what was going 
on. I didn't want to rush blindly into this without knowing where everybody was, how the fight was 
going on. . . ."
"Always the cautious and crafty Jadawin," she said. "Well, that's all right; it shows you are no 
fool, which I already know. Believe me, you need me as much as I need you. You can't go this thing 
alone."
He followed her, and presently they came upon Rintrah, crouching under a frond. He gestured at 
them for silence. When they were be-side him, Wolff looked at where Rintrah was pointing. Five 
abutal warriors were standing not twenty yards from them. The tail of a wrecked glider rose from 
behind a crushed bush to their left. They carried small round shields of bone, javelins of bone 
tipped with bamboo, and several had bows and arrows. The bows were made of some hornlike 
substance, were short and recurved, and formed of two parts that were joined in a central socket 
of horn. The warriors were too far away for him to overhear their conference.
"What's the range of your beamer?" Vala said.
"It kills up to fifty feet," he said. "Third-degree burns for the next twenty feet, and after 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (11 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
that, second-degree burns up through a light singe to no effect."
"Now's your chance. Rush them. You can kill all five with one sweep before they know what's going 
on."
Wolff sighed. There would have been a time when he would not even have waited for Vala's urgings. 
He would have killed them all by now and been tempted to continue the work with Vala and Rin-trah. 
But he was no longer Jadawin; he was Robert Wolff. Vala would not understand this, or if she did, 
she would see his hesitation as a weakness. He did not want to kill, but he doubted that there was 
any way of forcing the abutal to call off their attack. Vala knew these people, and she was 
probably telling him the truth about them. So, like it or not, he had to take sides.
There was a yell behind them. Wolff rolled over and sat up to see three more abutal warriors about 
forty feet from them. They had burst out from behind a frond and were charging towards them, their 
javelins raised.
Wolff twisted around to face the three abutal, and he pressed on a plate on the underside of the 
three-foot long barrel. A dazzling white ray, pencil-thick, traced across the bellies of all 
three. The vegetation between and in back of them smoked. The three fell forward, the jav-elins 
dropping from their hands, and they slid on the grass, face down.
Wolff rose to one knee, turned, and faced the five. The two archers stopped and took aim. Wolff 
dropped them first, then the other three. He continued to crouch and looked about him for others 
who might have been attracted by the cries. Only the wind through the fronds and the hushed cries 
and muffled explosions of the battle at the vil-lage could be heard.
The odor of burned flesh sickened him. He rose and turned over the three corpses, then the five. 
He did not think that any were still alive, but he wanted to make sure. Each was almost cut in 
half by the beam. The skin along the gashes was crisped under the blood. There was not much blood, 
since the energy of the beam, absorbed by the bodies, had cooked their lungs and intestines. Their 
bowels, contracting, had ejected their contents.
Vala looked at the beamer. She was very curious but knew better than to ask Wolff if she could 
handle it. "You have two settings," she said. "What can it do on full power?"
"It can cut through a ten-foot slab of steel," he replied. "But the charge won't last more than 
sixty seconds. On half-power, it can project for ten minutes before needing recharging."
She looked at his pockets, and he smiled. He had no intention of telling her how many fresh 
charges were in his pockets. 
"What happened to your weapons?" he said. 
Vala cursed and said, "They were stolen while we slept. I don't know whether Urizen or that slimy 
Theotormon did it."
He started to walk towards the battle; the two followed close behind. The island above threw them 
into a pale shadow which would be deepened soon when the night-bringing moon covered this side of 
the planet. Ilmawir, men and women both, were still dropping out of the openings in the bottom. 
Others, buoyed up by larger clus-ters of bladders, were working on the bottom as fire-fighters. 
They used many-faceted objects that, when squeezed, spurted out water. "Those are living sea-
creatures," she said. "Amphibians. They travel on land by spurting out jets of water and rolling 
with the thrusts."
Wolff set the beamer at full power. Whenever they came near a rope tangled in a tree or a stone 
anchor, he cut the cable loose. Three times he came across abutal and set the beamer on half-
power. By the time he was a few yards from the village, he had severed forty cables and killed 
twenty-two men and women.
"A lucky thing for us you came when you did," Vala said. "I don't think we could have driven them 
off if you hadn't arrived."
Wolff shrugged. He ejected a power-pack and slipped another of the little cylinders into the 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (12 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
breech. He had six left, and if this contin-ued he would soon be out. But there was nothing he 
could do to con-serve them.
The village was surrounded on the land side by about ninety abu-tal. Apparently, those who had 
dropped into the village had been wiped out, but the villagers were busy putting out fires. 
However, they no longer had to worry about attack from directly overhead. The Ilmawir island had 
been affected by the cutting of so many ca-bles. It had slipped on downwind by a quarter-mile and 
only because a hundred other ropes and anchors had been used had it managed to keep from losing 
the surface-island altogether.
Wolff beamed the group of officers who were standing on top of the only hill near the village. 
Presently, the other abutal became aware of what was happening. Half left the siege to surround 
the hill. The area bristled with spears and arrows. The Lords would have been open to a 
concentrated fire of arrows, but they were protected behind a group of four white stone idols on 
the hill.
Vala said, "They're on the defensive now. If they don't know it now, they soon will. And that will 
be good for us. Perhaps. . ."
She was silent for a while. Wolff shot three men as they ran to-wards a hollow in the hill. He 
said, "Perhaps what?"
"Our beloved father left a message for us on this island. He told us some of what we have to do if 
we hope to get within his castle. Apparently, we have to find the gates which lead to him. There 
are none on this island. He says there is a pair on another island, but he did not say just where. 
We have to find them by ourselves, so I was thinking. . ."
A roar arose from the abutals, and the front lines rushed the hill. The archers sent a covering 
fire of at least thirty arrows per volley. Vala and Rintrah cowered behind an idol, as Wolff had 
told them to do. Much as he hated to expend his power, he was forced to do so. He put the beamer 
on full and shot over the heads of the front lines. 
Smoke arose from vegetation and flesh alike as he described a circle with the white ray. The 
archers had had to expose themselves to get good shots, and so most fell.
Arrows rattled around Wolff, leaping off the stone idols. One creased his shoulder; another 
ricocheted off stone and flew between bis legs. Then, there were no more arrows. The abutal in the 
second ranks, seeing those crumple before them, smelling the fried flesh, wavered. Wolff began on 
them, and they fled back into the jungle. 
"You were thinking?" he said to Vala.
"We could search a thousand years, using this island as our ship, and not find one island that has 
the gates. Perhaps that is Father's idea. He would enjoy seeing us in a futile search, enjoy our 
despair. And the friction and murder that such long association would make inevitable among us. 
But if we were on an abuta, which would enable us not only to travel faster but to see far more 
from its altitude . . ." 
"It's a fine idea," he said. "How do we talk the abutal into letting us accompany them? And what 
guarantee is there that they would not turn on us the first chance they got?"
"You have forgotten much about your younger sister. How could you, of all who have loved me, not 
remember how persuasive I can be?"
She stood up and shouted at the seemingly uninhabited jungle. For a while there was no response. 
She repeated her demands. Presently, an officer walked out from behind a frond. He was a tall well-
built man in his early thirties, handsome behind the garish circles on his face. Besides the black 
chevrons down neck and shoulders, he was decorated with a painted seabird on his chest. This was 
an iiphtarz, and it indicated a commander of the glider force. Behind him came his wife, clad in a 
short skirt of red and blue seabird feathers, her red hair coiled on top of her head, her face 
painted with green and white lozenges, a necklace of fingerbones around her neck, an iiphtarz 
painted across her breasts, and three concentric circles of crimson, black, and yellow painted 
around her navel. As was the custom among the abutal, she accompanied her husband in battle. If he 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (13 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
died, it was her duty to attack his killers until she slew them or died her-self.
The two advanced up the hill until Wolff told them to come no further. Vala began talking, and the 
man began to smile. His wife, however, watched Vala closely and scowled throughout the 
conver-sation.
IV
DUGARNN, THE OFFICER, CAPITULATED ONLY WHEN CERTAIN TERMS had been agreed upon. He refused to 
leave the island until he had gotten at least part of what the Ilmawir had intended to take when 
they attacked. Vala did not hesitate to promise him that the de-fenders' domestic fowl and animals 
(sea-rats and small seals) would be his prize of war. Moreover, the abutal could mutilate the 
corpses of their enemies and scalp them.
The surface-islanders, who called themselves Friiqan, objected when they heard these terms. Wolff 
told their leaders that if they did not accept, they would find the war continued. And he, Wolff, 
would take no sides this time. Surlily, they said they would do as he wished. The abutal stripped 
the villagers of everything they considered valu-able.
The other Lords-Luvah, Enion, Ariston, Tharmas, and Palamabron-had been in the village when the 
attack started. They were very surprised to see him, and they could not hide their envy of his 
beamer. Only Luvah seemed glad to see him. Luvah, the runt of the lot, was sandy-haired and fine-
featured except for a broad and full mouth. His eyes were a deep blue, and he had a faint milky 
way of freckles across the bridge of his nose and cheeks. He threw his arms around Wolff and 
hugged him and even wept a little. Wolff permitted the embrace because he did not believe that 
Luvah would take the chance to stab him. As children, the two had always been close, and had much 
in common, both being imaginative and inclined to let others do and think as they wished. In fact, 
Luvah had never in-dulged in the Lords' deadly game of trying to dispossess or slay the others.
"How did our father manage to entice you out from your world, where you were safe and happy?" 
Wolff said.
Luvah grinned crookedly and said, "I might ask you the same thing. Perhaps he played the same 
trick on you as on me. He sent a messenger, a glowing hexaculum, and it said that it was sent by 
you. You wanted me to come visit you; you were lonely and wished to talk again to the one member 
of your family who did not want to kill you. So, after taking what I thought were good 
precautions, I left my universe. I entered what I thought was your gate, only to find myself on 
this island."
Wolff shook his head and said, "You were always too impetuous, brother, too rash. Yet, I feel 
honored that you would forsake your safety to visit me. Only. . ."
"Only I should have been much more careful, more sure that the messenger was from you. At another 
time, I might have been. But at the moment the hexaculum arrived, I was thinking of you and 
long-ing for you. Even we Lords have our weaknesses, you know."
Wolff was silent for a while, watching the exultant Ilmawir carry away fowl, animals, necklaces, 
and rings of sea-jade. Then he said, "We are in the most desperate situation we have ever faced, 
Luvah. The greatest peril, of course, is our father. But almost as deadly are those on whom we 
have to depend most. Despite their word of honor, they will always need watching. Now I propose 
that we sup-port each other. When I sleep, you watch. When you sleep, I stand guard."
Luvah smiled one-sidedly again and said, "And when you sleep, you will keep one eye open to watch 
me, heh, brother?"
Wolff frowned, and Luvah said hastily, "Do not be angry, Jadawin. You and I have managed to 
survive so long because we never fully gave our trust. With the best of reasons. How sad it is 
that all of us, our sisters, brothers, and cousins, once lived and studied and played together in 
innocence and even love. Yet, today, we are as hungry wolves at each others' throats. And why, I 
ask you? Why? I will tell you. It is because the Lords are mad. They think they are gods, when all 
the time they are only human beings, really no better than these savages here. Only they happen to 
be heir to a great power, a science and technology which they use without under-standing the 
principles behind it. They are as evil children with toys that create whole worlds and destroy 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (14 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
whole worlds. The great and wise men who devised the toys have long since died; knowledge and 
science have died out; and the good inherent in the cosmic powers is twisted for their benefit and 
theirs only."
"I know that well, brother," Wolff said. "Better than you, per-haps, since I was once as selfish 
and vicious as those others. Yet I underwent an experience which I will tell you about sometime. 
It changed me into a human being-I hope-into a being only you have the ability to appreciate."
The Ilmawir had dropped great balloon-like ladders with weights on them from the abuta. The loot 
was tied to these and floated back up along guideropes into the hatches in the bottom of the 
island. Those gliders worth repairing were also returned to the floater. When the stripping of the 
Friiqan was done, the abutal ascended. Wolff rode up in a harness attached to a pair of bladders. 
He held his beamer ready, since now the abutal had him in a position where they could attempt 
murder and have some hope of success. However, no moves were made. He rose through the opening and 
was seized by two grinning women. They dragged him to one side and unharnessed him. The bladders 
were taken into the dun interior of a large cham-ber, where other bladders were stored.
When all the Lords were landed, they were led by Dugarnn and his woman, Sythaz, up a winding 
flight of steps to the upper part of the island. The stairs were made of very light, paper-thin 
but strong material. This was the hardened shell of gas-bladders. On the abuta, where weight was 
critical, everything was as light as possible. This consideration had even affected the language 
as he was to discover. Although the speech differed little in basic vocabulary from the par-ent, 
it had undergone some sound changes. And new words relating to weight, shape, flexibility, size, 
and vertical and horizontal direction had arisen. These were used as classifiers in a sense 
unknown to the pristine speakers. Indeed, no noun and few adjectives could be used without 
accompanying classifiers. In addition, a detailed nautical and aeronavigational terminology had 
arisen.
The stairwell was a shaft cut through a hard tangle of roots. On coming out at its top, he found 
himself on the floor of a sort of am-phitheater. The floor was made of broad strips of bladder-
covering, and the sloping walls were composed of huge bladders tied together with roots. There was 
only one building on the great deck, a thatch-roofed opensided longhouse. This was the social and 
recreational building. It had flat stones on which each family cooked the meals. Domestic fowl and 
sea-rats ran loose, and meat-seals played in an inch-deep pool of water near the center.
Sythaz, the commander's wife, showed them where they would live. These quarters consisted of 
cubicles cut out of the roots and floored and walled with bladder-shells. Openings were cut in the 
floor and descent was made by a portable ladder. The only light came from through the hatch or 
from small fish-oil lamps. There was just enough room to take two steps one way and two another. 
The beds were coffin-shaped holes in the wall in which were mattresses of feathers stuffed into 
sealskin. Most of the daily and nightly activity took place on the "maindeck." There was 
absolutely no privacy ex-cept in the chief's bridge.
Wolff had expected the abutal to hoist anchor and sail off at once. Dugarnn said that they must 
wait awhile. For one thing, the island needed more altitude before it could start out over the 
open seas. The bacteria that generated gas in the bladders worked very fast when fed nutrient, but 
it still would take two days before the blad-ders were filled enough for Dugarnn to consider it 
safe to cast loose. 
Secondly, the invasion had cost the abutal a relatively staggering number of casualties. There 
were just not enough people to work the island efficiently. So, Dugarnn proposed something that 
the abutal had not had to do for a long time. The shortage of population would be made up by 
recruiting from the Friiqan. After making sure his "guests" knew where they were to be quartered, 
Dugarnn went back to the surface. Wolff, curious, accompanied him. Vala insisted on going with 
him. Whether this was to satisfy her curiosity or just to keep an eye on him, Wolff did not know. 
Probably, she had both mo-tives.
Dugarnn explained to the chief of the Friiqan what he wanted. The chief, dispirited, waved a hand 
to indicate that he did not care what happened. Dugarnn gathered the survivors together and made 
his offer. To Wolff's surprise, many volunteered. Vala told him that the two peoples were thorough 
enemies, but that the Friiqan had lost face. Moreover, many of the young considered an aerial life 
as ro-mantic.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (15 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Dugarnn looked the volunteers over and picked out those who had distinguished themselves during 
the fighting. He chose more women than men, especially those with children. There was an initial 
cere-mony of ritual torture, which consisted of lightly burning the candi-date on his or her 
groin. Normally, a captured enemy was tortured to death unless he exhibited exceptional stoicism 
and bravery. Then he could be initiated into the tribe.
In emergencies, such as now, the torture was only token.
Later, after the island had set sail, the initiates would go through a ceremony in which each 
would mingle his blood with that of an Ilmawir. This prevented revenge from the surface-people, 
since blood-brotherhood was sacred.
"There's another reason besides needing more crew," Vala said. "The abutal-in fact both surface 
and air islanders-have a tendency to inbreed. To avoid this, prisoners are sometimes adopted into 
the tribe."
She was very friendly with Wolff now and insisted on being with him every moment. She had even 
resumed calling him wivkrath, the Lords' term for "darling." She leaned against him every time she 
had a chance and once even gave him a light kiss on the cheek. Wolff did not respond. He had not 
forgotten, even after 500 years, that they had been lovers and yet she had tried to kill him.
Wolff set out for the area of the gate through which he had en-tered. Vala went with him. To her 
questions, he answered that he wanted to talk to Theotormon once more.
"That sea-slug! What can he have that you would want?"
"Information, perhaps."
They came to the gate. Theotormon was not in sight. Wolff walked along the edge of the island, 
noting that here and there the land sank slightly under his weight. Apparently, the bladders were 
not so thick in these places.
"How many of these islands are there on this planet and what is the maximum size?" he said.
"I do not know. We have sighted two since we've been here, and the Friiqan say that there are many 
more. They speak of the Mother of Islands, a relatively huge island that they claim to have heard 
of. There are many aerial islands, too, but none larger than the Ilma-wirs'. Why do you want to 
talk of boring things like that, when we have ourselves to discuss?"
"Like what?" he said.
She faced him, so close that her upraised lips almost touched his chin. "Why can't we forget what 
happened to us? After all, that was a long time ago, when we were much younger and therefore not 
so wise."
"I doubt that you've changed," he said.
She smiled and said, "How would you know? Let me prove that I am different now."
She put her arms around him and placed her head on his chest.
"Different in everything but one. I loved you once, and now that I see you again, I realize I've 
never really stopped loving you."
"Even when you tried to murder me in my bed?" he said.
"Oh, that! Darling, I thought you were with that loathsome and conniving Alagraada. I thought you 
were betraying me. Can you blame me because I was crazed with jealousy? You know how terri-bly 
possessive I am."
"I know only too well." He pushed her away and said, "Even as a child, you were selfish. All Lords 
are selfish, but few to the degree to which you were. I cannot see now why I ever loved you."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (16 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"You toad!" she cried. "You loved me because I am Vala. That's all, just that I am Vala."
He shook his head and said, "That may have been true once. But it is not true any longer. Nor will 
it ever be true again."
"You love another! Do I know her? It's not Anana, not my stupid murderous sister."
"No," he said. "Anana is murderous, but she's not stupid. She didn't fall into Urizen's trap. I 
don't see her here. Or has something happened to her? Is she dead?"
Vala shrugged, turned away, and said, "I haven't heard of her for three hundred years. But your 
concern shows that you do care for her. Anana! Who would have thought it?"
Wolff did not try to change her mind. He did not think that it was wise to mention Chryseis, even 
though Vala might never have con-tact with her. There was no use taking a chance.
Vala spun around and said, "What happened to that Earth girl?"
"What Earth girl?" he said, taken aback at her viciousness.
"What Earth girl?" she mimicked. "I mean that Chryseis, the mor-tal you abducted from Earth some 
two and a half millennia ago. From a region the Earthlings call Troy or something like that. You 
made her immortal, and she became your mistress."
"Along with quite a few thousand others," he said. "Why pick on her?"
"Oh, I know, I know. You have really become degenerate, my brother Wolff-Jadawin."
"So you know my Earth name, the name by which I prefer to be called? And how much else do you know 
about me? And why?"
"I've always made it my business to have as much information about the Lords as it is possible to 
get," she said. "That is why I have stayed alive so long."
"And why so many others have died."
Her voice became soft again, and she smiled at him. "There's no reason for you to pick a quarrel 
with me. Why can't we let bygones be bygones?"
"Who picked a quarrel? No, there's no reason why bygones can't be just that, provided they are 
bygones. But the Lords never re-member a good turn or forget an injury. And until you've convinced 
me otherwise, I will regard you as the same old Vala. As beautiful, maybe even more beautiful, but 
still with a black and rotten soul." 
She tried to smile. "You always were too blunt. Maybe that was one reason why I loved you so much. 
And you were more of a man than the others. You were the greatest of all my lovers."
She waited for him to return the compliment. Instead, he said, "Love is what makes a lover. I did 
love you. Did."
He walked away from her along the edge of the shore. He looked back from time to time. She was 
following him at a distance of twenty feet. Now and then, the earth sank beneath his feet. He 
stopped for her to catch up with him and said, "There must be many caves on the bottom. How can 
Theotormon be called out?"
"He can't. There are many caves, yes. Sometimes a whole group of bladders die, either from 
disease, old age, or from being eaten by a fish which finds them tasty. Then caverns exist for a 
while, al-though they're eventually filled up by new growths."
Wolff filed this information away for possible use. If things went too badly, a man could always 
take refuge under the island. Vala must have guessed what he was thinking-a gift he had found 
irritat-ing when they had been mates-and she said, "I wouldn't go under there. The water swarms 
with man-eaters." 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (17 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"How does Theotormon survive?"
"I don't know. Maybe he's too fast and strong for the fish. After all, he's adapted for that kind 
of life-if you want to call it a life."
Wolff decided that he would have to give up on Theotormon. He walked back into the jungle with 
Vala close behind. By now he per-mitted her to be at his back. She needed him too much to kill 
him. 
He had gone only a few yards when he was knocked down from behind. At first, he thought that she 
had leaped upon him. He rolled away from her, trying to draw his beamer from its holster at the 
same time. He saw then that she had been propelled into him by another. The huge glistening wet 
body of Theotormon was flying at him. The bulk came flat down on him, and his breath was knocked 
out by the impact of 400 pounds. Then Theotormon was sitting on top of him and striking savagely 
at his face with the flippers. The first blow knocked him half-unconscious; the second drove him 
into darkness.
V
Although he had no recollection of the few seconds after his senses had dissolved, he must not 
have been entirely unconscious. He had gotten his two arms out from under the pinning mass and 
seized the flippers. Slippery as they were, he managed to keep a grip on them. He regained full 
consciousness just as he yanked savagely on them, so strongly that Theotormon shrieked with pain 
and half-rose. That was enough for Wolff. He shoved against the bulging paunch and thrust himself 
partly free. He bent his free right leg and kicked. Now it was Theotormon's turn to gasp for 
breath.
Wolff rose to his feet and kicked hard again, his shoe driving into the weakest part of the 
monster, his head. Theotormon, caught on the forehead, slumped back. Wolff kicked him in the jaw 
and then half-buried another kick in the paunch. Theotormon, the moss-green eyes glazed, fell 
back, his legs doubled under him.
Yet he was not out, and when Wolff advanced on him to finish his work, Theotormon kicked with a 
huge foot. Wolff caught the foot and so denied its full impact, but he was shoved backwards. 
Theotor-mon arose, crouched, and leaped again. Wolff also leaped forward, his right knee driving 
upward. It caught Theotormon on his chin, and both fell to the ground again. Wolff scrambled up, 
felt for his beamer, and found it was not in his holster. His brother also rose. They faced each 
other at a distance of six feet, both breathing heav-ily and just becoming aware of the pain of 
the blows they had taken. 
Wolff's natural strength had been increased twofold by artificial means, and his bones had been 
toughened, without being made brit-tle, to match the muscular strength. However, all Lords had 
under-gone the same treatment, so that when they engaged in physical combat among themselves, the 
original strength was, relatively, the same. Theotormon's body had been reshaped by Urizen, and he 
outweighed his brother by at least one hundred and sixty pounds. Apparently, Urizen had not 
increased Theotormon's power by much, since Wolff had been able to match him so far. Weight meant 
much in a fight, though, and it was this that Wolff had to watch for. He must not give Theotormon 
another chance to use it.
Theotormon, his wind having returned, growled, "I will batter you into unconsciousness again, 
Jadawin. And then I will carry you into the sea, dive into a cavern, and hold you while my pets 
eat you alive."
Wolff looked around. Vala was standing to one side and smiling very curiously. He did not waste 
his breath or time asking for her aid. He charged Theotormon, leaped high into the air, and kicked 
out with both feet. His brother had frozen for a second at the unex-pected attack, then he ducked. 
Wolff had hoped that he would. He kicked low, but Theotormon was very fast. Wolff's shoes came 
down hard on his back, the shoes slipped on the wet back, and Wolff skidded down the back. He 
whirled even as he shot off Theotormon. The monster turned and leaped, expecting, or hoping to 
find Wolff flat on his back. Instead, he was caught by another kick in the jaw.
This tune, Theotormon did not get up. His dark seal fur red with blood from a torn lip and gashed 
jaw and mashed nose, he lay breathing noisily. Wolff kicked him several times in the ribs to make 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (18 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:39 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
sure he stayed down.
Vala applauded Wolff and said, "Well done. You are the man I once loved-still love."
"And why didn't you help me?" he said.
"You didn't need it. I knew you'd knock that bag of blubber out of his pinhead-mind."
Wolff looked through the grass for his beamer but could not find it. Vala did not move from where 
she stood. She said, "Why didn't you use your knife?"
"I would have if it had been necessary. But I want him alive. We're taking him along with us."
Her eyes widened. "In the name of Los, why?" 
"Because he has certain abilities we may be able to use." 
Theotormon groaned and sat up. Wolff kept an eye on him but continued his search. Finally, he 
said, "All right, Vala. Hand it over."
She reached within her robe and brought out the beamer. "I could kill you now."
"Do it then, but don't waste my time with idle threats. You don't scare me."
"All right. Have it then," she said fiercely. She raised the beamer and for a moment Wolff thought 
he had goaded her too far. After all, the Lords were proud, far too proud, and overly swift to 
react to in-sult.
But she pointed the beamer carefully at Theotormon, and a white rod of light touched the end of 
one flipper. Smoke curled up; burnt flesh stank. Theotormon fell backwards, his mouth open, his 
eyes staring.
Vala, smiling, reversed the weapon and handed it to Wolff. He swore and said, "There was no reason 
but viciousness for that, Vala. Viciousness and stupidity. I tell you, he might have been the 
difference between death and life for us."
She walked-strolled-over to the huge wetness and bent over to look at him. She raised the flipper, 
the end of which was charred.
"He's not dead-yet. You can save him, if you want to. But you'll have to cut off the flipper. 
It'll be cooked halfway to his shoulder." Wolff walked away without further comment. He recruited 
a num-ber of Ilmawir to help him get Theotormon on the island. Hoisted by four bladders, 
Theotormon rose up through a hatch. There he was pulled to one side and stretched out on the floor 
of a "brig." This was a cage with very light but steel-strong bars of laminated bladder-shells. 
Wolff did the surgery himself. After forcing a drugged drink, provided by the Ilmawir wizard, down 
Theotormon's throat, he ex-amined a number of saws and other surgical tools. These were the 
property of the wizard, who took care of both the spiritual and phys-ical welfare of his people.
With several saws fitted with the teeth of a sharklike fish, Wolff cut off the flipper just below 
the shoulder. The flesh went quickly; the bones offered enough resistance to dull two saws. The 
wizard thrust the red-hot end of a torch against the huge wound to seal off the blood vessels. 
Moreover, the wizard applied a salve to the burn, as-suring Wolff that it had saved the lives of 
men who had been burned over half their bodies.
Vala watched the entire operation with a slight sneer. Once, her gaze met Wolff's as he looked up 
from his work, and she laughed. He shuddered, although she had a beautiful and striking laugh. It 
re-minded him of a gong he had once heard while voyaging down the Guzirit river in the land of 
Khamshem on the third level of the planet of his own universe. It had golden notes to it, that was 
the only way to describe the laughter. The gong had probably been of bronze, hanging in the dark 
adytum of an ancient and crumbling temple of jade and chalcedony, muffled by stone and the green 
density of the jungle. It was bronze, but it gave forth golden vibrations. And this was how the 
laughter of Vala sounded, bronze and golden and also with something dark and smoldering in it.
She said, "He'll never be able to grow a new flipper unless you keep peeling off the scab. You 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (19 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
know regeneration won't take place if there's scar tissue."
"You let me worry about those things," he said. "You've inter-fered enough."
She sniffed and went up the narrow corkscrewing staircase to the maindeck. Wolff waited awhile. 
After it seemed reasonable that Theotormon was not going to die of shock, he also went up onto the 
deck. The Friiqan adoptees were being trained for their new duties, and he watched them for a 
while. He asked Dugarnn how the great gas-plants were fed, since it seemed to him that the 
nutrient would weigh much. There were at least four thousand of the bladders, each as large as the 
cell in a zeppelin.
Dugarnn explained. A growing bladder did not have to be fed. But when it matured, it died. The 
skin would become dry and hard but was specially treated to preserve flexibility and 
expandability. New colonies of gas-generating bacteria were placed therein. These had to be fed, 
but the amount of gas they produced was very high in propor-tion to the amount of food they 
needed. This was mainly the heart-stuff of growing plants, although the bacteria could work on 
fish, meat, or decaying vegetable matter.
Dugarnn left him, saying there was much work to be done. The shadow of the moon passed, and full 
daylight returned. The island began to tug harder against the ropes. Finally, Dugarnn decided that 
it was buoyant enough to cast loose. The stone anchors were drawn up, and the ropes around the 
fronds cut. The island drifted past them and slowly rose. It settled at a hundred and fifty feet 
for a while. Then, as the gas continued to fill the bladders, it rose to five hundred feet. 
Dugarnn ordered the bacteria food to be reduced. He inspected the entire island, a trip which took 
several hours, and returned to the bridge. Wolff went down to see how Theotormon was coming along. 
The wizard reported that his patient was doing even better than could be expected.
Wolff climbed up a flight of steps to the top of the walls. Here he found Luvah and one of his 
cousins, Palamabron. The latter was a well-built and handsome man, darkest of the family. He wore 
a conical hat with hexagonal rim, both decorated with emerald-green owls. His cloak had a turned-
up collar in back and epaulets in the shape of lions couchant. The fabric was a green shimmering 
stuff with a pattern of trefoils pierced with a bleeding lance. His shirt was electric-blue and 
piped with white skulls. A great belt of leather was bossed with gold and set with diamonds, 
emeralds, and topazes. His baggy pants were white-and-black striped and calf-length. The boots 
were of some pale soft red leather.
He made a striking and handsome figure, of which he was well aware. He nodded at Wolff's greeting, 
then left. Wolff, watching him, chuckled. He said, "Palamabron never did care too much for me. I 
would worry if he did."
"They won't do anything as long as we're on this aerial island," Luvah said. "At least, they won't 
unless this search takes too long. I wonder how long it will take? We could float forever over 
these seas and never happen across the gates."
Wolff looked at the red skies and the green-blue oceans and at the island they had left, a piece 
of unattached land seemingly no larger than a penny now. White birds with enormous wings and 
yellow curved beaks and orange-ringed eyes flew over them and gave forth shrill ululations. One 
settled down not far from where they stood and cocked its head and fastened an unblinking green 
eye upon them. Wolff remembered the ravens of his own world. Did some of these great birds have a 
slice of human brain within their unbird-like-sized craniums? Were they watching and listening for 
Urizen? Their father had some means of observing them, otherwise he would not be get-ting full 
enjoyment from this game.
"Dugarnn told me that the abuta is pushed always by the same wind. It takes it around and around 
this world of water in a spiraling path. Eventually, it covers every area."
"But the island that has the gates may always be on a different course. Always out of sight." 
Wolff shrugged and said, "Then we won't find it." 
"Perhaps that is the way Urizen wants it. He would like us to go mad from frustration and boredom 
and slit each other's throat."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (20 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Perhaps. However, the abuta can change course when its people so wish. It's a slow process, but 
it can be done. Also. . ."
He was silent for so long that Luvah became uneasy. "Also what?"
"Our good father has placed other creatures here besides man, birds, a few animals, and fish. I 
understand that some of the islands, water and air alike, are populated by rather vicious flying 
creatures." 
Vala called from below, saying that their meals were prepared. They went down to eat at one end of 
the chief's table. Here they heard what Dugarnn was planning. He was ready to thrust the abuta off 
course. Somewhere to the southwest was another floating island, that of their most bitter enemies, 
the Waerish. Now that the Ilmawir had Wolff and his beamer, they could join battle for the last 
time with the Waerish. It would be a glorious victory for the Ilmawir; the Waerish would be 
swallowed up by the ocean forever.
Wolff agreed, since there was little else he could do at that mo-ment. He hoped that the Waerish 
would not be found, since he wanted to conserve the power packs of the beamer for more impor-tant 
matters.
The bright red days and pale red nights that followed were many and unvaried. They were, at first, 
however, busy for Wolff. He learned all he could about the management of the abuta. He studied the 
mores of the tribe and the idiosyncrasies of each member. The other Lords, with the exception of 
Vala, showed little interest in any of these. They spent their tune at the bow, looking for the 
island that was supposed to contain the gates of Urizen. Or they complained to the abutal or to 
each other. And always one Lord was insulting an-other, although in a way that barely avoided an 
outright challenge from the insulted.
Wolff became more disgusted with them as each day passed. Ex-cept for Luvah, none was worth 
saving. They had an arrogance that displeased the abutal. Wolff warned the Lords against this many 
times, saying that their lives were dependent upon the natives. Should these be too antagonized, 
they were likely to dump the Lords over-board. His advice was taken for a while, and then the 
lifelong belief in their near-divinity would take hold of the Lords again.
Wolff spent much time on the bridge with Dugarnn. It was neces-sary to do this to smooth out the 
ridges of ill-feeling his brothers and cousins raised. He also went into the glider-training 
school, since the abutal could not fully give a man admiration and respect unless he had won his 
wings. Wolff asked Dugarnn why this was so. To Wolff, the gliders seemed more of a hindrance and 
unnecessary expense and trouble than anything else.
Dugarnn was astonished at the question. He groped for words, then said, "Why, it's just because 
... it is. That's all. No man is a man until he makes his first solo landing. As for your 
implications that gliders aren't worth the trouble, I deny those. When the day comes that we find 
an enemy, you will eat your words."
The next day, Wolff went up in a glider. He got into a tandem seat instruction ship, which was 
hauled aloft at the end of a cable borne by two great bladders. The craft rose upward until the 
abuta was a small brown oval below. Here the swifter upper winds carried them along until they 
were several miles ahead of the island. Then the in-structor, Dugarnn, unlocked the Lift 
mechanism. The bladders were then hauled down back to the abuta with a slim but strong cord, to be 
used again.
As Jadawin, Wolff had flown many types of craft. On Earth, he had gotten a private pilot's license 
qualifying him to fly single-motor craft. He had not flown for many years now, but he had not 
forgotten all his old skills, either. Dugarnn let him handle the controls for a while as they 
spiraled downwards. He tapped Wolff's shoulders and nodded approvingly, then took the controls 
over. The glider came in upwind, sideslipping at the last moment and landing on one side of the 
broad deck.
Wolff took five more lessons, during the last two of which he made the landings. On the fourth 
day, he soloed. Dugarnn was very impressed, saying that most students required twice that time. 
Wolff asked what happened if a soloing student missed the abuta. How could the islanders pick him 
up?
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (21 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Dugarnn smiled and lifted his hands, palms up, and said that the unfortunate was left behind. No 
more was said about that, although Wolff noted that Dugarnn had insisted that the beamer be left 
on the island when Wolff had gone up. Wolff had placed it in the care of Luvah, whom he did not 
think would misuse it. Not to the extent the others would, anyway.
Thereafter, Wolff went bare-chested, as befitted a man who wore a painted iiphtarz upon his chest. 
Dugarnn insisted that Wolff also be-come a blood-brother. On hearing this, the other Lords 
scoffed.
"What, Jadawin, son of the great Lord Urizen, direct descendant of the Los himself, be brother to 
these painted ignorant savages? Have you no pride, brother?"
"Brother me no brother, brothers," he replied. "These people have at least not tried to slay me. 
That is more than I can say for any of you except Luvah. And they are not to be despised by the 
likes of you. They are masters of their own little worlds. You are homeless and trapped like dull-
witted fat geese. So do not be so ready to scorn me or them. You would be far better off if you 
would condescend to make friends with them. The time may come when you will need them very much."
Theotormon, his flipper pink and half-grown out now, was squat-ting in the inch-deep pool. He 
said, "The whole accursed lot of you are doomed; long may you scream when Urizen finally closes 
the trap on you. But this I will say for Jadawin. He is twice the man any of you are. And I wish 
him luck. I wish he may get to our beloved father and exact vengeance from him, while the rest of 
you die hor-ribly."
"Shut your ugly mouth, you toad!" Ariston cried. "It is bad enough to have to look at you. My 
stomach wrings itself out when I see you. To have to hear you, you abomination, is too much. I 
wish that I were in my own lovely world again and had you at my feet and in chains. Then I would 
make you talk, monsterling, so fast your words would be a gabble for mercy. And then I would feed 
you inch by inch to some special pets of my own, oh, beautiful little pets."
"And I," Theotormon said, "will pitch you over the side of this floating island some night and 
will laugh as I watch you flailing at the air and hear your last scream."
"Enough of this childish bickering," Vala said. "Don't you know now that when you quarrel among 
yourselves, you delight the heart of our father? He would love to see you tear each other apart."
"Vala is right," Wolff said. "You call yourselves Lords, makers and rulers of entire universes. 
Yet you behave like spoiled, and evil, brats. If you hate each other, remember that the one who 
taught you this horrible hatred, and who now has set the stage for your death, still lives. He 
must die. If we have to die ourselves in making sure of his death, so be it. But at least try to 
live with dignity and so dignify your deaths."
Suddenly, Ariston strode towards Wolff. His face was red, and his mouth was twisted. He towered 
over Wolff, though he was not as broad. He waved his arms, and the saffron robes, set with scarlet 
and green imbrications, flapped.
"I have put up with enough from you, detested brother!" he howled. "Your insults and your 
insinuations that you are better than us now because you have become less than us-one of those 
animals -have enraged me. I hate you as I have always hated you, hated you far more than the 
others. You are nothing-a ... a ... foundling!"
With this insult, the worst the Lords could conceive, for they could think of nothing worse than 
not to be of the true lineage of Lords, he began to draw his knife. Wolff bent his knees, ready to 
fight if he had to but hoping he would not. It would look very bad for the Lords if they brawled 
in front of the abutal.
At that moment, a cry arose from the gondola on the prow of the island. Drums began to beat, and 
the abutal dropped what they were doing. Wolff caught hold of a man running by and asked what the 
alarm was about.
The man pointed to the left, indicating something in the sky. Wolff turned to see an object, dark 
and fuzzy against the red dome of the sky.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (22 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
VI
Even as wolff ran towards the bridge, another object ap-peared. Before he had reached the gondola, 
he saw two more. They made him prickle with uneasiness and a sense of strangeness. He could not 
identify the reason for this at first. But before he reached the gondola, he knew. The objects 
were not drifting with the wind but were coming in at right angles to it. Something was propelling 
them.
On the bridge, Dugarnn told Wolff what he wanted of him. He was to stay by his side until ordered 
otherwise. As for the other Lords, now was the time for them to earn their keep. Dugarnn had heard 
them boasting of their prowess. Let them put their swords where their mouths were-or words to that 
effect.
Communication on the island-surface during a battle was by drum. Orders to those inside the 
island, stationed on the ports on the sides or the hatches at the bottom, were transmitted by 
another means. Throughout the abuta was a network of thin narrow pipes. These were fashioned from 
the bones of the girrel fish, and had the prop-erty of transmitting sound quite well. The abutal 
could use voice over the girrel-bones up to seventy-five feet. Past this distance, a code was 
rapped out by a tiny hammer.
Wolff watched Dugarnn issue orders, which were performed swiftly by the well-trained people. Even 
children were carrying out duties within their capabilities, and so relieving adults for more 
difficult and dangerous posts. To Vala, who had come up to the bridge, Wolff said, "We so-called 
divine Lords could learn much about cooperation from these so-called savages."
"No doubt," Vala replied. She looked out across the oceans and said, "There are six now. What are 
they?"
"Dugarnn mentioned the Nichiddor, but he had no tune to tell me what they are. Be patient. We'll 
know soon enough. Too soon, I sus-pect."
The gliders had been fastened to the lift-bladders. The pilots got into the cockpits while the 
"ground" crews fitted the explosive bladder-bombs to the wings. Then the wizard, clad in robes and 
a mask, passed along the gliders. He carried a double-ankh with which he blessed the pilots and 
their craft. Between each pair of gliders, he stopped to shake the double-ankh at the ufo and hurl 
maledictions. Dugarnn became impatient but dared not hurry the wizard. As soon as the last of the 
twenty airmen had been touched by the ankh and prayed over, Dugarnn gave the signal. The bladders 
with their white-winged cargoes were released. They soared up and up until they had attained a 
height of a thousand feet above the island.
Dugarnn said, "They'll release themselves as soon as the Nichid-dor nests get within range. Los 
guard them, since few will get through. But if the nests can be destroyed. . ."
"There are eight now," Wolff said. The nearest was a half-mile away. Ball-shaped, it had a 
diameter of about three hundred yards. The fuzzy appearance had been caused by the many uneven 
projec-tions of plants. These grew out to conceal the gas-bladders that formed irregular 
concentric rings. On the surface of the spheroid nest were hundreds of tiny figures. An aerial 
dung-ball, Wolff thought.
Dugarnn pointed above him, and Wolff saw a number of small dark objects. "Scouts," Dugarnn said. 
"The Nichiddor won't attack until the scouts report to them." 
"Who are the Nichiddor?"
"There's one now, coming down to take a close look." 
The wings were black-feathered and had a spread of at least fifty feet. They sprouted out from the 
five-foot wide shoulders, below which was a hairless human torso. The breast-bone projected 
several feet and under it was the abdomen with a human navel. The legs were thin and ended in huge 
feet that were mainly clawlike toes. A long black feathered tail spread out behind it. The face 
was human except for the nose. This extended like an elephant's proboscis for several feet and was 
as flexible. As the Nichiddor swept over them, it raised the proboscis and trumpeted shrilly.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (23 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Dugarnn glanced at Wolffs beamer. Wolff shook his head and said, "I'd rather they didn't know yet 
what they're up against. My supply of charges is limited. I want to wait until I can get a number 
with a single shot."
He watched the Nichiddor flap heavily away towards the nearest nest. The creatures were 
undoubtedly the work of Urizen, who had placed them here for his own amusement. They must be human 
be-ings-although not necessarily Lords-he had transmuted in the labo-ratory. They could have been 
abducted from other worlds than his; some might even be descended from Earthmen. Now they lived a 
strange life beneath red skies and a dark moon, born and raised on an aerial nest that drifted 
with the winds of this landless world. They lived largely on fish, which they caught as an osprey 
catches fish, with their talons. But when they came across a surface or air-island, they killed to 
eat raw human flesh.
By now Wolff could see why the nests were going against the wind. The hundreds of Nichiddors on it 
had gripped the plants in their talons and were flapping their wings in unison. The foul chariot 
of the skies was drawn by as strange birds as ever existed.
When the nest had come within a quarter-mile, the wings stopped beating. Now the other nests drew 
up slowly. Two settled down-wards; from these the Nichiddor would attack the bottom of the 
is-land. Two others veered around behind the island and then came on the other side. Dugarnn 
waited calmly until the Nichiddor had set their attack pattern.
Wolff asked him why he did not order the gliders to attack.
"If they were released before the main body of Nichiddor came at us," Dugarnn said, "every 
Nichiddor would rise to bar the way. The gliders could not possibly get through them. But with 
only a small number of Nichiddor attacking the gliders, we have a chance of get-ting through to 
the nests. At least, that has been my experience so far."
"Wouldn't it be wisest, from the Nichiddors' viewpoint, to elimi-nate the gliders first?" Wolff 
asked.
Dugarnn shrugged and said, "You'd think so. But they never do what seems to me the most strategic 
thing. It's my theory that, being deprived of hands, the Nichiddor have suffered a lessening of 
intelli-gence. It's true they can manipulate objects to some extent with their feet and their 
trunks, but they're far less manual than we.
"Then again, I could be wrong. Perhaps the Nichiddor derive a certain pleasure from giving the 
gliders a fighting chance. Or perhaps they are as arrogant as sea-eagles, which will attack a 
shark that out-weighs them by a thousand pounds, a vicious creature that an eagle cannot possibly 
kill or, if it could, would not be able to carry off to some surface island."
The wind carried to the abuta the gabble of hundreds of voices and the trumpeting of hundreds of 
proboscises. Suddenly, there was a silence. Dugarnn froze, but his eyes were busy. Slowly, he 
raised his hand. A warrior standing near him held a bladder in his hand. By him was a bowl-shaped 
stone with some hot coals. He held his gaze upon his chief.
The silence was broken with the united scream of Nichiddor through their snaky noses. There was a 
clap as of thunder as they launched themselves from the nests and brought their wings together in 
the first beat. Dugarnn dropped his hand. The warrior dipped the short fuse of the bladder into 
the fire and then released it. It soared upwards to fifty feet and exploded.
The gliders dropped from their lifts, each towards the nest ap-pointed to it. Wolff looked at the 
dark hordes advancing and lost some of his confidence in his beamer. Yet, the Ilmawir had beaten 
off attacks by the Nichiddor before-although with great loss. But never before had eight nests 
ringed the abuta.
A great-winged white bird passed overhead. Its cry came down to him, and he wondered if this could 
be an eye of Urizen. Was his fa-ther watching through the eyes and brains of these birds? If so, 
he was going to see a spectacle that would delight his bloody heart.
The Nichiddor, so thick they were a brown and black cloud, sur-rounded the island. Just out of 
bowrange, they stopped advancing and began to fly around the island. Around and around they flew, 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (24 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
in an ever-diminishing circle. The Ilmawir archers, all males, waited for their chief to signal to 
fire. The women were armed with slings and stones, and they also waited.
Dugarnn, knowing that it would weaken them to spread out his people along the top of the walls, 
had concentrated them at the prow. There was nothing to prevent the Nichiddor from landing at the 
far end. However, they did not settle down there. They hated to walk on their weak legs.
Wolff looked out at the gliders. Some had dropped below his line of vision to attack the two nests 
below the underside. The others were coming down swiftly in a steep glide. A number of Nichiddor 
rose from the nest to meet them.
Two fliers passed over the nearest nest. Small objects, trailing smoke, dropped from them and fell 
on the nests. Females, flapping their wings, scrambled towards them. Then, there was an explosion. 
Smoke and fire billowed out. Another explosion followed.
The two gliders pulled up sharply. Carried upward by the momen-tum of their steep dives, they 
turned and came back for another and final pass. Again, their bombs hit. Fire spread through the 
dry plants and caught and enfolded some of the giant gas-cells. The females screamed so loudly 
they could be heard even above the wing-beatings and trumpetings of the circling horde. They rose 
from the burning nest, their infants clutched in their toes. The entire nest blew apart, catching 
some of the females, burning them in flight or hurling them head over heels. Infants dropped 
towards the sea below, their short wings ineffectively flapping.
Wolff saw one mother fold her wings and drop like a fish-hawk to-wards her infant. She caught it, 
beat her wings, and lifted slowly to-wards an untouched nest.
Two nests, burning and exploding, spun towards the ocean. By then several hundreds of males had 
detached themselves from the ring around the island. They flew after the gliders, which by now 
were far down, headed towards a landing on the waves.
The nests on a level with the island were out of range of his beamer. It was possible the two 
below might not be. Wolff told Dugarnn what he meant to do and went down a fifty-foot winding 
staircase to a hatch at its bottom. The nests there had risen close, and he caught both of them 
with a sweep of the full power of the beamer. They blew up with such violence that he was lifted 
and al-most knocked off the platform. Smoke poured up through the hatch. Then, as it cleared away, 
he saw the flaming pieces of vegetation fall-ing. The bodies of the children and females plummeted 
into the sea. 
The male warriors from the nests were trying to get through the bottom hatches. Wolff put the 
beamer on half-power and cleared the area. Then he ran along the gangplank, stopping at every 
hatch to fire again. He accounted for at least a hundred attackers. Some had gotten through the 
defending abutal at the hatches at the far end. It took him a while to kill these, since he had to 
be careful not to touch the many great bladders. Even though he slew thirty, he could not get them 
all. The island was too large for him to cover all the bottom area.
By the time he climbed back up to the hatch, he found that the Nichiddor had launched their mass 
attack. This end of the island was a swirling, screeching, shouting, screaming mob. There were 
bodies everywhere.
The archers and slingers had taken a heavy toll of the first wave and a lighter toll of the 
second. Then the Nichiddor were upon them, and the battle became a melee. Although the winged men 
had no weapons other than their wings and feet, these were powerful. With a sweep of a wing, a 
Nichiddor could knock down an Ilmawir. He could then leap upon his stunned and bruised foe and 
tear at him with the heavy hooked clawlike toenails. The abutal defended them-selves with spears, 
swords which were flat blades lined with shark's teeth, and knives formed from a bamboolike 
surface plant.
Wolff methodically set about to kill all those in the neighborhood of the maindeck. The Lords had 
made a compact group, all facing outwards and slashing with their swords. Wolff took careful aim 
and slew the Nichiddor pressing them. A shadow fell on him, and he fell on his back and fired 
upwards. Two Nichiddor struck the deck on each side of him, the wing of one buffeting him. It 
covered him like a banner and stank of fish. He crawled out from under just in time to shoot two 
that had forced Dugarnn back against the wall. Dugarnn's wife lay near him, her spear stuck in a 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (25 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
winged man's belly. Her face and breasts were ripped into shreds, and the Nichiddor who had done 
it was tearing out her belly. He fell backwards, his claws caught in her entrails, as Wolff shot 
him from behind.
For the next minute, it was near-death for him. At least two dozen Nichiddor came at him from all 
sides and from above. He spun like a top, using the beam as a spray, around him and in the air. 
The corpses, half-severed, smoking, stinking, piled up around him. Then he was over them, out in 
the open, on the fringes of the eddying bat-tle. He shot everywhere and usually hit his target, 
though twice an abutal was borne by the thrust of the fight into the beam. This could not be 
helped; he was lucky that he had not hit more.
The Ilmawir, despite a fierce resistance, had lost half their num-bers. Even with Wolff's help, 
they were being defeated. The Nichid-dor, despite casualties that should have made them retreat, 
refused to stop. They were intent on extermination of their foe, even if it meant near-
extermination for them.
Wolff cleared the attackers around the Lords again. They were all on their feet and swinging their 
swords, although covered with blood. Wolff called to them to form around him. While they kept off 
the winged men, he would shoot over them. He stood upon a pile of Nichiddor, his feet braced on 
the slippery corpses, and coolly re-sumed firing. Suddenly, he realized that he was down to his 
last two power packs. He had hoped to save some for Urizen's stronghold, but there was nothing he 
could do to conserve them now. If he did not use the beamer, he and all that fought with him would 
die.
Vala, standing just in front of him, yelled. He looked upward where she was pointing. A dark 
object spanned the skies: a black comet. It had appeared while all were intent upon the fight.
The abutal near them also looked up. They gave a cry of despair and threw down their weapons. 
Ignoring the winged men, they ran towards the nearest hatches. The Nichiddor, after searching the 
skies for the cause of the panic, also reacted with terror. They launched themselves into the air 
to get to the nests or to escape to the protect-ing underside of the island.
Wolff did not throw down his beamer, but he was as frenzied as the others in their attempt to get 
to the closest cover. Dugarnn had told him of the black comets that occasionally visited the space 
above this planet. He had warned of that which always accompanied the comet.
As Wolff raced towards a hatch, there were small whistling noises around him. Holes appeared in 
the foliage of the walls; little curls of smoke rose from the sheathing of the maindeck. A 
Nichiddor, ten feet up, flapping his fifty-foot wings frantically, screamed. He fell to the deck, 
his skin pierced in several places, smoke coming from one wing. Another and another winged man 
dropped, and with them some abutal. The corpses jerked with the impact of the tiny drops.
Wolff's beamer was knocked out of his hand by the blow of a drop of quicksilver. He stooped and 
picked it up and resumed his run. For a moment, he could not get into the hatchway because of the 
Lords jammed before it. They fought each other, cursed, and cried to Los. Some even cried out for 
their father, Urizen, or their long-dead mother.
For one wild second, Wolff thought of clearing the way for himself with the beamer. It was exactly 
what any of them, with the possible exception of Luvah, would have done. To stay out here was to 
be dead. Every bit of time counted.
Then whoever was the cause of the pile-up got through, and the others clawed and bit and scratched 
their way in.
Wolff went through the hatch in a dive, headfirst. Something touched his pants. His calf burned. 
There was a splashing noise, and hot mercury clung to the back of his head. He fell past the 
shallow ladder and hit the floor with his two hands, dropping the beamer be-fore he hit. He 
absorbed most of the shock with his bent arms and then rolled over. He brought up against 
Palamabron, who was just starting down the second ladder. Palamabron yelled and pitched for-ward. 
Wolff, looking down the well, saw Palamabron on top of a pile of Lords. All were shouting and 
cursing. None, however, seemed to be hurt badly.
At another time Wolff would have laughed. Now he was too con-cerned with scraping the globules of 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (26 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
hot mercury from his hair. He examined his leg to make sure that the hit there had only been 
glanc-ing. Then he went on down the steps. It was best to get as far below as possible. If this 
were a heavy and steady mercury-drop shower, the entire upper decks could be destroyed. If the big 
gas-bladders were penetrated, good-bye forever to all.
VII
Vala greeted him IN the twilight of a gangplank by a spheroid cell. She was laughing. Her laughter 
was not hysteria but genuine amusement. He was sure that if there were enough light, he would be 
able to see her eyes shining with mirth.
"I'm glad that you find this funny," he said. He was covered with Nichiddor blood, which was 
rapidly being carried off by his heavy sweating, and he was shaking. "You were always a strange 
one, Vala. Even as a child, you loved teasing the rest of us and playing cruel jokes upon us. And 
as a woman, you loved blood and suffering -in others-more than you loved love."
"So I am a true Lord," she said. "My father's daughter. And, I might add, my brother's sister. You 
were just like me, dear Jadawin, before you became the namby-pamby human Wolff, the degenerate 
half-Earthling."
She came closer, and, lowering her voice, said, "It has been a long time since I have had a man, 
Jadawin. And you have not touched a woman since you came through the gate. Yet I know that you are 
like a he-goat, brother, and that you begin to suffer when a day passes without taking a woman to 
bed. Can you put aside your so-evident loathing of me-which I do not understand-and go with me 
now? There are a hundred hiding places in this island, dark and warm and private places where no 
one will disturb us. I ask you, though my pride is great."
She spoke truly. He was an exceedingly strong and vigorous man. Now he felt longing come upon him, 
a longing that he had put aside every day by constant activity. When night came and he went to 
bed, he had bent his mind to plots against his father, trying to foresee a thousand contingencies 
and the best way to dispose of them.
"First the blood-feast and then the lust-dessert," he said. "It's not I who rouses you but the 
thrust of the blade and the spurt of blood." 
"Both do," she said. She held out her hand to him. "Come with me."
He shook his head. "No. And I want to hear no more of this. The subject is forever dead."
She snarled, "As you will soon be. No one can. . ." 
Vala turned and walked away, and when he next saw her, she was talking earnestly to Palamabron. 
After a while, the two walked off into the dimness of a corridor.
He thought for a moment of ordering them back. They were in effect deserting their posts. The 
danger from the Nichiddor seemed to be over, but if the mercury shower became heavier, the island 
could be badly crippled or destroyed.
He shrugged and turned away. After all, he had no delegated au-thority. The cooperation among the 
Lords was only a spoken agree-ment; there was no formal agreement of organization with a system of 
punishments. Also, if he tried to interfere, he would be accused of doing so because of jealousy. 
The charge would not be entirely base-less. He did feel a pang at seeing Vala go off with another 
man. And this was a measure of what he had once felt for her, that after five hundred years and 
what she had tried to do to him, he should care even the fraction of a bit.
He said to Dugarnn, "How long does a shower last?" 
"About a half-hour," the chief replied. "The drops are carried along with the black comets. The 
laughter of Urizen, we call them, since he must have created them. Urizen is a cruel and bloody 
god who rejoices in the sufferings of his people."
Dugarnn did not have exactly the same attitude towards Urizen that the Lords did. In the course of 
the many thousands of years that the descendants of the trapped Lords had been here, the name of 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (27 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Urizen had become that of the evil god in the abutal pantheon. Dugarnn had no true idea of the 
universe in which he was born. To him, this world was the world, the only one. The Lords were 
demi-gods, sons and daughters of Urizen by mortal women. The Lords were mortal, too, though 
extraordinarily powerful.
There was an explosion, and Wolff feared for a moment that one of the gas-bladders at the far end 
of the island had been penetrated. One of the abutal said that a Nichiddor nest had gone up. Less 
protected than the island, it had received a concentration of drops, one bladder had blown up 
another, and in the chain reaction the whole nest was hurled apart.
Wolff went over to where Theotormon crouched in a corner. His brother looked up at him with hate 
and misery. He turned his head away when Wolff spoke to him. After a while, as Wolff squatted 
quietly by him, Theotormon began to fidget. He finally looked at Wolff and said, "Father told me 
that there are four planets that revolve in orbit about a central fifth. This is Appirmatzum, the 
planet on which is his stronghold. Each planet is about the size of this one, and all are 
separated from Appirmatzuin by only twenty thousand miles. This universe is not a recent one. It 
was created as one of a series by our father at least fifteen thousand years ago. They were kept 
hidden, their gates only being activated when Father wished to enter or leave one. Thus, the 
scanners failed to detect them."
"Then that is why I've seen only three of the planets," Wolff said. "The outer ones are at the 
corners of an equilateral quadrangle. The planet opposite is always hidden by Appirmatzum."
He did not wonder at the forces which enabled such large bodies to be so relatively close and yet 
stay in undeviating paths. The sci-ence of the Lords was beyond his comprehension-as a matter of 
fact, it was beyond the understanding of any of the Lords. They had inherited and used a power the 
principles of which they no longer understood. They did not care to understand. It was enough that 
they could use the powers.
This very lack of knowledge of principles made the Lords so vul-nerable at times. Each only had so 
many weapons and machines. If any were destroyed, lost, or stolen, a Lord could only replace them 
by stealing them from other Lords-if there were any still in exist-ence. And the defenses they set 
up against other Lords always had holes in them, no matter how impregnable the defenses seemed. 
The vital thing was to live long enough while attacking to find these holes. So, no matter how 
powerless the group seemed at the moment, Wolff had hopes that he could win.
While waiting for the mercury shower to cease, he had time to think. From some corner of his mind 
came an irrelevancy that had been bothering him for a long long time. It had nothing to do with 
the present situation. It might have been sent by the unconscious to keep him from worrying about 
Chryseis, for whom he could do noth-ing at all at this moment.
The names of his father, brothers, sisters, and cousins had made him wonder ever since he had 
regained his memory of his life as Jadawin, Lord of  the World of Tiers. Urizen, Vala, Luvah, 
Anana, Theotormon, Palamabron, Enion, Ariston, Tharmas, Rintrah, these were the names of the vast 
and dark cosmogens found in William Blake's Didactic and Symbolical Works. It was no coincidence 
that they were the same. Of that Wolff was convinced. But how had the mystical English poet come 
across them? Had he known a dispos-sessed Lord, wandering on Earth, who had told him of the Lords 
for some reason? It was possible. And Blake must have used some of the Lord's story as a basis for 
his apocalyptic poetry. But the story had been very much distorted by Blake.
Some day, if Wolff got out of this trap, he would do some research on Earth and also among those 
Lords who would let him get close enough to them to talk.
The pounding of the quicksilver stopped. After waiting for half an hour to make sure that the 
storm was all over, the islanders went back upon the maindeck. The floor was broken up, pitted, 
and scorched. The walls had been pierced so many times that the roots and leaves were rags of 
vegetation. The gondola had been hit by an especially heavy concentration and was a wreck. Tiny 
globules of mercury lay all over the deck.
Theotormon said, "The mercury shower can't be compared to a meteor shower. The drops are only 
traveling about a hundred miles an hour when they hit the atmosphere, and they are considerably 
slowed up and broken up before they reach the surface. Yet ..."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (28 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
He waved a flipper to indicate the damage.
Wolff looked out over the sea. The surviving nests were drifting slowly away. The winged men had 
enough problems of their own without resuming the attack. One nest was so overburdened with 
ref-ugees from others that it was losing altitude.
Dugarnn was sad. He had lost so many people that it would be very difficult to maneuver the island 
and impossible to defend it against another attack. Now they would drift helplessly around and 
around the world. Not until the children had grown up would they become powerful again. It was 
unlikely that the island would be left alone long enough for the children to become adults.
"My people are doomed," he said.
"Not as long as you keep fighting," Wolff said. "After all, you can avoid battle with other abutal 
islands and with the surface islands. You told me that the only reason two abuta get together for 
a conflict is that both maneuver to approach each other. You can quit doing that. And the 
Nichiddor are rare. This is the first tune in fifteen years that you have met a cluster of nests."
"What! Run away from a fight!" Dugarnn said. His mouth hung open. "That . . . that's unthinkable. 
We would be cowards. Our names would be a scornword in the mouths of our enemies."
"That's a lot of nonsense," Wolff said. "The other abutal can't even get close enough to identify 
you unless you let them. But that's up to you. Die because you can't change your ways, if that's 
what you want."
Wolff was busy helping to clean up the island. The dead and wounded Nichiddor were dumped 
overboard. The dead abutal were given a long burial ceremony, officiated over by Dugarnn, since 
the wizard had had his head twisted off during the battle. Then the bod-ies were slipped over the 
side and received by the sea.
Days and nights drifted by as slowly as the wind-driven island. Wolff spent much time observing 
the great brown spheres of the other planets. Appirmatzum was only twenty thousand miles away. So 
near and yet so far. It might as well be a million miles. Or was it truly so impossible to get 
there? A plan began to form, a plan so fan-tastic that he almost abandoned it. But, if he could 
get the materials, he might, just might, carry it out.
The abuta passed over the polar area, the surface of which looked just like the others. Twice, 
they saw enemy islands at a distance. When these began to work their way towards Dugarnn's island, 
Du-garnn sadly ordered his island to flee. The banks of gas-bladders on one side were operated to 
give the island a slow lateral thrust, and the distance between the two was kept equal. After a 
while, the enemy gave up, having used up as much gas in his bladders as he dared.
Dugarnn explained that the maneuvers which brought two abuta into battle-conflict sometimes took 
as much as five days.
"I've never seen people so anxious to die," was Wolff's only com-ment.
One day, when it seemed to all the Lords that they would drift above the featureless waters 
forever, a lookout gave a cry that brought them running.
"The Mother of All Islands!" he shouted. "Dead ahead! The Mother of Islands!"
If this was the mother of islands, then her babies must be small in-deed. From three thousand 
feet, Wolff could span the floating mass from shore to shore with one sweep of the eye. It was not 
more than thirty miles wide at the broadest and twelve miles long. But most things are relative, 
and on this world it was a continent.
There were bays and inlets and even broken spaces that formed lakes of sea-water. At various 
times, some force, perhaps collision with other islands, had crumpled up parts of the island. 
These formed hills. And it was on top of one of the hills that Wolff saw the gates.
There were two, hexagons of some self-illuminated metal, each huge as the open end of a zeppelin 
hangar.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (29 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Wolff hurried to notify Dugarnn. The commander was aware of the gates and was barking out orders. 
A long time ago, he had prom-ised Wolff that when the gates were found, he would terminate the 
agreement. Wolff and the beamer and the Lords could leave the abuta.
There was not near enough time to valve off gas to lower the is-land. Before the desired altitude 
could be reached, the abuta would have drifted far past the Mitza, the mother. So the Lords 
hastened to the lowest deck, where jump-bladder harnesses were ready for them. They strapped the 
belts around their shoulders, chests, and legs and then were towed to the hatch. Dugarnn and the 
abutal crowded around them to say farewell. They said no words of good-bye to any of the Lords but 
Wolff and Luvah. These two they kissed, and they pressed the flower of the young gas-plant in 
their hands. Wolff said farewell and stepped through the hatch. He fell as swiftly as a man below 
an open parachute. The other Lords followed him. There was an open space among the fronds in which 
he tried to land, but he miscalculated the wind. He crashed into the top of a frond, which bent 
beneath him and so broke his fall. The others also made good landings, though some were bruised. 
Theotormon had an extra large jump-harness because of his four hundred and fifty pounds, but he 
came down faster than the others anyway. His rubbery legs bent under him; he rolled; and he was up 
on his feet, squawking because he had banged his head.
Wolff waited until they were recovered. He waved at the Ilmawir, who were peering down at him from 
the hatches. Then the island passed on and presently was out of their sight. The Lords made their 
way through the jungle towards the hill. They were alert, since they had seen many native villages 
from the abuta. But they came to the hill-gates without seeing the aborigines and presently were 
standing before the towering hexagons.
"Why two?" Palamabron said.
Vala said, "That is another of our father's riddles, I'm sure. One gate must lead to his palace on 
Appirmatzum. The other, who knows where?"
"But how will we know?" Palamabron said.
"Stupid!" Vala said. "We won't know until we go through one or the other."
Wolff smiled slightly. Ever since she had gone off with Palama-bron, she had treated him with even 
more contempt and scorn than the others. Palamabron was bewildered by this. Evidently, he had been 
expecting some sort of gratitude.
Wolff said, "We should all go through the same one. It won't be wise to split up our forces. Wrong 
one or right one, we must be united."
Palamabron said, "You are right, brother. Besides, if we split, and one group were to get into 
Urizen's stronghold and kill him, then that group would have control. And they would betray the 
second group."
"That is not why I think we should stay together," Wolff said. "But you have a good point."
"On top of his head," Vala said. "Palamabron is no more of a thinker than he is a lover."
Palamabron reddened, and he put his hand upon the hilt of his sword. "I am through swallowing your 
insults, you vixen in heat," he said. "One more, and your head will roll off your shoulders."
"We have enough fighting ahead of us," Wolff said. "Save your fury for that which lies on the 
other side of one of those gates."
He saw a movement in the bushes a hundred yards away. Pres-ently, a face showed. A native was 
watching them. Wolff wondered if any of the natives had tried to go through the gates. If one had, 
his disappearance would have terrified the others. Possibly, this area was tabu.
He was interested in the natives' reactions, because he considered that they might be of some 
help, someday. Just now, he did not have time or did not wish to take time. Chryseis was in 
Urizen's strong-hold, and every minute there must be agony. It might not be agony only of spirit; 
she could be tormented physically by his father.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (30 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
He shuddered and tried to put out of his mind the pictures that this thought painted. One thing at 
a time.
He looked at the others. They were watching him intently. Al-though they would have strongly 
denied it, they regarded him as a leader. He was not the oldest brother and one of his cousins was 
older. But he had taken immediate and forceful measures whenever any crisis had come up on this 
world. And he had the beamer. More-over, they seemed to detect something different in him, a 
dimension that they lacked-although they would have denied this, too. His ex-perience as Robert 
Wolff, the Earthman, had given him a grip upon matters that they had always considered too mundane 
to bother with. Insulated from hard labor, from having to deal with things at a primitive level, 
they felt lost. Once they had been makers and semi-divine rulers of their own private universes. 
Now they were no bet-ter-perhaps not as good-as the savages they so despised. Jadawin- or Wolff, 
as they were beginning to call him-was a man who knew his way around in a world of savages.
Wolff said, "It's one fate or the the other. A case of eenie meenie minie moe."
"And what barbaric language is that?" Vala said.
"Earth type. I'll tell you what. Vala is the only woman here . . ."
"But more of a man than most of you," Vala said.
". . . so why don't we let her pick out which one we enter? It's as good a method as any for 
choosing."
"That bitch never did anything right in her life," Palamabron said. "But I say, let her designate 
the gate. Then we won't go wrong if we enter the one she doesn't choose."
"Do what you like," Vala said. "But I say--that one."
She pointed at the right-hand hexagon.
"Very well," Wolff said. "Since I have the beamer, Ill go first. I don't know what's on the other 
side. Rather, I know what is there--death-but I don't know what form it'll take. Before I go, I'd 
like to say this. There was a time, brothers, cousins, sister, when we loved each other. Our 
mother lived then, and we were happy with her. We were in awe of our father, the gloomy, remote, 
forbidding Urizen. But we did not hate him. Then our mother died. How she died, we still don't 
know. I think, as some of you do, that Urizen killed our mother. It was only three days after she 
died that he took to wife Araga, the Lord of her own world, and so united his domain with hers.
"Whoever murdered our mother, we know what happened after that. We found out that Urizen was 
beginning to be sorry that he had children. He was one of the very few Lords to have children 
being raised as Lords. The Lords are dying out; they are paying for their immortality, so-called, 
and for their power, with gradual extinction. They have also paid with the loss of that one thing 
that makes life worthwhile: love."
"Love!" said Vala. She laughed, and the others joined her. Luvah half-smiled, but he did not 
laugh.
"You sound like a pack of hyenas," Wolff said. "Hyenas are car-rion-eaters, powerful, nasty, 
vicious brutes, whose stench and habits make them despised and hated everywhere. However, they do 
serve a useful function, which is more than I can say for you.
" 'Love,' I said. And I repeat it again. The word means nothing to you; it has been too many 
thousands of years since you felt it. And I doubt that any of you felt it very strongly then. 
Anyway, as I was saying, we found out that Urizen was considering doing away with us. Or at least 
disowning us and driving us out to live with the abo-rigines on a planet in one of his universes, 
a world which he intended to make gateless so we could never strike back at him. We fled. He came 
after us and tried to kill us. We got away, and we killed other Lords and took over their worlds.
"Then we forgot we were brothers and sisters and cousins and be-came true Lords. Hateful, 
scheming, jealous, possessive. Murderers, cruel alike to each other and to the miserable beings 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (31 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
who populated our worlds."
"Enough of this, brother," Vala said. "What are you getting at?"
Wolff sighed. He was wasting his breath.
"I was going to say that perhaps Urizen has done us a favor with-out meaning to. Perhaps we could 
somehow find it in ourselves to resurrect the childhood love, to act as brothers should. We. . ."
He stopped. Their faces were like those of stone idols. Time could break them, but love would 
never soften them.
He turned and stepped through the right-hand gate.
VIII
HIS FEET SLID OUT FROM UNDER HIM, AND HE FELL ON HIS SIDE. HE caught a glimpse of smooth glassy 
surfaces as he slid down the hill on top of which the gate was set. The stuff on which he raced 
downhill was dry and slippery, although it gave an impression of oiliness. No matter how he tried 
to dig his heels in, how strongly he placed the flats of his hands against the stuff to brake 
himself, he sped on down. It was like being on ice.
He shot on, gaining speed. Throwing himself over with a convul-sive twist, he managed to face the 
direction in which, willynilly, he was going. Ahead was a gentling of the slope, and when he 
reached it his velocity slowed somewhat. Still, he was going at least sixty miles an hour with no 
way of stopping himself. His head was raised to keep his face from being burned and his hands were 
upheld. By then his clothes should have been burned off him, and his flesh should have been 
crisped and unraveling from the friction, but he sped on with only a slight feeling of warmth.
The skies were purple, and just above the edge of the horizon, the arc of a moon-he thought it was 
a moon-was showing. The arc was a deeper purple than the skies. He was not inside any Lord's 
palace; he was on another planet. Judging from the distance of the horizon, this planet was about 
the size of the one he had just left. In fact, he was sure that it was one of the bodies that he 
had seen in the skies from the surface of the waterworld.
Urizen had tricked them. He had set up the gate through which they had gone to jump them to one of 
the bodies circling about Appirmatzum. The other gate back on the waterworld might have led to 
Urizen's world. Or, it might have led to here also. There was no way of knowing now.
Whichever way the other entrance presented, it was too late to do anything about it. He was caught 
helplessly in one of his father's jokes. A practical joke, if you could consider death as 
practical.
He had traveled perhaps two miles when the incline began to turn upwards. Within a half-mile, he 
was slowed down to what seemed a thirty mile an hour velocity, although it was difficult to tell 
with the few references he had. Off to his right, at a long distance, were a number of peculiar-
looking trees. Not knowing how tall they were or how far away, he could not determine just how 
fast he was traveling.
And then, just as he slowed down to about ten miles an hour, and the incline sloped sharply 
upwards, he rose over its edge. He was in the air, out over the lip of the rise, beyond the edge 
of a precipice. He fell, unable to hold back a scream. Below him, forty or fifty feet, was a one 
hundred foot wide stream of water. The other side was blocked off by a wall of the same vitreous 
substance on which he had slid.
He dropped into the canyon, kicking to maintain an upright posi-tion so he could hit the water 
feet-first. The water was not as far away as he had thought, however, being only thirty-five feet 
down. He struck with his feet and plunged into tepid waters. He went on down, down, then began to 
swim upwards. The current carried him on swiftly between the canyon walls and took him around a 
bend. Just before he was carried around it, he saw a Lord hit the surface and another halfway down 
the wall.
Then the canyon opened out, and the river broadened. He was sliding and bumping over rapids. 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (32 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Fortunately, the rocks were smooth and slick, vitreous also. He escaped cuts but did suffer some 
bruises. Once past the rapids, he found that the current had slowed. He swam to the shore, which 
led up gently from the water. But he could not keep a handhold on the land and slid back into the 
river.
There was nothing to do but swim along the shoreline and hope that eventually he would find a 
place which would enable him to scramble onto the land. His clothes and the bow and arrows and 
knife and beamer weighed him down. As long as he could, he resisted the need to abandon them. When 
he began to tire, he slipped off the bow and quiver. Later, he unstrapped his belt and holster and 
scabbard. These he dropped into the water, but slipped the beamer and his knife inside his pants. 
After a while, he rid himself of the knife.
Now and then, he looked back. Eight heads were bobbing up and down. All had survived so far, but 
if the banks continued to resist grasping, they would all soon be drowned. All except Theotormon. 
He could outswim and outfloat them all, even with one flipper only half-grown out.
It was then that Wolff got an idea. He swam against the current, al-though the effort took more 
strength than he could afford. He swam until Luvah and Vala and Tharmas were close to him. Then he 
yelled at them to also swim against the current, if they wished to be saved.
Presently Theotormon's huge, oily, blue-black bulk was beside him. Behind him came Ariston, Enion, 
and Rintrah. Last of all, the most boastful but the most fearful to enter the gate, was 
Palamabron. His face was white, and he was breathing even more heavily than the rest.
"Save me, brother!" he cried. "I can't go on much longer. I will die."
"Save your breath," Wolff said. To Theotormon, he said, "We have need of you, brother. Now you, 
the once-despised, can help us. Without you, we shall all drown."
Theotormon, swimming easily against the current, chuckled. He said, "Why should I? You all spit on 
me; you say I make you sick."
"I have never spit upon you," Wolff said. "Nor have I said you sicken me. And it was I who 
insisted that you come with us. I did so because I knew that we would need you. There are things 
you can do with that body that we cannot. It is ironic that Urizen, who set this trap, and who 
also transformed you into a sea-thing, prepared you to survive in his trap. He unwittingly gave 
you the means to escape and so to help us escape."
It was a long speech under the circumstances and left him winded. Nevertheless, he had to praise 
Theotormon; otherwise, he would leave them to die and laugh while doing so.
Theotormon said, "You mean Urizen outwitted himself?"
Wolff nodded.
"And how can I escape from this?" Theotormon said.
"You are swift and strong as a seal in the water. You can propel yourself so swiftly that you can 
shoot through the water and on up onto the bank. You can also shove us, one by one, onto the bank. 
I know that you can do this."
Theotormon grinned slyly. "And why should I push you to safety?"
"If you don't, you'll be left alone on this strange world," Wolff said. "You can live for a while. 
But you'll be lonely. I doubt that there's anyone here you can talk to. Moreover, if we're to get 
off this world, we have to find the gates which will lead us off. Can you do this alone? Once on 
land, you'll need us."
"To hell with you!" Theotormon screamed. He upended and dis-appeared beneath the surface. 
"Theotormon!" Wolff called.
The others echoed his call. They treaded water and looked de-spairingly at each other. There was 
nothing of the haughty Lord in their faces now.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (33 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Suddenly, Vala screamed. She threw her hands up into the air and went under. So swiftly she went, 
she must have been pulled under.
A few seconds passed. Then Theotormon's oily blue-black head appeared and a moment later Vala's 
red hair. Her brother's long toes were entangled in her hair, her head held by the foot.
"Say you're sorry!" Theotormon shouted. "Apologize! Tell me I'm not a loathsome mass of blubber! 
Tell me I'm beautiful! Promise to love me as you did Palamabron on the island!"
She tore her hair loose, leaving some dark red strands between his toes. She screamed, "I'll kill 
you, you blotch! I'm a long way from dying yet! And if I were, I'd go gladly to my death rather 
than make up to you!"
His eyes wide, Theotormon paddled away from her with his feet. He turned to Wolff and said, "See! 
Why should I save her or any of you? You would still hate me, just as I would hate you."
Palamabron began to yell and to splash violently. "Save me, Theotormon! I can't stay up any 
longer! I'm too tired! I'll die!" 
"Remember what I said about your being alone," Wolff gasped. 
Theotormon grinned and dived, and presently he was pushing Pa-lamabron ahead of him. With his head 
on his brother's buttocks, he pushed, driving with his flippers and his great webbed feet. 
Palama-bron slid from the water and two body lengths onto the glassy shore. There he lay, 
breathing like a sick horse, the water running from his nose and saliva from his mouth.
One by one, Theotormon propelled the others onto the bank, where they lay like dead men. Only Vala 
refused his offer. She swam as hard as she could, summoning strength that Wolff would not have 
believed possible she had left. She skidded up a body's length and soon was nudging herself, very 
slowly, on up the gentle slope. When she had reached a level spot, she carefully got to a sitting 
position.
She looked down at the others and said with scorn, "So these are my brothers? The all-mighty Lords 
of the universes! A pack of half-drowned rats. Sycophants of a sea-slug, begging for their lives."
Theotormon slid upon the bank and past the men. He walked on his bent legs past Vala and did not 
look at her. And when the others had regained some of their strength and breath, they too crawled 
to the level land. They were sorry looking, since most of them had slipped off their clothes and 
their swords in the water. Only Wolff and Vala had retained their clothes. He had lost all his 
weapons but his beamer. She still had her sword. Except for her hair, she looked as if she had 
never been in the water. Her garments had the property of repelling liquids.
Luvah had scooted over to Wolff after trying twice to walk to him and ending on his buttocks both 
times. His color had come back to his face, so that the freckles across his cheeks and nose did 
not stand out so sharply. He said, "We were caught by our father as easily as children playing 
hide-and-seek are caught. Now, from children we have become infants. We cannot even walk, but must 
crawl like ba-bies. Do you suppose that our father is trying to tell us something?" 
"I do not know about that," Wolff said. "But this I do know. Urizen has been planning this for a 
long long time. I am beginning to believe that he made the planets that revolve around Appirmatzum 
for one reason only. This world and the others are designed to tor-ment and to test us."
Luvah laughed without much merriment. "And if we survive the torment and pass the tests, what is 
our reward?"
"We get a chance to be killed by our father or to kill him." 
"Do you really believe he will play fair? Won't he make the stronghold absolutely impregnable? I 
cannot believe that our father will be fair."
"Fair? What is fair? There is supposed to be an unspoken agree-ment that every Lord will leave 
some slight loophole in his defense. Some defect whereby an extremely skillful and clever attacker 
can get through. Whether this is true in all cases, I do not know. But Lords have been killed or 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (34 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
dispossessed, and these Lords thought they were safe from the most powerful and clever. I do not 
think that the successful ones were successful because of built-in weaknesses by the defender. The 
chinks in the armor were there for another reason.
"That reason is that the Lords have inherited their weapons. What they haven't inherited or taken 
from others, they cannot get. The race has lost its ancient wisdom and skill; it has become users, 
consumers, not creators. So, a Lord must use what he has. And if these weapons do not cover every 
contingency, if they leave holes in the armor, then they can be penetrated.
"There is another aspect to this. The Lords fight for their lives and fight to kill each other. 
But most have lived too long. They weary of everything. They want to die. Deep in the abyss of 
their minds, below the thousands of strata of the years of too much power and too little love, 
they want to die. And so, there are cracks in the walls."
Luvah was astonished. "You do not really believe this wild theory, brother? I know I am not tired 
of living. I love life now as much as when I was a hundred. And the others, they fight to live as 
much as they ever did."
Wolff shrugged and said, "It's only a theory of mine. I have evolved it since I became Robert 
Wolff. I can see things that I could not see before and that none of you can see."
He crawled to Vala and said, "Lend me your sword for a moment. I want to try an experiment."
"Like cutting my head off?" she said. 
"If I wanted to kill you, I have the beamer," he replied. She took the short blade from its 
scabbard and handed it to him. He tapped the sharp edge gently on the glassy surface. When the 
first blow left the stuff unmarked, he struck harder.
Vala said, "What are you doing? You'll ruin the edge." 
He pointed at the scratch left by the second blow. "Looks like a scratch made in ice. This stuff 
is far slipperier, more frictionless than ice, but in other respects it seems to resemble frozen 
water."
He handed the weapon to her and drew his beamer. After putting it on half-power, he aimed it at a 
spot on the surface. The stuff grew red, then bubbled. Liquid flowed from it. He turned the beamer 
off and blew the liquid from the hole. The others crawled over to watch him.
"You're a strange man," Vala said. "Whoever would have thought of doing this?"
"Why is he doing it?" Palamabron said. "Is he crazy, cutting holes in the ground?"
Palamabron had recovered his haughtiness and his measured way of speaking.
Vala said, "No, he's not crazy. He's curious, that's all. Have you forgotten what it is to be 
curious, Palamabron? Are you as dead as you look . . . and act? You were certainly lively enough a 
little while ago."
Palamabron flushed, but he said nothing. He was watching the growth of tiny crystals on the walls 
of the hole and along the edges of the scratch.
"Self-regeneration," Wolff said. "Now, I have read as much as possible on the old science of our 
ancestors, but I have never read or heard of anything like this. Urizen must have knowledge lost 
to others."
"Perhaps," Vala said, "he has gotten it from Red Orc. It is said that Orc knows more than all of 
the other Lords put together. He is the last of the old ones; it is said that he was born over a 
half a mil-lion years ago."
"It is said. It is said," Wolff mimicked. "The truth is that nobody has seen Red Ore for a hundred 
millennia. I think he is a dead man but his legend lives on. Enough of this. We have to find the 
next set of gates, though where those will lead us, I don't know."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (35 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
He rose carefully and shuffled slowly a few steps forward. The sur-face of this world was not 
entirely barren vitreosity. There were widely spaced trees several hundred yards away and between 
them mushroom-shaped bushes. The trees had thin spiraling trunks that were striped with red and 
white, like barber poles. The trunks rose straight for twenty feet, then curved to left or right. 
Where the curve began, branches grew. These were shaped like horizontal 9's and covered with a 
thin gray fuzz, the strands of which were about two feet long.
Rintrah, naked, shivered and said, "It is not cold, but something makes me uneasy and quivers 
through me. Perhaps it is the silence. Listen, and you hear nothing."
They fell silent. There was only a distant soughing, the wind rip-pling through the bushes and the 
stiff projections on the end-curled branches, and the slursh-slursh of the river. Aside from that, 
nothing. No bird calls. No animal cries. No human voices. Only the sound of wind and river and 
even that hushed as if pressed down by the purple of the skies.
Around them the pale white land rolled away to the four horizons. There were some high rounded 
hills, the tallest of which was that which had sent them speeding down the hill. From where they 
stood, they could see its mound and the gate, a tiny dark object, on its top. The rest was low 
hills and level spaces.
Where do we go from here? Wolff thought. Without some clue, we could wander forever. We could 
wander to the end of our lives, pro-vided we find something to eat on the way.
He spoke aloud. "I believe we should follow along the river. It leads downward, perhaps to some 
large body of water. Urizen cast us into the river; this may mean that the river is to be our 
guide to the next gate... or gates."
"That may be true," Enion said. "But your father and my uncle has a crooked brain. In his perverse 
way, he may be using the river as an indication that we should go up it, not down it."
"You may be right, cousin," Wolff replied. "However there is only one way to find out. I suggest 
we go downriver, if only because it will be easier traveling." He said to Vala, "What do you 
think?"
She shrugged and said, "I don't know. I picked the wrong gate the last time. Why ask me?"
"Because you were always the closest to father. You know better than the rest of us how he 
thinks."
She smiled slightly. "I do not think you mean to compliment me by that. But I will take it as 
such. Much as I hate Urizen, I also ad-mire and respect his abilities. He has survived where most 
of his con-temporaries have not. Since you ask, I say we go downriver."
"How about the rest of you?" Wolff said. He had already made up his mind which direction he was 
going, but he did not want the others complaining if they went the wrong way. Let them share the 
responsibility.
Palamabron started to speak. "I say, no, I insist, that. . ."
IX
A WAIL CAME DOWN AGAINST THE WIND, AND THEY TURNED TO STARE upriver. Several hundred yards away, 
an animal tall as an elephant had appeared from around a hill. Now it stood between two large 
boulders, the head on the end of its long neck much like that of a camel's with antlers. Its eyes 
were enormous and its teeth long and sharp, a carnivore's. Its body was red-brown and furry and 
sloped sharply back from the shoulders. The legs were thin as a giraffe's, de-spite the heavy 
body. They ended in great spreading dark-blue cups. On seeing the cup-feet, Wolff guessed their 
function. They looked too much like suckers or vacuum pads, which would be one of the few means to 
enable an animal to walk across this smooth surface. "Stand still," he said to the others. "We 
can't run; if we could, there'd be no place to go."
The beast snorted and slowly advanced towards them. It swiveled its neck back and forth, turning 
its head now and then to look behind it. The right front foot and left rear foot raised in unison, 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (36 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
the cups giving a plopping noise. These came down to give it a hold in its for-ward progress. Then 
the left front foot and the right rear one raised, and so it came towards them. When it was fifty 
yards from them, it stopped and raised its head. It gave a cry that was half-bray and half-banshee 
wail. It lowered its neck until the jaw was on the ground and then scraped the jaw against the 
ground. The head slid back and forth on the pale surface.
Wolff thought that this motion could be the equivalent of the paw-ing of dirt of a Terrestrial 
bull before it charged. He put his beamer on half-power and waited. Suddenly, the creature raised 
its head as high as it would go, screamed-much like a wounded rabbit-and galloped at them. It was 
necessarily a slow gallop, since the suction cups did not come off easily. To the humans, it 
seemed too swift.
Wolff could afford to wait to determine if the beast were bluffing. At twenty yards, he placed the 
end of the beam at the juncture of neck and chest. Smoke curled up from the red-brown fur, which 
blackened. The animal screamed again but did not stop its charge. Wolff continued to hold the beam 
as steadily as he could. Then, see-ing that its impetus might carry it to the point where its 
fanged head could seize them, he switched to full-power.
The beast gave a last scream; its long thin legs crumpled; its body came down on them. The cups 
stuck to the ground, the legs cracking beneath the weight, the body settling slowly. The neck went 
limp and the head lolled, the red-purple tongue sticking out, the hazel eyes glassy.
There was silence, broken by Vala's laugh. "There's our dinner and breakfast and dinner again, 
already cooked for us."
"If it's edible," Wolff said. He watched while Vala and Theotormon, knife handled by one foot, 
stripped off the hide and cut out half-burnt steaks. Theotormon refused to test the meat. Wolff 
shuffled forward very carefully, but even so his feet went out from under him. Vala and 
Theotormon, who had gotten to the beast with-out slipping, laughed. Wolff arose and continued his 
journey. He said, "If no one else dares, I'll try the meat. We can't stand around debating whether 
it's safe or not."
Vala said, "I'm not afraid of it, just disgusted. It has such a rank odor." She bit into it, 
chewed with distaste, and swallowed. Wolff de-cided that there was no use his testing it now. With 
the others, he waited. When a half-hour passed, and Vala showed no ill effects, he started to eat 
it. The others shuffled or crawled to the carcass and also ate. There was not too much they could 
stomach, since most of the meat was charred, leaving only a narrow area where the heat had cooked 
or half-cooked the flesh.
Wolff borrowed Theotormon's knife and cut out other steaks. Re-luctantly, because he wished to 
conserve the power of the beamer, he cooked the steaks. Then they each took an armful and began to 
march down the river. Wolff lingered for a while, considering the possibility of severing the 
suction-pads and using them for his loco-motion. He gave up the idea after feeling the thickness 
of the bones of the legs and the toughness of bone and cartilage at juncture of pad and leg. 
Vala's sword might do the job, but its edge would be too blunted for use afterward.
At the end of a two-mile crawl, they came to a group of bushes near the riverbank. These were 
three feet high and mushroom in shape, the upper part spreading out far from the slender base. The 
branches were thick and corkscrew and, like the trees, grew fuzz. At close range, the fuzz looked 
more like slender needles. There were also large dark-red berries in clusters at the ends of the 
branches.
Wolff picked one and smelled it. The odor reminded him of pecan nuts. The skin was smooth and 
slightly moist.
He hesitated about biting into the berry. Again, it was Vala who dared the strange food. She ate 
one, exclaiming all the while over its deliciousness. A half-hour went by, during which she ate 
six more. Wolff then ate several. The others picked them off. Palamabron, the last to try them, 
complained that there were not many left for him.
Vala said, "It is not our fault that you are such a coward."
Palamabron glared at her but did not answer. Theotormon, think-ing that here he had found someone 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (37 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
who would not dare to answer him back, took up the insults where Vala left off. Palamabron slapped 
Theotormon in the face. Theotormon bellowed with rage and leaped at Palamabron. His feet slipped 
out and he skidded on his face into Palamabron's legs. Palamabron went down like a bowling pin. He 
slid sidewise, out of reach of Theotormon's flailing flipper. Both made a frenzied but vain effort 
to get at each other's throat.
Finally, Wolff, who had not shared the scornful laughter of the others, called a halt. He said, 
"If these time-wasting displays of childishness continue, I'll put a stop to them. Not with the 
beamer, since I don't care to use up power on the likes of you. We'll just go on without you or 
send you away. We have to have unity and a minimum of discord. Otherwise, Urizen will have the 
pleasure of seeing us destroy ourselves."
Theotormon and Palamabron spat at each other but quit their struggles. Silently, in the pale 
purple shade of the moon overhead, they continued to slide their feet forward. The night had 
brought an end to the silence. They heard bleatings as of sheep and bellowings as of cattle from a 
distance. Something roared like a lion. They passed another clump of bushes and saw small bipedal 
animals feeding off the berries. These were about two and a half feet tall, brown-furred, and 
lemur-faced. They had big rabbit ears and slit eyes. Their upper legs ended in paws; their lower, 
in suction discs. They had short scarlet tails, like a rabbit's. On seeing the human beings, they 
stopped eating and faced them, their noses wiggling. After being convinced that the newcomers were 
no danger, they resumed eating. But one fellow kept his eyes on them and barked like a dog at 
them.
Presently, a four-legged animal the size of a Norwegian elkhound came around a low hill. It was 
shaggy as a sheep-dog, yellowish, and built like a fox. At the ends of its feet were thin skates 
of bone on which it raced towards the bipeds. These barked in alarm and all took off in a body. 
They made swift progress, despite the pads, but the skate-wolf was far faster. The leader of the 
bipeds, seeing that they had no chance, dropped behind until he was even with the slowest of his 
charges. He shoved against the laggard, knocking him over, then he ran on. The sacrifice screamed 
and tried to get back up on its suckers, only to be knocked down again by the snarling skate-wolf. 
There was a brief struggle, ending when the wolfs jaws closed on the biped's throat.
Wolff said, "There's your explanation for the scratches we've seen now and then on the surface. 
Some of these creatures are skaters."
He was silent for a while, thinking that skates would enable them to make much better progress. 
The problem was getting them down.
They passed another long-necked, hyena-bodied, deer-antlered beast. This one did not offer to 
bother them. It bit into a rock of the vitreous substance, ripped out a chunk, and chewed upon it. 
It kept its eye upon them, groaning with delight at the taste of the rock, its stomach rumbling 
like defective plumbing in an old house.
They went on and soon came within three hundred yards of a herd of the creatures, all grazing upon 
the rocks. There were young among them, awkwardly chasing each other in play or nursing from the 
mothers. Some of the bulls bray-wailed at the intruders, and one kept pace with them for a while. 
They passed antelope-like animals, marked with red diamond-shapes on white and with two horns that 
intertwined. Bone skates grew at the end of their legs.
Wolff began to look for a place to sleep. He led them into a semi-amphitheater, a level between 
four hills. "I'll stand first watch," he said. He designated Enion as next and Luvah after him. 
Enion protested, asking by what authority Wolff could pick him.
"You can refuse to take your share of responsibility, if you wish," Wolff said. "But if you sleep 
when your turn comes, you may wake up in the jaws of that."
He pointed past Enion's shoulder, and Enion whirled so swiftly he lost his footing. The others 
looked in the direction in which Wolff's finger was pointing. On top of one of the hills, a huge 
maned animal was glaring down at them. Its head was that of a short-snouted croc-odile and its 
body was catshaped, the feet ending in broad cups.
Wolff put the the beamer on half-power and shot. He flicked the actuation plate briefly and aimed 
towards the hairs of the mane. The hairs crisped and smoked, and the beast roared, turned, and 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (38 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
disap-peared beyond the hill.
Wolff said, "Now, somebody has to be officially given authority. So far, we've avoided, that is, 
you've avoided, a decision. You've more or less let me run things. Mostly because you're too lazy 
or too occupied with your own petty problems to face this issue. All right, now's the time to 
settle this. Without a leader whose orders will be immediately obeyed in emergencies, we're all 
lost. So what do you say?"
"Beloved brother," Vala said, "I think that you have shown that you're the man to follow. I vote 
for you. Besides, you have the beamer, and that makes you the most powerful of all. Unless, of 
course, some of us have hidden weapons we've not displayed as yet."
"You're the only one who has enough clothes to conceal weap-ons," he said. "As for the beamer, 
whoever is on guard will have it."
They all raised their eyebrows at this. He said, "It's not because I trust your loyalty. It's just 
that I don't think any of you would be quite stupid enough to try to keep it for yourself or try 
to take off on your own. When we resume the march, I expect to get the beamer back."
All then voted, except for Palamabron. He said that he did not have to vote, since it was obvious 
that he would be overruled by the majority, anyway.
"Surely brother, you were not going to nominate yourself," Vala said. "Even you, with all your 
hideous egotism, could not think of that."
Palamabron ignored her. To Wolff he said, "Why am I not one of the sentinels? Don't you trust me?"
"You can stand first watch tomorrow night," Wolff replied. "Now, let's all get some sleep."
Wolff sat guard while the others slept on their hard beds of white rock. He listened to the 
distant animal cries: the bray-wails, roars, and some new sounds, a shrill fluting, a plaintive 
sobbing, a whis-tling. Once, something beat out a gonging, and there was the flutter of wings 
overhead. He rose to his feet now and then and slowly pivoted around to cover all points of the 
compass. At the end of a half-hour, he woke up Enion and gave him the beamer. He had no watch to 
determine the tune, any more than the others did, but, like them, he knew the measured passage of 
tune. As a child, he had gone through a species of hypnosis which enabled him to clock the 
sec-onds as accurately as the most precise of chronometers.
For a while, he did not sleep. He was worried about the first watch of the next night, when 
Palamabron would be entrusted with the beamer. Of all the Lords, he was the most unstable. He 
hated Vala even more than the others. Could he withstand the temptation to kill her while she 
slept? Wolff decided he would have a talk with Pala-mabron in the morning. His cousin must 
understand that if he killed her, he would have to kill them all. This he could do with the 
beamer, but he would be alone from then on. This was a curious thing. Though the Lords could not 
stand to be with each other, they could stand the idea of being alone even less. In other 
circumstances, they would want no one but themselves, of course. In these, they shared a dread of 
their father and some comfort in having compan-ions in misery and peril.
Just before he went to sleep, he had an idea. He swore. Why had he not thought of it? Why had not 
the others? It was so obvious. There was no need to creep and slip along on the ground. With 
boats, they could travel swiftly and much more surely. They would be safe from the predators. He 
would see what they could do about this in the morning.
He was propelled from sleep at dawn by shouting. He sat up to see Tharmas shooting at a maned 
beast, one just like the liongator he had scared off by singeing its hair. The beast came down the 
hill swiftly, plop-plopping as its suction pads pulled free. Behind it lay three dead mates. The 
survivor came within ten feet and then dropped, its snout cut half off.
Tharmas held the beamer while he stared at the carcass. Wolff shouted at him to turn the power 
off. The ray was drilling into the side of the hill. Tharmas suddenly realized what he was doing 
and deactivated the weapon. By then, most of the charge was gone. Groaning, Wolff took the beamer 
back. Now he was down to his final power pack.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (39 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
The others went to work swiftly. They took turns with the knives of Theotormon and Vala and 
stripped the tough hides off the dead beasts. This was slow work, both because of their ineptness 
and be-cause they kept sliding on the glassy surface. And they could not re-frain from arguing 
with him, saying that all the hard work was for nothing. Where would he get the framework for the 
boats he planned? Even if he could use these hides as coverings for the boats, there were not 
enough to go around.
He told them to shut up and keep on working. He knew what he was doing. With Luvah, Vala, and 
Theotormon, he shuffled off to the nearest bushes. Here it was necessary to use more power to kill 
an animal that was eating the berries and refused to give up its claim. It was like a Chinese 
dragon. It hissed and struck threateningly at them before they got within its range. Its skin was 
as thick and ridged as armor plate and could be penetrated only by a beam at full-power. Even its 
eyes were protected. When Wolff shot at these, the ray struck transparent coverings. The creature 
began waving its head wildly so that Wolff could not keep the beam on one spot. Eventu-ally, he 
cut through the armor back of the head, and it turned over and died, exposing the serrated plates 
and tiny suction discs on which it made progress.
"If this keeps up, we'll be out of power," he said to the others. "Pray that that time does not 
come."
Wolff tested the toughness of the bark of the bushes and found it to be strong indeed. Chopping 
down the bushes and slicing off lengths to make a framework for the rough coracles he had in mind 
would be long hard work and ruin the sword. It was then, glancing at the caterdragon-as he called 
it-that he saw a ready-made vessel. Well, not quite finished, but it should need less work to 
complete than the original boat he had in mind.
The sword, driven by his powerful arm, was equal to the task of separating the caterdragon's 
locomotion plates from the body armor. Thereafter, the sword and the knife cut up the internal 
organs. By then the other Lords were with them, and they took turns at the work. All were soon 
covered with blood, which also ran over the area and made the surface even more frictionless. 
Several of the lion-gators, attracted by the odor of blood, and then driven frantic by it, 
attacked. Wolff had to expend more power in killing them.
The only possible sources for paddles were the 9-shaped branches on the trees. The bark of these 
resisted the edge of the sword. Again, Wolff had to use his beamer. He cut enough branches to make 
ten paddles, three extra, since Theotormon could not handle one with his flippers. The needles 
came off easily when cut with a knife.
They had a rather flexible canoe, sixty feet long. The only open-ings to worry about were the 
mouth and nostrils. These were dis-posed of by bending the hollow front part back and up and tying 
a small boulder to it with Vala's cloak. The weight of the boulder stopped the forward part from 
straightening out and thus kept it above the water level-they hoped. Again, Wolff had to use some 
more power to burn off the pieces of gristle and the blood that ad-hered to the inside walls of 
the armor-plate. Then, walking on their knees, the Lords shoved their makeshift boat towards the 
river.
Near the edge of the river, they rose to their feet and got into the dragonboat by falling over 
the sides and into the bottom. They did so by teams of twos, one on each side, to keep the craft 
from falling to one side. When all but Wolff and Vala had gotten in, the two urged the boat down. 
Fortunately, there was a very gentle incline. As the craft picked up a little speed, Wolff and 
Vala clung to the sides and the others pulled them aboard.
The night-bringing moon crossed the horizon, and the dragoncraft floated with the current. Two 
Lords stayed on paddle-duty to keep the boat straight while the others tried to sleep. The moon 
passed, and after it came the bright purple of the naked skies. The river was smooth, disturbed 
only by tiny waves and ripples. They passed through canyons and came out again between rolling 
ground. The day passed without incident. They complained about the stench from the meat and blood 
they had not been able to clear away. They made jokes as each had to rid himself of food and 
drink. They spoke grouchily of their lack of sleep the previous night. They talked about what 
might face them when-or if-they ever found the gate that would lead them into the palace of their 
father.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (40 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
A day and a night floated by. Several hours after the second dawn, they came around a wide bend of 
the river. Ahead was a rock that split the river, a dome of white about thirty feet high. On top 
of it, side by side, was a pair of towering and golden hexagonal frames.
X
FROM   THE   EDGE   OF   THE   RIVER,   WHERE   THE   DRAGONBOAT   WAS beached, Wolff studied the 
problem. It was useless to try to climb the near-perpendicular and near-frictionless rock without 
some aids. A rope had to be thrown up to catch on something. The hexagons were too wide to try to 
settle a noose around them.
A grappling hook might do the job. It could be presumed that the other side of the gate-that which 
opened onto another planet, he hoped-would hold a grapple.
The hides of animals could be cut and tied or sewn together to make a rope, although the strips 
would have to be tanned to give them flexibility. The metal for the hooks was a big problem.
There might be metal somewhere in this world, perhaps not too far away. But getting to it across 
the land would be a slow process. So, there was only one thing to do, and he did not expect that 
the two most vital in this particular project would be cooperative.
Nor were they. Vala did not want to give up her sword and Theo`tormon refused to part with his 
knife.
Wolff argued with them for several hours, pointing out that if they did not give up their weapons, 
they would be dead in time anyway.
Wolff said, after Theotormon's violent refusal, "Very well. Be pig-headed. But if the rest of us 
find a way to get through the gate, we will not take you with us. I swear it! You will be pushed 
back into this pale world of icestone, and you will stay here until an animal de-vours you or you 
die of old age."
Vala looked around at the Lords who sat in a circle about her. She smiled and said, "Very well. 
You may have my sword."
"You won't get my knife, I promise you that," Theotormon said.
The others began to scoot on their buttocks towards him. He stood up and tried to run past them. 
His huge feet gave him a better grip on the white stuff than the others could manage, but Wolff 
reached out and clutched his ankle, and he went down. He fought as best he could, submerged under 
the pile of bodies. Eventually, weeping, he gave up. Then, muttering, scowling, he went off to sit 
down on the river's edge by himself.
With some chalky stone he found, Wolff traced lines on Vala's sword. He set the beamer at full 
power and quickly cut out trian-gles. He then arranged the three pieces and set several round 
pieces of the sword on top of them. With the beamer at half-power he fused the three prongs and 
round pieces into a single unit. After plunging these into cold water, he heated the prongs in 
their middles and ham-mered them into slightly hooked shapes. He curved another strip of sword 
with heat and hammered and fused this onto the top of the prong so that a rope could be tied 
around it.
Since he did not have to use Theotormon's knife, he gave it back to him. He cut the end of Vala's 
sword into a point and thus pro-vided her with a somewhat short sword. As he pointed out, it was 
better than nothing.
Making the rope took several days. It was not difficult to kill and flay the animals and then cut 
out strips for rope lengths. Tanning presented difficulties. He searched for materials but could 
find noth-ing. Finally, he decided to grease the plaited rawhide with animal fat and hope for the 
best.
One dawn, as the empurpling shadow of the moon withdrew, the dragonboat was launched well above 
the gaterock. With the Lords behind him paddling backwards, Wolff stood up in the prow, and he 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (41 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
cast the grapple upwards in an arc and released the rope after it.
The three-pronged device went through the gate and disappeared. He pulled in on it as the boat 
rammed into the base of the rock. For a second, he thought he had a hold. Then the grapple came 
flying out of the gate, and he fell back. He caught himself, but the uneasy equilibrium of the 
boat was upset. It turned over, and all went into the water. They clung to the upturned bottom, 
and Wolff managed to keep hold of the rope and grapple.
A half-hour later, they tried again.
"Try and try again," Wolff told them. "That's an old Earth saying."
"Spare me your proverbs," Rintrah said. "I'm soaked as a drown-ing rat and as miserable. Do you 
think there's any use trying again?"
"What else is there to do? Let's get at it. Give it the old college try."
They looked at him uncomprehendingly and then reluctantly launched the boat again. Now Wolff made 
a more difficult cast. He threw for the very top of the hexagon. It was at least twelve feet high, 
which made the top of the frame forty-two feet above water. Nevertheless, he threw well, the 
prongs gripping the other side of the frame.
"I got it!" he said grinning. He pulled in on the rope to take up the slack. The boat slid on by 
the right side of the rock, rubbing against it. He ordered the men to continue backwatering, which 
they tried without success. The boat began to bend as the current wrapped it around the rock. 
Wolff, in the bow, knew that if he continued to be carried with the boat, he would slide the 
prongs sidewise off the top of the frame.
He clung to the rawhide rope and allowed the boat to be taken off from under him. Then Wolff was 
hanging onto the rope, his feet in the water. He lifted his feet to brace himself against the 
rock, only to have them slide away. He quit this method of climbing and hauled himself up, hand-
over-hand, on the greasy rope. This was not easy to do, since the rock curved just gently enough 
to make the rope follow it closely, the tension being greatest just above his handhold. Without 
slack, he had to force his hands to slide between rope and rock.
He rose slowly. Halfway up, he felt the tension go. There was a crack, barely audible above the 
swirl of water at the rock-base. Yell-ing with disappointment, he fell back into the river.
When he was hauled out by Vala and Enion, he discovered that two of the prongs had broken across 
where they joined the top part. The pieces were now somewhere at the bottom of the river.
"What do we do now?" Palamabron snarled at him. "You have used up all our weapons and drained your 
beamer of much of its power. And we are no closer to getting through the gate than before. Less, I 
say. Look at us. Look at me. Spouting water like an old fish brought up from the abyss and weary, 
oh, Los, how weary!"
"Go fly a kite," Wolff said. "Another old Earth saying."
He stopped, eyes widening, and said, "I wonder. . ."
Palamabron threw his hands up into the air and said, "Oh, no, not another of your wonderful 
ideas!"
"Wonderful or not, they're ideas," Wolff said. "So far, I'm the only one who's had anything to 
offer . . . besides whinings, com-plaints, and backbitings."
He lay on his back for a while, staring up at the purple skies and chewing on a piece of meat 
Luvah had handed him. Was a kite a fan-tastic thought? Even if it could be built, would it work?
He discarded the kite. If one were made big enough to carry a heavy prong, it would not go through 
the hexagon. Wait a minute. What if the kite, dangling a hook on the end of a rope, were flown 
above the hexagon? He groaned and gave up the kite again. It just would not work.
Suddenly, he sat up and shouted. "It might do it! Two!"
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (42 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Two what?" Luvah said, startled out of his drowse.
"Not kites!"
"Who said anything about kites?" Luvah replied.
"Two boats and two good men to throw," Wolff cried. "It might work. It better. I've about 
exhausted my ideas, and it's evident I'm not going to get any from the rest of you. You've used 
your brains these many thousands of years for only one purpose: to kill each other. You're good 
for nothing else. But, by Los, I'm going to make you good for something else!"
"You're tired," Vala said. "Lie down and rest." She was grinning at him. That surprised him. Now, 
what would she be amused about? She was wet and muscle-aching and as frustrated as the others.
Could it be that she still had some love for him beneath that hate? Perhaps she was proud of him 
that he continued to improvise and to fight while the others only nursed their resentments.
Or was she trying to make him think that she still loved him and was proud of him? Did she have a 
secret reason for this display of amiability?
He did not know. To be a Lord was to mistrust every motive of another Lord, and with good reason.
By the time the first two coracles were half-made, Wolff changed his plan. Originally, he had 
wanted to have two of the little round boats approach the gaterock on each side. But then he 
decided that three would be better.
Using wood of the bushes and tree branches and strips of hide for ties, he made a high 
scaffolding. Each of its four legs was placed on a boat, one on the dragoncraft and each one of 
the other three on a coracle. Then, after rehearsing the Lords many times in what they must do, 
Wolff began the operation. Slowly, the boats at the base of the rectangular scaffolding were 
pushed into the water. The current near the shore was not as swift as out in the river's center, 
so the Lords could keep it from being carried off at once. While they swam and shoved against the 
boats, Wolff climbed up the narrow ladder built on one leg of the scaffolding. This was supported 
by the larger dragon boat, and thus the leg with Wolff on it did not tip over too far. Even so, 
for a moment, he feared a turnover. Then, as he hitched himself on his belly along the planking of 
the scaffolding, the struc-ture righted.
The other Lords, working in teams, climbed into the big boat and the three small ones. They went 
in simultaneously, to distribute the weight equally. Vala, Theotormon, and Luvah were each already 
in a coracle, and they helped Palamabron, Enion, and Ariston. Tharmas was very agile; he got into 
the dragonboat with a quick heave and twist of his body.
The Lords began paddling to direct the scaffolding. They had some trouble at first, since the 
coracles, built more like tubs than boats, were difficult to navigate. But they had launched the 
structure well above their goal so that they could get the feel of their awkward craft before they 
reached the rock. Wolff clung to the forward part of the structure, the bridge, which projected 
out above the water. The bridge pitched and rolled, and twice he thought sure that it would go 
over with him. Then the white dome of the rock with the twin golden hexagons was dead ahead. He 
shouted down to the Lords, and they began backpaddling. It was vital that the scaffolding not 
crash into the rock with much speed. Fragile, it could not resist a strong im-pact.
Wolff had decided that he would enter the left gate, since the last time they had taken the right. 
But as the end of the bridge neared, the scaffolding veered. The bridge drove in at a slant 
towards the right hexagon. Wolff rose to a crouch, and, as the structure rammed with a loud noise 
into the rock, he leaped forward. He shot through the hexagon with his beamer in his belt and a 
rope coiled around his shoulders.
XI
HE DID NOT HAVE THE SLIGHTEST IDEA OF WHAT HE WOULD FIND ON the other side. He expected either 
another planet or Urizen's strong-hold. He suspected that Urizen was not through playing with 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (43 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
them, and that he would find himself on the third of the planets that re-volved around 
Appirmatzum. He might have a comfortable landing or be dropping into a pit of wild beasts or down 
a precipice.
As he landed, he realized that he had come in against an incline. He bent his knees and put out 
his hands and so stopped himself from banging into the stone. It was smooth but not frictionless, 
and it leaned away from him at a forty-five degree angle. Turning, he saw why the grapples had 
slid back out of the gate at his first experi-ment. The base of the hexagon on this side was set 
flush with the stone. There was no purchase for any hold.
He smiled, knowing that his father had foreseen hooks and had set up the trap against them. But 
his son had gotten through.
Wolff pushed against the seemingly empty area within the hex-agon. Unlike the gate through which 
they had entered the water-world, this was not one-way. Urizen did not care, for some reason or 
another, whether they went back into the planet of purple skies. Or he knew that they would never 
want to return to it.
Wolff climbed up the stone incline, which was set on the side of a hill. He tied one end of his 
rope around a small tree and then went back to the gate. He flipped the free end of the rope 
through the gate. It jerked, and presently Vala's face appeared. He helped her through, and the 
two of them grabbed hold of the other Lords as they climbed through.
When Rintrah, the last, was safe, Wolff stuck his head through the gate for a final look. He made 
it quick, because it gave him a fright-ening feeling to know that his body was on a planet twenty 
thousand miles distant from his head. And it would be a grim joke, exactly to his father's tastes, 
if Urizen should deactivate the gate at that mo-ment.
The end of the bridge was only three feet from the hexagon. The scaffolding was still holding 
straight, although in time the currents would swing one of the boats supporting a leg and carry 
off the whole structure.
He withdrew his head, his neck feeling as if it had just escaped a guillotine.
The Lords should have been exultant, but they were too tired from their labors, and they were 
burdened with the future. By now, they knew that they were on another of the satellites of 
Appirmatzum. The sky was a deep yellow. The land around them was, apart from this hill, flat. The 
ground was covered with a six-inch high grass, and there were many bushes. These were much like 
the Terrestrial plants Wolff knew. There were at least a dozen species which bore berries of 
different sizes, colors, and shapes.
The berries had one thing in common, however. They all had a very disagreeable odor.
Near the hill of the gate was the shore of a sea. Along the sea ran a broad yellow sandbeach that 
extended as far as they could see. Wolff looked inland and saw mountains. The side of one had some 
curious formations that resembled a face. The longer he looked at it, the more sure he was that it 
was a face.
He said to the other Lords, "Our father has given us a sign, I think. A marker on the road to the 
next gate. I also think that he is not directing us just for our benefit."
They started across the plain towards the distant ranges. Presently, they came to a broad river 
and followed its course. They found its water to be pure and sweet, and they ate the meat and 
berries they had brought with them from the white-and-purple world. Then the night-bringing moon 
swung around the horizon. This was mauve and, like the other satellites, swept the surface of the 
primary with a pale dusk.
They slept and marched all the next day. They were a silent troop now, tired and footsore and 
nervous because of their lack of weap-ons. Their silence was also a reflection of the hush of this 
world. Not an animal or bird cried, nor did they see any life besides themselves and the 
vegetation. Several times they thought they saw a small creature in the distance, but when they 
neared the place, they could find nothing.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (44 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
The mountains were three days away. As they got closer, the fea-tures became more distinct. The 
evening of the second day, the face became that of Urizen. It was smiling at them, the eyes 
looking down. Then the Lords became even more silent and startful, since they could not escape the 
gigantic stone face of their father. Always, he seemed to be mocking them.
Halfway through the fourth day, they stood at the foot of the mountain and below the 
brobdingnagian chin of Urizen. The moun-tain was of solid stone, flesh-pink and very hard. Near 
where they stood was an opening, a narrow canyon that rose to the top of the mountain, at least 
ten thousand feet above.
Wolff said, "There doesn't seem any other way to go than through there. Unless we go around the 
mountains. And I think we'd be wast-ing our time if we did that."
Palamabron said, "Why should we do what our father wants?"
"We have no choice," Wolff said.
"Yes, we'll dance to his tune, and then he'll catch us and spit us on a roast, like fowl," 
Palamabron said. "I have a notion to quit this trudging, this weary weary road."
"And where will you settle down?" Vala said. "Here? In this para-dise? You may be too stupid to 
have noticed it, brother, but we are almost out of food. The meat is almost gone, and we ate the 
last of the berries this morning. We have seen nothing on this world that seems edible. You may 
try the berries, if you wish. But I think they're poisonous."
"Oh, Los! Do you think Urizen means to starve us to death?" Palamabron said.
Wolff said, "I think we'll starve unless we find some food. And we won't find any standing here."
He led the way into the canyon. Their path took them on smooth bare rock that had once been the 
bed of the stream. The river had shifted to the other side of the canyon and was now several feet 
below the stone banks. Bushes grew sparsely on the lip of the stone.
The Lords followed a meandering course all day. That night, they ate the last of their food. When 
dawn came, they rose with empty bellies and a feeling that this time their fortune had deserted 
them. Wolff led them as swiftly as he dared, thinking that the sooner they got out of the gloomy 
canyon, the better. Moreover, this place offered no food. There were no fish in the river; there 
were not even insects.
The second day of their starvation, they saw their first living crea-ture. They came around a 
bend, all silent and walking slowly. Their noiselessness, plus their approach from downwind, 
enabled them to be close to the animal before it detected them. Two feet high, it was standing on 
its kangaroo-like hind legs and holding a branch with two lemur-like front paws. On seeing them, 
it quit eating the berries, glanced wildly around, and then launched itself away with great leaps. 
Its long thin tail projected stiffly behind it.
Wolff started to run after it, but quit as soon as he realized its speed. The animal stopped when 
it was a hundred yards away and turned to face them. Its head was much like a purebred Persian 
cat's except that the ears were a jackrabbit's. The body was khaki; the head, chocolate; the ears, 
magenta.
Wolff advanced steadily towards it, and it fled until it was out of sight. He decided that it 
would be a good thing if the Lords had clubs in case they came within close range of the hopper 
again. He cut the bushes to make sticks that would be heavy enough to do the job.
Palamabron asked him why he did not kill the beast with his beamer. Wolff answered that he was 
trying to waste as little power as possible. The thing took off so swiftly that he was not sure he 
could hit it. The next time, power conservation or not, he would shoot. They had to have something 
to eat. They continued on their way and began seeing more of the hoppers. These must have been 
warned by the first, since they all kept well out of range.
Two hours later, they came to a wide fissure in the canyon walls. Wolff went down it and found 
that it led to a box canyon. This was about thirty feet lower than the main one, about three 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (45 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
hundred yards wide and four hundred deep. The floor was thick with bushes, among which he saw one 
hopper.
He went back to the others and told them what they were to do. Luvah and Theotormon stayed within 
the narrow passage while the rest walked out into the canyon. They spread out in a wide circle to 
close in on the lone animal.
The hopper stood in a large clearing, its nose twitching, its head turning quickly from side to 
side. Wolff told the others to stop, and he walked slowly towards it, the club held behind his 
back. The ani-mal waited until Wolff was within ten feet of it. Then it disappeared. Wolff whirled 
around, thinking that it had jumped with such swift-ness that he had not been able to see it. 
There was no animal behind him. There were only the Lords, gaping and asking what had hap-pened.
Approximately three seconds later, the beast reappeared. It was now thirty feet from him. Wolff 
took a step towards it, and it was gone again.
Three seconds later, there were two animals in the clearing. One was ten feet away from Vala. The 
other was to Wolffs left and fifteen feet away.
"What the hell?" Wolff said. It took much to startle him. Now he was far more than startled. He 
was bewildered.
The animal near Vala disappeared. Now there was one left. Wolff ran towards it, his club raised 
and shouting, hoping to freeze the ani-mal long enough to get a chance to strike it.
It vanished. A little later, it reappeared to his right. A second hopper was with it.
The Lords closed in on them. The two beasts suddenly became five.
After that, there was much yelling, screaming, and confusion. Some of the animals had popped up 
behind the Lords, and several Lords turned to give chase.
Then there were two of the creatures that Wolff was to call tempusfudgers.
These two became three as the wild chase continued for another three seconds.
Then there was one.
The Lords pursued that one and suddenly had two before them.
Three animals were being chased three seconds later.
Then there was one.
The Lords came in on it from all directions at full speed. Two ani-mals reappeared, one directly 
in front of Palamabron. He was so startled, he tried to stop, stumbled, and fell on his face. The 
creature hopped over him and then vanished as Rintrah swung at it with his stick.
There were two now.
Three.
All of a sudden, none.
The Lords stopped running and stared at each other. Only the wind and their heavy breathing 
sounded in the box canyon.
Abruptly three of the beasts were in their midst.
The chase started again.
There was one.
Five.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (46 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Three.
Six.
For six seconds, three.
Six again.
Wolff called a halt to the milling chase. He led the Lords back to the entrance, where they sat 
down to recover their breath. Having done that, they began chattering away to each other, all 
asking the same questions and no one with an answer.
Wolff studied the six animals a hundred yards away. They had for-gotten their panic, though not 
the cause of it, and were nibbling away at the berries.
A silence fell upon the Lords again. They looked at their pensive brother, and Vala said, "What do 
you make of it, Jadawin?"
"I've been thinking back to the time that the first animal we saw vanished," he said. "I've been 
trying to calculate the lengths of their disappearances and the correlation between the number at 
one time and at succeeding times."
He shook his head. "I don't know. Maybe. It doesn't seem possi-ble. But how else explain it. Or, 
if not explain, describe, anyway.
"Tell me, have any of you ever heard of a Lord having success with time-travel experiments?"
Palamabron laughed.
Vala said, "Jackass!" She spoke to WolfL "I have heard that Blind Orc tried for many years to 
discover the principles of time. But it is said that he gave up. He claimed that trying to dissect 
time was a problem as insolvable as explaining the origin of the universe."
"Why do you ask?" Ariston said.
"There is a tiny subatomic particle which Earth scientists call the neutrino," Wolff answered. 
"It's an uncharged particle with zero rest mass. Do you know what I'm talking about?"
All shook their heads. Luvah said, "You know we were all ex-ceedingly well educated at one time, 
Jadawin. But it has been thou-sands of years since we took any interest in science except to use 
the devices we had at hand for our purposes."
"You are indeed a bunch of ignorant gods," Wolff said. "The most powerful beings of the cosmos, 
yet barbaric, illiterate divini-ties."
"What has that got to do with our present situation?" Enion said. "And why do you insult us? You 
yourself said we must quit these in-sults if we are to survive."
"Forgive me," Wolff said. "It's just that I am sometimes overwhelmed at the discrepancy . . . 
never mind. Anyway, the neutrino behaves rather peculiarly. In such a manner, in fact, that it 
might be said to go backward in time."
"It really does?" Palamabron said.
"I doubt it. But its behavior can be described in time-travel terms, whether the neutrino actually 
does go into reverse chronological gear or not.
"I believe the same applies to those beasts out there. Maybe they can go forward or backwards in 
time. Perhaps Urizen had the power to create such animals. I doubt it. He may have found them in 
some universe we don't know about and imported them.
"Whatever their origin, they do have an ability which makes them seem to hop around in time. 
Within a three-second limit, I'd say."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (47 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
He drew a circle in the dirt with the end of his stick. "This repre-sents the single animal we 
first saw."
He drew a line from it and described another circle at its end. "This represents the disappearance 
of it, its nonexistence in our time. It was going forward in time, or seemed to."
"I'll swear it was not gone for three seconds when it first disap-peared," Vala said.
Wolff extended a line from the second circle and made a third cir-cle at its end. Then he 
scratched a line at right angles to it, and bent it back to a position opposite the second circle.
"It leaped forward into time, or can be described as doing so. Then it went back to the time-slot 
it did not occupy when it made the first jump. Thus, we saw a beast for six seconds but did not 
know that it had gone forward and backward.
"Then the animal-let's call it a tempusfudger-jumped forward again to the time at which its first-
avatar-had come out of the first jump.
"Now we have two. The same animal, fissioned by time-travel. 
"One jumped the three seconds forward again, and we did not see it during that tune. The other did 
not jump but ran about. It jumped when tempusfudger No. 2 reappeared.
"Only No. 1 also jumped back just as No. 2 came out of the time-hop. So we have two again."
"But all of a sudden there were five?" Rintrah said. "Let's see. We had two. Now No. 1 had made a 
jump, and he was one of the five. He jumped back to be one of the previous two. Then he jumped 
forward again to become No. 3 of the five.
"No. 2 had jumped, when there was only one tempusfudger, to become No. 2 of the five. No. 1 and 
No. 2 jumped forward and then back to also become No. 4 and 5 of the five.
"No. 4 and 5 then jumped ahead to the period when there were only two. Meanwhile, No. 1 had leaped 
over three seconds, No. 4 didn't leap, and No. 5 did. So there were only two at that instant."
He grinned at their lax faces. "Now do you understand?"
"That's impossible," Tharmas said. "Time-travel! You know it's impossible!"
"Sure, I know. But if these animals aren't time-traveling, what are they doing? You don't know any 
more than I do. So, if I can de-scribe their behavior as chronosaltation, and the description 
helps us catch them, why object?"
"Why don't you use your beamer?" Rintrah said. "We're all very hungry. I'm weak after chasing 
those flickering on-again-off-again things."
Wolff shrugged and arose and walked towards the fudgers. They continued eating but kept watching 
him. When he was within thirty yards, they hopped away. He followed them until they were getting 
close to the blind wall of the canyon. They scattered. He put the beamer on half-power and aimed 
at one.
Perhaps the tempusfudger was startled by the raising of the weapon. It disappeared just as he 
fired, and the beam's energy was absorbed by a boulder beyond it.
He cursed, flicked off the power, and aimed at another. This leaped to one side and avoided the 
first shot. He kept the power on and swung the beam to catch it. The animal jumped again, narrowly 
escaping the ray. Wolff twisted his wrist to bring the fudger within touch of the beam. The animal 
disappeared.
Quickly, he swung the weapon back towards the others. A fudger sprang across his field of vision, 
and he brought the white ray upon it.
It disappeared at the same time. There was a shout behind him. He turned to see the Lords pointing 
at a dead animal a few yards to his left. It lay in a heap, its fur scorched.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (48 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
He blinked. Vala came running and said, "It dropped out of the air; it was dead and cooked when it 
hit the ground."
"But I didn't hit anything except just now," he said. "And the ani-mal I hit hasn't reappeared 
yet."
"That fudger was dead on arrival three seconds ago, maybe a little more," she said. "Three seconds 
before you hit the other."
She stopped, grinned, and said, "What do I mean . . . other? It's the same one you hit. Killed 
before you hit it. Or just as you hit it. Only it jumped back."
Wolff said, slowly, "You're telling me I killed it first, then shot it."
"No, not really. But it looked that way. Oh, I don't know. I'm confused."
"Anyway, we have something to eat," he said. "But not much. There's not enough meat there to 
satisfy us."
He whirled and brought the beam around to describe a horizontal arc. It struck some rocks, then 
came to a fudger. And the beam went out.
He continued to aim the beamer steadily at the fudger, which stood poised upon its hind legs, its 
big eyes blinking.
"The power's gone," he said. He ejected the power pack and stuck the beamer into his belt. It was 
useless now, but he had no intention of throwing it away. The time might come when he would get 
his hands on some fresh packs.
He wanted to continue the hunt with sticks. The others vetoed him. Weak and hungry, they needed 
food at once. Although the meat was half-charred, they devoured it greedily. Their bellies quit 
rum-bling a little. They rested a moment, then got to their feet and went after the tempusfudgers 
again.
Their plan was to spread out in a wide circle which would contract to bring all the animals within 
reach of the clubs. The fudgers began hopping wildly and flickering in and out of existence ... or 
time. At one moment, there were none, when all must have simultaneously decided to jump forward or 
to jump backward. It was difficult to tell what was going on during the hunt.
Wolff made no effort at the beginning to keep count. There were six, then zero, and then six, then 
three, then six, then one, then seven.
Back and forth, in and out, while the Lords ran around and howled like wolves and swung their 
sticks, hoping to connect with a fudger just as it came out of the chronoleap. Suddenly, Tharmas' 
club thudded against the side of the head of one of the animals as it materialized. It collapsed, 
jerked several times, and died.
Eight had dropped out of the air. One had stayed behind as a car-cass while the others became 
invisible. There should have been seven the next time, but there were eight again. Three seconds 
later, there were three. Another three seconds, nine. Zero. Nine. Two. Eleven. Seven. Two.
Eleven, and Wolff threw his stick and caught one in the back. It pitched forward on its face. Vala 
was on it with her stick and beat it to death before it could recover from its stunned condition.
There were fifteen, quickly cut to thirteen when Rintrah and Theotormon each killed one. Then, 
zero.
Within a minute, the tempusfudgers seemed to go riot. Terrified, they hurled themselves back and 
forth and became twenty-eight, zero, twenty-eight, zero, and fifty-six, or so Wolff roughly 
estimated it. It was, of course, impossible to make an accurate count. A little later, he was 
sure, only because his arithmetic assured him it should be so, that the doubling had resulted in 
one thousand seven hundred and ninety-two.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (49 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
There had been no more casualties among the fudgers to reduce the number. The Lords had been 
unable to kill any. They were being buffeted by the ever-increasing horde, knocked down by hoppers 
ap-pearing in front of them, behind them, and beside them, stepped upon, scratched, kicked, and 
hammered.
Suddenly, the little animals stampeded towards the exit of the can-yon. They hurtled over the 
floor and should have jammed into the narrow pass, but somehow formed an orderly arrangement and 
were gone.
Slowly, sore and shaken, the Lords arose. They looked at the four dead animals and shook their 
heads. Out of almost eighteen hundred that had been at hand, easy prey-in theory-these pitiful 
four were left.
"Half a fudger will make one good meal for each of us," Vala said. "That's better than none. But 
what will we do tomorrow?"
The others did not answer. They began collecting wood for the cooking fires. Wolff borrowed 
Theotormon's knife and started the skinning.
In the morning, they ate the scraps left over from the evening's feast. Wolff led them on up. The 
canyon remained as silent as before, except for the river's murmuring. The walls kept on pressing 
in. The sky burned yellow far above. Fudgers appeared at a distance. Wolff tried throwing rocks at 
them. He almost struck one, only to see it disappear as if it had slipped around a corner of air. 
It came into sight again, three seconds later, twenty feet away and hopping as if it had an 
important engagement it had suddenly recalled.
Two days after they had last eaten, the Lords were almost ready to try the berries. Palamabron 
argued that the repulsive odor of the ber-ries did not necessarily mean that they had a 
disagreeable taste. Even if they did, they were not necessarily poisonous. They were going to die, 
anyway, so why not test the berries?
"Go ahead," Vala said. "It's your theory and your desire. Eat some!"
She was smiling peculiarly at him, as if she were enjoying the conflict between his hunger and 
fear.
"No," Palamabron said. "I will not be your guinea pig. Why should I sacrifice myself for all of 
you? I will eat the berries only if all eat at the same time."
"So you can die in good company," Wolff said. "Come on, Pala-mabron. Put up or shut up-old Earth 
proverb. You're wasting our time arguing. Either do it yourself or forget about it."
Palamabron sniffed at the berry he was holding, made a face, and let the berry fall on the rocky 
floor. Wolff started to walk away, and the Lords followed. About an hour later, he saw another 
side-canyon. On the way into it, he picked up a round stone which was just the right size and 
weight for throwing. If only he could sneak up close enough to a fudger and throw the rock while 
it was looking the other way.
The canyon was a little smaller than that in which the Lords had made their first hunt. At its far 
end was a single tempusfudger, eating the berries. Wolff got down on his hands and knees and began 
the slow crawl towards it. He took advantage of every rock for covering and managed to get halfway 
across the canyon before the animal no-ticed anything. It suddenly quit moving its jaws, sat up, 
and looked around, its nose wiggling, its ears vibrating like a TV antenna in a strong wind.
Wolff hugged the ground and did not move at all. He was sweating with the effort and tension, 
since the starvation diet had weakened him considerably. He wanted to jump up and run at the 
fudger and hurl himself upon it, tear it apart, eat it raw. He could have devoured the entire 
animal from the tips of its ears down to the tip of its tail and then broken the bones open to 
suck out the marrow.
He forced himself to stay motionless. The animal must get over its suspiciousness soon, after 
which Wolff could resume his turtle-like approach.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (50 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Then, from behind a rock near the fudger, another beast appeared. It was gray except for red 
wolflike ears, had a long pointed face, a bushy tail, and was about midway in size between a fox 
and a coyote. It sprang at the tempusfudger, coming up from behind it just as it was looking the 
other way.
Its teeth closed on air. The fudger had disappeared, escaping the jaws by a fraction of an inch.
The predator also disappeared, vanishing before it struck the ground.
Three animals appeared, two fudgers and one predator. Wolff, who liked to tag unknown things, at 
once called it a chronowolf. For the first time, he was seeing the creature that nature-or Urizen-
had placed here to keep the fudger from overpopulating this world.
Wolff now had time to figure out what was happening with the leapers. There had been two. Then 
there were none. Then, three. So the original fudger and the chronowolf had jumped ahead. But the 
fudger had stayed only a microsecond, and leaped back also. So that he had reproduced himself and 
now there were two for the wolf to chase.
Again, the animals vanished. They reappeared, four in number. Two fudgers, two chronowolves. The 
chase was on, not only in space but in the strange gray corridors of backwards-forwards time.
Another simultaneous jump into the tempolimbo. Wolff ran to-wards a boulder around which grew a 
number of bushes. He hurled himself down and then peered between the bushes.
Seven again. This time a wolf had come out of wherever he had been just behind his quarry. He 
hurled himself forward, and his jaws closed around the neck of the fudger. There was a loud crack; 
the fudger dropped dead.
Seven living, and one dead. A fudger had gone back and then for-ward again.
The living vanished. Evidently the wolf did not intend to stay behind and eat his kill.
Then six were jumping around the plain. Savagely, a wolf bit an-other wolf on the neck, and the 
attacked crumpled in death.
Nothing for three seconds. Wolff ran out and threw himself down on the ground. Although not hidden 
behind anything this time, he hoped that his motionlessness, combined with the terror of the 
fudgers and the bloodlust of the wolves, would make them not notice him,
Another wolf had been born out of time's womb. Parthenogenesis of chronoviators.
Two wolves launched themselves at each other, while the third watched them, and the fudgers hopped 
around in apparent confusion.
The observer predator became participant, not in the struggle be-tween his fellows, but in the 
hunt. He caught a fudger by the throat as it hurtled by him in its blind panic.
A fudger and a wolf died.
The living flickered out again. When they came back into his sight, a wolf gripped a fudger's neck 
and cracked it.
Wolff slowly rose to his feet. At the exact moment that one of the wolves died, he hurled his 
stone at the winner. It must have caught the motion out of the corner of its eyes, since it 
vanished just before the stone would have struck. And when it shot out of the chute of time, it 
was going as swiftly as its four legs would take it towards the exit.
"I'm sorry to deprive you of the spoils of victory," Wolff called out after it. "But you can 
resume the hunt elsewhere."
He went to call the other Lords and to tell them that their luck had changed. Six animals would 
fill their bellies and furnish a little over for the next day.
There came the tune again when the Lords had been without food for three days. They were gaunt, 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (51 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
their cheeks hollow, their eyes couched within dark and deep caves, their bellies advancing 
towards their spines. That day Wolff sent them out in pairs to hunt. He had intended to go alone 
but Vala insisted that he take Luvah with him. She would hunt by herself. Wolff asked her why she 
wanted it that way, and she replied that she did not care to be accompanied by only one man.
"You think you might become the victim of a cannibal?" Wolff said.
"Exactly," she said. "You know that if we continue to go hungry, it's inevitable that we'll start 
eating one another. It may even have been planned by Urizen. He would very much enjoy seeing us 
kill one another and stuff our bellies with our own flesh and blood."
"Have it your own way," Wolff said. He left with Luvah to ex-plore a series of side-canyons. The 
two sighted a number of fudgers eating from bushes and began the patient, hours-long creeping upon 
them. They came within an inch of success. The stone, thrown by Wolff, went past the head of his 
intended victim. After that, all was lost. The fudgers did not even bother to take refuge in tune 
but leaped away and were lost in another canyon.
Wolff and Luvah continued to look until near the time for the moon to bring another night of 
hunger-torn sleeplessness. When they got back to the meeting-place, they found the others, looking 
very perturbed. Palamabron and his hunting-companion, Enion, were missing.
"I don't know about the rest of you," Tharmas said, "but I'm too exhausted to go looking for the 
damn fools."
"Maybe we should," Vala said. "They might have had some luck and even now be stuffing themselves 
with good meat, instead of shar-ing it with us."
Tharmas cursed. However, he refused to search for them. If they had had luck, he said, he would 
know it when he next saw their faces. They would not be able to hide their satisfaction from him. 
And he would kill them for their selfishness and greed.
"They wouldn't be doing anything you wouldn't if you had their chance," Wolff said. "What's all 
the uproar about? We don't know that they've caught anything. After all, it was only a suggestion 
by Vala. There's no proof, not the slightest."
They grumbled and cursed but soon were asleep with utter weari-ness.
Wolff slept, too, but awoke in the middle of the night. He thought he had heard a cry in the 
distance. He sat up and looked at the others. They were all there, except for Palamabron and 
Enion.
Vala sat up also. She said, "Did you hear something, brother? Or was it the wailing of our 
bellies?"
"It came from upriver," he said. He rose to his feet. "I think I shall go look."
She said, "I'll go with you. I cannot sleep any longer. The thought that they might be feasting 
keeps me angry and awake."
"I do not think the feasting will be on the little hoppers," he said.
She said, "You think. . ."
"I do not know. You spoke of the possibility. It becomes stronger every day, as we become weaker 
and hungrier."
He picked up his stick, and they walked along the edge of the river. They had little difficulty 
seeing where they were going. The moon brought only a half-darkness. Even though the walls of the 
canyon deepened the twilight, there was still enough light for them to proceed with confidence.
So it was that they saw Palamabron before he saw them. His head appeared for a moment above a 
boulder near the wall of the canyon. His profile was presented to them, then he disappeared. On 
bare feet, they crept towards him. The wind carried to them the noise he was making. It sounded as 
if he were striking one stone against another.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (52 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Is he trying to make a fire?" Vala whispered.
Wolff did not answer. He was sick, since he could think of only one reason why Palamabron would 
want to build a fire. When he came to the huge rock behind which Palamabron was, he hesitated. He 
did not want to see what he thought he must when he came around the boulder.
Palamabron had his back to them. He was on his knees before a pile of branches and leaves and was 
knocking a piece of flint against a rock that was heavy in iron.
Wolff breathed a sigh of relief. The body beside Palamabron was that of a fudger. Where was Enion?
Wolff came up silently behind Palamabron, his stick raised high. He spoke loudly. "Well, 
Palamabron?"
The Lord gave a short scream and dived forward over the firepile. He rolled and came up on his 
feet, facing them. He held a very crude flint knife.
"It's mine," he snarled. "I killed it, and I want it. I have to have it. I'll die if I don't get 
to eat!"
"So will we all," Wolff said. "Where is your cousin?" 
Palamabron spat and said, "The beast! He's no cousin of mine. How should I know where he is? Why 
should I care?" 
"You went out with him," Wolff said.
"I don't know where he is. We got separated while we were hunting."
"We thought we heard a cry," Vala said.
"It was a fudger, I think," Palamabrcn said. "Yes, it was. The one I killed a little while ago. I 
found it sleeping and killed it and it cried out as it died."
"Maybe," Wolff said. He backed away from Palamabron until he was at a safe distance. He continued 
on up the rivershore. Before he had gone a hundred yards, he saw the hand lying beside a boulder. 
He went around it and found Enion. The back of his head was crushed in; beside him lay the bloody 
rock that had killed him.
He returned to Palamabron and Vala. She was still there; the Lord and the fudger were gone.
"Why didn't you stop him?" Wolff said.
She shrugged and smiled. "I'm only a woman. How could I stop him?"
"You could have," he replied. "I think you wanted to enjoy the chase after him. Well, let me tell 
you, there won't be any. None of us have the strength to waste it climbing around here. And when 
he eats, he'll have enough strength to outclimb or outrun us."
"Very well," she said. "So what do we do now?"
"Keep on going and hope for the best."
"And starve!" she said. She pointed at the boulder which hid Enion's body. "There's enough food 
for all of us."
Wolff did not reply for a moment. He had not wanted to think about this, but, since he was faced 
with it, he would do what had to be done. Vala was right. Without this food, however horrible it 
was to think about it, they might well die. In a way, Palamabron had done them a favor. He had 
taken the guilt upon himself of killing for them. They could eat without considering themselves 
murderers. Not that killing would bother the rest of them. He, however, would have suffered 
agonies if he had been forced into a position where he had to slay a human being to survive.
As for the actual eating, he was now feeling only a slight repul-sion. Hunger had deadened his 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (53 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
normal horror against cannibalism.
He returned to wake the others while Vala picked up the rocks dropped by Palamabron. By the time 
they returned, she had not only started a fire but was intent on the butchering. Wolff held back 
for a moment. Then, thinking that if he was to share in the food, he should also share in the 
work, he took Theotormon's knife. The others offered a hand, but he turned them down. It was as if 
he wanted to punish himself by making himself do most of the grisly work.
When the meal was cooked, half-cooked, rather, he took his share and went around the boulder to 
eat. He was not sure that he could keep the meat down, and he was sure that if he watched the 
others eat, he would not be able to keep from vomiting. Somehow, it did not seem so bad if he were 
alone.
Dawn had found them still cooking. Not until the middle of the morning did they start traveling 
again. The meat that had not been eaten was wrapped in leaves.
"If Urizen was watching us," Wolff said, "he must really be laughing."
"Let him laugh," Vala said. "My turn will come."
"Your turn? You mean, our turn."
"You may do what you like. All I'm interested in is what I do."
"Typical of the Lords," said Wolff without elaborating. He watched her for a while after that. She 
had amazing vitality. Perhaps it was the food that had given her such a swift walk and had filled 
out her cheeks and arms. He did not think so. Even during the star-vation, she had not seemed to 
suffer as much as the rest or to waste away as swiftly.
If anybody could survive to get at her father's throat, it would be Vala, he thought.
May I not be far behind her, he prayed. Not so much for venge-ance on Urizen, though I want that, 
as to rescue Chryseis.
XII
They had been without food for a day when they emerged from the canyon. Before them, at the foot 
of a long gentle hill, was a plain that stretched to the horizon. A quarter of a mile away was a 
small hill, and on this were two giant hexagons.
They stopped to look dully at their goal. Wolff said, "I suggest we take one or the other gate 
immediately. Perhaps there may be food on the other side."
"If not?" Tharmas said.
"I'd rather die quickly trying to get through Urizen's defenses than starve slowly. Which, at the 
moment, looks as if it might. . ."
He let his voice trail off, thinking that the Lords felt low enough.
They followed him sluggishly up to the foot of the golden, gem-studded frames. He said to Vala, 
"Sister, you have the honor of choosing the right or the left entrance for us. Continue. Only be 
quick about it. I can hear my strength ebbing away."
She picked up a stone, turned her back to the gates, and cast the stone over her head. It sailed 
through the right gate, almost striking the frame.
"So be it," Wolff said. He looked at them and laughed. "What a crew! Brave Lords! Tramps rather! 
Sticks, a broken sword, a knife, and muscles shaking with weakness and bellies groaning for meat. 
Was ever a Lord attacked in his own stronghold by such a con-temptible bunch?"
Vala laughed and said, "At least you have some spirit left, Jadawin. That may mean something."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (54 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"I hope so," he said, and he ran forward and jumped through the right gate. He came out under a 
deep-blue sky and onto ground that gave under his feet a little. The topography was flat except 
for a few steep hills, so rough and dark that they looked more like excres-cences than mounds of 
dirt. He doubted they were dirt, since the sur-face on which he stood was not earth. It was 
brownish but smooth and with small holes in it. A foot-high stalk, thin as a pipestem cleaner, 
grew out of each hole.
Almost like the skin of a giant, he thought.
The only vegetation, if it could be called that, was a number of widely separated trees. These 
were about forty feet high, were thinly trunked, and had smooth, sharply pointed branches that 
projected at a forty-five degree angle upwards from the trunk. The branches were darker than the 
saffron of the main shaft and sparsely covered with blade-like leaves about two feet long.
The other Lords came through the gate a minute later. He turned and said, "I'm glad I didn't find 
anything I couldn't have handled without your help."
Vala said, "They all were sure that this time the gate would lead into Urizen's stronghold."
"And perhaps I'd trip a few traps before I went down," he said. "And so give the rest of you a 
chance to live a few minutes longer."
They did not reply. Wolff gazed reproachfully at Luvah, whose cheeks reddened.
Wolff tested the gate. It had either been deactivated or else was unipolar. He saw a long black 
line that could be the shore of a lake or sea. This world, unlike the one they had just left, gave 
no indica-tions of the direction they must take. On the side, where he had first stepped, however, 
he had seen two rough dark hills very close to-gether. These might or not be some sort of sign 
from Urizen. There was only one way to find out, which Wolff took without hesitation.
He set out on the slightly springy ground, the others trailing. The shadow of a bird passed before 
them, and they looked up. It was white with red legs, about the size of a bald eagle, and had a 
monkey face with a curving bird's beak instead of a nose. It swooped so low that Luvah threw his 
stick at it. The stick passed behind its flaring tail. It squawked indignantly and climbed away 
swiftly.
Wolff said, "That looks like a nest on that tree. Let's see if it could have eggs."
Luvah ran forward to recover his stick, then stopped. Wolff stared where Luvah was pointing.
The earth was rippling. It rose in inch-high waves and advanced towards the stick. Luvah turned to 
run, thought better of it, turned again, and ran to pick up the stick. Behind him, the earth 
swelled, rose up and up, and raced forward, like a surfer's wave.
Wolff yelled. Luvah whirled, saw the danger, and ran away from it. He ran at an angle, towards the 
end of the wave. Wolff came along behind it, not knowing what he could do to help Luvah but hoping 
to do something.
Then the wave collapsed. Wolff and Luvah stopped. Abruptly, Wolff felt the earth rising below his 
feet and saw that another swell-ing had started some ten feet from Luvah. Both turned and raced 
away, the earth-or whatever it was-chasing after them.
They made it back to the area around the gate, which had been stable and would continue to be so-
they hoped.
They got to the safety zone just in time to escape the sudden sink-ing of the land behind them. A 
hole, broad and shallow at first, ap-peared. Then it narrowed and deepened. The sides closed in on 
themselves, there was a smacking sound, and the hole reversed its original process. It widened out 
until all was smooth as before, ex-cept that the foot-high, thin growths sprouting from each 
depression kept on vibrating.
"What in Los' name!" Luvah said over and over. He was pale, and the freckles stood out like a 
galaxy of fear.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (55 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Wolff was a little sick himself. Feeling the earth tremble under him had been like being caught in 
an earthquake. In fact, that was what he had thought when it first happened.
Somebody yelled behind him. He spun to see Palamabron trying to get back through the gate through 
which he had just stepped only to go flying vainly through the frame. He must have been following 
them and waited until he thought they had gone some distance from the gate. Now, he was trapped as 
much as they.
More so, since Wolff had use for him. Wolff shoved the others away from Palamabron's throat and 
shouted at them to leave him alone. They drew back while Palamabron shook and his teeth 
chat-tered.
"Palamabron," Wolff said, "you have been sentenced to death be-cause you broke truce with us and 
murdered your cousin."
Palamabron, seeing that he was not to be killed out of hand, took courage. Perhaps he thought he 
had a chance. He cried, "At least I did not eat my own brother! And I had to kill him! He attacked 
me first!"
"Enion was struck in the back of the head," Wolff said.
"I knocked him down!" Palamabron shouted. "He started to rise when I seized a rock and hit him 
with it. It was not my fault he had his back turned. Would you ask me to wait until he had turned 
around?"
"There's no use talking about this," Wolff said. "But you can go free. Your blood will not be on 
our hands. Only, you can't stay with us. None of us would feel safe to sleep at night or turn our 
backs on you."
"You are letting me go?" Palamabron said. "Why?"
"Don't waste time talking," Wolff said. "If you don't get out of our sight within ten minutes, 
I'll let the others at you. You'd better leave. Now!"
"Wait a minute," Palamabron said. "There's something very sus-picious about this. No, I won't go."
Wolff gestured at the others. "Go ahead. Kill him."
Palamabron screamed, turned, and ran away as swiftly as he could. He seemed weak, and his legs 
began to move slowly after the first thirty yards. He looked back several times, then, seeing that 
they were not coming after him, he quit running.
The earth swelled behind him and built up until it was twice as high as his head. At the moment it 
gained its peak, Palamabron looked over his shoulder again. He saw the giant wave racing to-wards 
him, and he screamed and began to run again. The wave collapsed, the tremors following the 
collapse upsetting Palamabron and knocking him off his feet. He scrambled up and continued to go 
on, although he was staggering by now.
A hole opened up ahead of him. He screamed and darted off at right angles to it, seeming to gain 
new strength from terror. The hole disappeared, but a second gaped ahead of him. Again, he raced 
away, this time diagonally to the hole.
Another wave began to build up before him. He whirled, slipped, fell hard, rolled over, and 
stumbled away. Presently, the swelling, which had risen directly between Palamabron and the Lords, 
grew so high that it walled him off from their sight. After that, the wave froze for a moment, 
rigid except for a slight trembling. Gradually, it sub-sided, and the plain was flat again, with 
the exception of a six-foot long mound.
"Swallowed up," Vala said. She seemed thrilled. Her eyes were wide open, her mouth parted, the 
lower lip wet. Her tongue flicked out to trace with its tip the oval of both lips.
Wolff said, "Our father has indeed created a monster for us. Perhaps, this entire planet is 
covered with the skin of ... of this Weltthier."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (56 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"What?" said Theotormon. His eyes were still glazed with terror. And though he had been shrinking 
during the starvation on the last world, he now seemed to have dwindled off fifty pounds in the 
past two minutes. His skin hung in loops.
"Weltthier. World-animal. From German, a Terrestrial language." 
A planet covered with skin, he thought. Or maybe it was not so much a skin as a continent-sized 
amoeba spread out over the globe. The idea made him boggle.
The skin existed; there was no denying that. But how did it keep from starving to death? The 
millions and millions of tons of proto-plasm had to be fed. Certainly, although it ate animals, it 
could not get nearly enough of these to maintain itself.
Wolff decided to investigate the subject, if he ever got the chance. He was as curious as a monkey 
or a Siamese cat, always probing, pondering, speculating, and analyzing. He could not rest until 
he knew the why and how.
He sat down to rest while he considered what to do. The others, Vala excepted, also sat or lay 
down. She walked from the "safety zone," placing her feet carefully with each step. Watching her, 
he un-derstood what she was doing. Why had he not thought of that? She was avoiding contact with 
the plants (hairs?) that grew from the holes (pores?). After traveling on a circle with a radius 
of about twenty-five yards, she returned to the gate area. Not once had the skin trembled or begun 
to form threatening shapes.
Wolff stood up and said, "Very good, Vala. You beat me to it. The beast, or whatever it is, 
detects life by touch through the feelers or hairs. If we navigate as cautiously as ships going 
through openings in reefs, we can cross over this thing. Only trouble is, how do we get past 
those?"
He pointed outwards to the horny buttes, the excrescentoid hills. The hairs began to crowd 
together at their bases, and beyond the buttes they carpeted the ground.
She shrugged and said, "I don't know."
"We'll worry about it when we get to it," he said. He began walk-ing, looking downwards to guide 
himself among the feelers. The Lords followed him in Indian file, with Vala again being the only 
ex-ception. She paralleled his course at a distance of five or six yards to his right.
"It's going to be very difficult to hunt animals for food under these conditions," he said. "We'll 
have to keep one eye on the hairs and one on the animal. A terrible handicap."
"I wouldn't worry," she said. "There may be no animals."
"There is one I'm sure exists," Wolff said. He did not say anything more on the subject although 
it was evident that Vala was wondering what he meant. He headed towards the "tree" in a branch of 
which he saw the nest. A circular pile of sticks and leaves, it was lodged at the junction of the 
trunk and a branch and was about three feet across. The sticks and leaves seemed to be held 
together with a gluey substance.
He stepped between two feelers, propped his club against the tree, and shinnied up the trunk. 
Halfway up, he saw the tops of two hex-agons on one of the buttes. When he got to the nest, he 
clung to the trunk with his legs, one arm around the trunk, while with the other hand he poked 
through leaves on top of the nest. He uncovered two eggs, speckled green and black and about twice 
the size of turkey eggs. Removing them one by one, he dropped them to Vala.
Immediately thereafter, the mother returned. Larger than a bald eagle, she was white with bluish 
chevrons, furry, monkey-faced, fal-con-beaked, saber-toothed, wolf-eared, bat-winged, archeopteryx-
tailed, and vulture-footed.
She shot down on him with wings folded until just before she struck. The wings opened with a 
whoosh of air, and she screamed like iron being ripped apart. Perhaps the scream was intended to 
freeze the prey. If so, it failed. Wolff just let loose of the trunk and dropped. Above him came a 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (57 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
crash and another scream, this time of frustration and panic, as the beast rammed partly into the 
nest and partly into the trunk. Evidently, it had expected to have its momen-tum absorbed by 
Wolff's body. And it may have underestimated its speed in its fury.
Wolff hit the ground and rolled, knowing that he was disturbing the feelers but unable to prevent 
it. He came up on his feet, clumps of glued-together sticks and leaves raining around him from the 
shat-tered nest. He got to one side just in time to escape being hit by the body of the half-
stunned flier. However, the blow would not have been a full one, since the creature had slowed its 
fall with an instinc-tive outspreading of wings.
By then, the earth-skin was reacting to the messages transmitted by the feelers. Not only Wolff 
had contacted them. The other Lords had scattered when Wolff fell, and they had brushed against 
hairs all around the tree.
"Back to the tree," Wolff yelled at them. Vala had anticipated his advice; she was already halfway 
up the trunk. He began shinnying after Vala, only to feel talons sharp and hot as glowing-white 
hooks fasten into his back. The flying beast had recovered and was at him again. Once more, he let 
loose and fell backward. He kicked his feet against the trunk and shoved out to throw himself into 
a horizontal attitude. And so he came down hard but with the beast below him.
Two breaths whooshed out, his and that of the beast crushed be-neath him. Less hurt, Wolff rolled 
off, stood up, and kicked the thing in the ribs. Its mouth gaped beneath the brownish beak, its 
two saber teeth covered with saliva and blood. Wolff kicked again and turned back to the tree. He 
was bowled over by two Lords frantic to get to the safety of the tree. Tharmas stepped on his head 
and used it as a springboard to leap for the trunk. Rintrah pulled him down, shoved him away, and 
started to climb. Staggering back from the push, Tharmas fell over Wolff, who was just getting to 
his hands and knees.
From her perch near the top of the tree, Vala was laughing hyster-ically. She laughed and pounded 
her thigh and then, suddenly, shrieked. Her hold lost, she fell hard, broke off a branch, turned 
over, and came down on her shoulder. She lay stunned at the base of the tree.
Theotormon was perhaps the most terrified. Still huge despite the many pounds of fat that had 
thawed off him, and handicapped by having flippers, he had a hard time scaling the tree. He kept 
slipping back down, the while he could not refrain from looking over his shoulder and gibbering.
Wolff managed to get to his feet. Around him, around the tree, rather, the skin was going mad. It 
rose in great waves that chased after Luvah and Ariston. These two were going around in circles 
with great speed, their fright giving their weary and hungry bodies fresh strength. Behind them, 
the earth-flesh rose up, moved swiftly after them, then began to curl over. Other waves appeared 
ahead of them, and pits yawned beneath their feet.
Suddenly, Luvah and Ariston passed each other, and the various moving tumors and depressions hot 
on their heels collided. Wolff was confused by the chaos of tossing, bumping, smacking, gulping 
shapes of protoplasm. More than anything, the scene resembled a collection of maelstroms.
Before the skin could get its signals straight and reorganize, it had lost Ariston and Luvah. They 
gained the trunk of the tree, but they impeded each other's ascent. While they were clawing at 
each other, Wolff picked up the body of the flier and hurled it from him as far as he could. It 
landed on an advancing swell, which stopped the mo-ment it detected the carcass. A depression 
appeared around and be-neath the body. Slowly, it sank until it was below the surface. Then the 
lips of the hole closed over it, and there was only a mound and a seam to show what was beneath.
The flier had been a sacrifice, since Wolff had wanted to keep the body for food. The area around 
the tree smoothed out, made a few ripples, and became as inert as if it were truly made of earth. 
Wolff went around the tree to examine Vala. She was sitting up, breathing hard, her face twisted 
with pain. Since the skin was springy, the im-pact had not been as hard as if it had occurred on 
hard dirt. She was bruised on her shoulder and the side of her face, and for a while she could not 
move her arm.
Her worst injury seemed to be to her dignity. She cursed them for a pack of cowardly fools and 
males fit only to be slaves-if that. The Lords were abashed by her insults or sullen. They felt 
that she was right; they were ashamed. But they were certainly not going to admit the truth.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (58 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Wolff began to think the whole affair had been funny. He started laughing, then straightened up 
with a groan. He had forgotten the gashes inflicted by the flier's talons. Luvah looked at his 
back and clucked. The blood was still oozing out, although he expected that it would soon stop 
flowing. He certainly hoped that Wolff would not be-come infected, since there was no medicine to 
be had.
"You're very cheerful," Wolff growled. He looked around for the eggs. One was smashed and spread 
over the base of the tree. The other was nowhere in sight and presumably had been swallowed by the 
skin.
"Oh, Los!" moaned Ariston. "What do we do now? We're about to die of hunger; we're lost; we can't 
leave this tree without being swallowed alive by that monster. Our father has killed us, and we 
have not even gotten close to his stronghold."
"You Lords and Makers of Universes are pitiful creatures indeed when stripped of your fortress 
walls and your weapons," Wolff said. "I'll tell you another old Earth proverb. There's more than 
one way to skin a cat."
"What cat? Where?" Theotormon said. "I could eat a dozen cats right now."
Wolff rolled his eyes upwards but did not answer. He told the others either to get on the other 
side of the tree or go up it. Then he took Theotormon's knife and went out a few feet from the 
tree. Squatting, he jammed the knife with all his strength into the skin. If it was flexible 
enough to shape itself into rough pseudopods or holes, it had to be vulnerable.
He snatched the knife out of the wound and rose and retreated a few steps. The skin shrank away, 
became a hole, then a cone formed around the wound, and the cone thrust up, like a crater slowly 
build-ing itself. Wolff stood patiently. Soon the crater flattened out, and the wound was 
revealed. Instead of the blood he had been half-expect-ing, a thin pale liquid oozed out.
He approached the wound, taking care to avoid the hairs near it. Quickly he slashed at the skin 
again, dug out a quivering mass of flesh, and ran back to the tree. There was a storm of 
protoplasmic shapes once more: waves, craters, ridges, and brief swirlings in which the flesh 
formed corkscrew pillars. Then it subsided.
Wolff said, "The skin immediately around the tree seems to be tougher and less flexible than that 
further away. I think we're safe as long as we stand on it, although the skin might be capable of 
a . . .a tidal wave that could sweep us off. Anyway, we can eat."
The other Lords took turns cutting out chunks. The raw flesh was tough, slimy with ichor, and ill-
smelling, but it could be chewed and swallowed. With something in their bellies, they felt 
stronger and more optimistic. Some lay down to sleep; Wolff walked to the shore. Vala and 
Theotormon followed him, and Luvah, seeing them, de-cided to go along. The land area ended 
abruptly with no beach for transition. Along the edge there were so few feelers they could relax a 
little. Wolff stood on the very edge and looked into the water. De-spite the fact that there was 
no sun to cast its beams, the clear water allowed him to see quite deep into it.
There were many fish of various sizes, shapes, and colors swim-ming close to shore. Even as he 
watched, he saw a long slender pale tentacle shoot out from under the edge and seize a large fish. 
The fish struggled but was drawn quickly back under the edge. Wolff got down on all fours and 
leaned out over the edge to see what kind of creature it was that had caught the prey. The rim on 
which he stood extended out quite far. In fact, he could not see the base of the land. Instead, he 
saw a mass of writhing tentacles, many of which gripped fish. And farther back were tentacles that 
hung deep into the abyss. Presently, one coiled upon itself and brought up a gigantic fish from 
the deeps.
He withdrew his head hastily, since one of the nearby tentacles was snaking out and up in his 
general direction. He said, "I won-dered how such a monster could get enough to eat. It must feed 
mainly on the sea life. And I'll bet that this animal on which we stand is a vast floater. Like 
the islands of the waterworld, this thing is free, unattached to any base."
"That's nice to know," Luvah said. "But how does that help us?"
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (59 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"We need more to eat," Wolff replied. "Theotormon, you're the swimmer among us. Would you jump in 
and swim around a bit? Stay close to shore and be ready to shoot back in. Come out fast, like a 
seal."
Theotormon said, "Why should I? You saw how those tentacles grabbed those fish."
"I think they're grabbing blindly. Maybe they can detect vibrations in the water, I don't know. 
But you're fast enough to evade them. And the tentacles immediately under this edge are small."
Theotormon shook his head. "No, I won't risk my life for you."
"You'll starve if you don't," Wolff said. "We can't keep on cutting out chunks of skin. It gets 
too violent."
He pointed at a fish that was just skimming by below the surface. It was fat and sluggish with a 
head shaped like a sphinx. "Wouldn't you like to sink your teeth in that?"
Theotormon drooled, and his belly thundered, but he would not go after it.
"Give me your knife, then," Wolff said. He removed the weapon from its scabbard before Theotormon, 
standing on one leg, could lift the other to clutch the hilt with his toes. He turned and ran and 
dived out as far as he could. The fish wheeled away from him and scooted away. It was slow but not 
so slow that he could catch it. Nor had he thought he could. He was interested in finding out if a 
tentacle, feel-ing the vibrations of the splash and his strokes, would come probing for him.
One did. It undulated down from the fleshy base to which it was attached and then out towards him. 
He swam back towards the shore, dipping his head below the water to watch it. When he saw it 
suddenly gain speed as it neared him, he reached out one hand and grabbed its tip. Until then, he 
had not been certain that the tentacle was not poisonous, like a jellyfish's. However, the fish 
that had been seized had fought vigorously with no indication of being envenomed.
The tentacle doubled up on itself, looped, and went around him. He released the tip, turned, and 
grabbed the tentacle about twelve inches back from its tip. He began to saw at the skin with the 
knife, which went through fairly easy. The tentacle abandoned its efforts to wrap itself around 
him and began to pull back. He kept hold with one hand and continued to cut. The water became 
darker as he was carried back under the edge. Then, the knife was through, and he was swimming 
back up with the severed part in his teeth.
He heaved the tentacle up on shore and was beginning to pull him-self out when he felt something 
enfold his right foot. He looked down at a mouth on the end of another tentacle. The mouth was 
toothless but strong enough to keep its grip on his foot. He clung with his arms on the edge and 
gasped, "Help me!"
Theotormon took a few steps towards him on his rubbery legs and then halted. Vala looked down at 
the thing and smiled. Luvah snatched the broken sword from her scabbard and went into the water. 
At that, Vala laughed, and she followed Luvah in. She came back up, took Wolff's dagger, and dived 
back down. She and Luvah went to work on the tentacle a few feet from the mouth. The shaft parted; 
Wolff pulled himself on out with the amputated mouth-part still ensocked on his foot.
The two pieces of flesh could be eaten only after being pounded against the treetrunk to tenderize 
them. Even then, eating them was almost like chewing on rubber. But it was more food in the 
stomach. 
Afterwards, they advanced gingerly over the plain. At the point by the first butte where the hairs 
began to cluster thickly, they halted. Now they could see their goal. A half-mile away, on top of 
a tall butte, was the pair of golden hexagons.
Wolff had picked up the branch that Vala's fall had broken off. He threw this hard as he could and 
watched it come down in the hairs. The whole area reacted at once and far more violently than the 
less haired area. The skin stormed.
"Oh, Los!" Ariston said. "We're done for! We could never get across that." He shook his fist at 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (60 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
the sky and shouted, "You, our fa-ther! I hate you! I loathe you, and abominate the day that you 
jetted me from your foul loins! You may think you have us where you want us! But, by Los and 
crooked Enitharmon, I swear that we'll get to you yet!"
"That's the spirit," Wolff said. "For a moment, I thought you were going to whine like a sick dog. 
Tell the old bastard off! He can probably hear you."
Ariston, breathing hard, fists still clenched, said, "Brave enough talk. But I still would like to 
know what to do."
Wolff said to the others, "Any ideas?"
They shook their heads. He said, "Where is all the diabolical cleverness and weasel agility of 
mind that the children of Urizen are supposed to have? I've heard tales of each one of you, of how 
you have assailed the stronghold of many a Lord and by your wits and powers have taken his 
universe from him. What is the matter now?"
Vala said, "They were brave enough and clever enough when they had their weapons. But I think 
they're still recovering from the shock of being taken so easily by our father. And of being 
deprived of their devices. Without those, they lose that which made them Lords. Now, they're only 
men, and pretty sorry men at that."
"We're so tired," Rintrah said. "My muscles ache and burn. They sag as if I were on a heavy 
planet."
"Muscles!" Wolff said. "Muscles!"
He led them back to the tree. Despite the flame in his back every time he pulled on a branch-agony 
from the talon-wounds-he worked with a will. The other Lords helped him, and each soon had a 
bundle of branches in his arms. They returned to the rim of the overgrown area and here began to 
cast the sticks as far out into the feelers as they could. They did not do it all at once but 
spaced their throws. The skin reared up like a sea in a hurricane. Waves, craters, wavelets 
coursed back and forth.
But as the skin continued to be activated, its ragings became less. Near the end of the supply of 
branches, it began to react feebly. The last stick got no more than a shallow hole and a weak and 
quickly subsiding wave.
Wolff said, "It's tired now. Its rate of recovery may be very swift, however. So I suggest we get 
going now."
He led the way, walking swiftly. The skin quivered and humped up in response to the warnings from 
the feelers and broad three-or-four-inch deep holes appeared. Wolff skirted them, then decided he 
should trot. He did not stop until he had reached the foot of the butte. This, like the first they 
had passed, seemed to be an excres-cence, a huge wart on the skin. Though its sides rose 
perpendicularly, it was wrinkled enough to give hand and footholds. The ascent was not easy but 
was not impossible. They all got to the top without mishap.
Wolff said, "Yours is the honor again, Vala. Which gate?"
Ariston said, "She hasn't done very well so far. Why let her pick it?"
Vala turned on him like a tigress. "Brother, if you think you can do any better, you choose! But 
you should show your confidence in yourself by being the first to go through the gate!"
Ariston stepped back and said, "Very well. No use breaking with the custom." 
Vala said, "So it's a custom now! Well, I choose the left one.
Wolff did not hesitate. Although he felt that this time he might find himself, weak and 
weaponless, in Urizen's fortress, he stepped through.
For a moment, he could not understand where he was or what was happening, he was so dizzy and the 
objects that hurtled above him were so strange.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (61 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
XIII
HE WAS ON A HUGE GRAY METALLIC CYLINDER THAT WAS ROTATING swiftly. Above him, on both sides, and 
also coming into view as the cylinder whirled, were other gray cylinders. The sky behind them was 
a pale pink.
Between each pair of cylinders were three glowing beams of mauve light. These began about ten feet 
from the ends of the cylin-ders and from the middle. Every now and then, colored lights burst 
along the lengths of the beams and ran up and down them. Red, or-ange, black, white, purple, they 
burst like Very lights and then bobbed along the beams as if jerked along by an invisible cord. 
When they came to a point about twelve feet from the cylinders, they flared brightly and quickly 
died out.
Wolff closed his eyes to fight off the dizziness and the sickness. When he opened them again, he 
saw that the others had come through the gates. Ariston and Tharmas fell to the surface and clung 
as tightly as they could. Theotormon sat down as if he feared the spinning would send him scooting 
across the metal or perhaps might hurl him out into the space between the cylinders. Only Vala 
seemed not to be affected. She was smiling, although it could have been a mere show of courage.
If so, she was to be admired for achieving even this.
Wolff studied the environment as best he could. The cylinders were all about the size of 
skyscrapers.
Wolff did not understand why they were not all spun off immedi-ately by centrifugal force. Surely, 
these bodies could not have much gravity.
Yet, they did.
Perhaps-no perhaps-Urizen had set up a balance of forces which enabled objects with such strong 
gravities to keep from falling on each other. Perhaps the colored lights that ran along the beams 
were manifestations of the continual rebalancing of whatever statics and dynamics were being used 
to maintain the small but Earth-heavy bodies.
Wolff did not know anything except that the science that the Lords had inherited was far beyond 
that which Terrestrials knew.
There must be thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands, of these cylinders. They were about a mile 
apart from each other, spinning on their own axes and also shifting slowly about each other in an 
intri-cate dance.
From a distance, Wolff thought, the separate bodies would look like one solid bulk. This must be 
one of the planets he had observed from the waterworld.
There was one advantage to their predicament. On a world as tiny as this one, they would not have 
to go far to find the next set of gates. But it did not seem likely that Urizen would make things 
so easy for them.
Wolff stepped back to the gate and tried to reenter it. As he had expected, it only permitted him 
to step through the frame and back onto the cylinder. He turned and tested its other side, only to 
find that equally unfruitful. Then he set out to look for the gates by walk-ing around the 
circumference. And when he had gotten less than halfway around, he saw the two hexagons.
These were at one end and hung a few inches above the surface, the pale sky gleaming pinkly 
between the lower frame and the cylin-der surface. With the others, he began to talk towards it. 
He kept his eyes on the gates and tried not to see the whirling shifting objects around him.
Wolff was in the lead and so was the first to notice the unexpected behavior of the twin hexagons. 
As he came within fifty feet of them, they began to move away. He increased his pace; the gates 
did not maintain quite the same distance. When he broke into a run, they went more swiftly but 
still he gained a little. He stopped; the gates stopped. He made a dash at them, only to see them 
start off just as quickly. As he stepped up his speed, he gained on them.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (62 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
The other Lords were behind him. Their feet slapped on the me-tallic surface, and their gaspings 
whistled through the atmosphere. Wolff stopped again. The gates halted. The other Lords, except 
Vala, gathered around him and babbled.
"Los! First he starves us to death. . . then runs us to death."
Wolff waited until he had recovered his breath, then said, "I think they can be caught. They began 
to slow down in their speed as I went faster. It's a proportional decrease. But I don't think I 
can go quickly enough and long enough to catch them. Who's the fastest here?"
Luvah said, "I could always beat the rest of you in a foot race. But now I am so tired and weak. . 
."
"Try," Wolff said.
Luvah grinned uncertainly at him and inched towards the gates. Hovering, they moved away. He broke 
into a dash and presently was gone around the curve of the cylinder out of their sight. Wolff 
turned and ran in the opposite direction. After him came Vala. The dizzyingly close horizon jumped 
at him; he sped on and then he saw Luvah and the gates. Luvah was now within ten feet of them, but 
he was slowing down. And as his legs refused to move as he wished and his breath burned out of his 
lungs, the gates drew away.
Wolff came up behind the gates. When he was as close to them as Luvah, the gates slipped sideways, 
like wet soap between two hands. Vala came in at an angle towards them, but they veered off. The 
panting Lords stopped, forming three corners of a square with the gates at the remaining comer,
"Where are the others?" Wolff said.
Luvah jerked a thumb. Wolff looked around to see them straggling around the curve of this minute 
world. He called to them, his voice sounding eerie in the strangely propertied atmosphere. Luvah 
started to go forward but stopped at Wolff's order.
Ariston, Tharmas, Rintrah, and Theotormon spread out. Under Wolffs directions, they formed a 
pentagon with the gates at the ends of two legs of the figure. Then all began to close in on their 
quarry. They kept the same distance between them and advanced at the same pace. The gates 
oscillated back and forth but made no break.
With two minutes of slow and patient closing in, the Lords were able to seize half of the frames. 
This time, Wolff did not bother to ask Vala which exit they should take. He went through the left.
The others came through on his heels and their look of dismay reflected his. They were on another 
cylinder, and down at the end was another pair of hexagons.
Again, they went through the tiring chase and the boxing in. Again, they stepped through a frame, 
the one to the right this time. Again, they were on another cylinder.
This occurred five tunes. The Lords looked at each other with fa-tigue-reddened and exhaustion-
circled eyes. Their legs trembled, and their chests ached. They were covered with sweat and were 
as dry within as a Saharan wind. They could hardly keep their grips on the hexagons.
"We can't go on much longer," Rintrah said.
"Don't be so obvious," Vala said. "Try to say something original once in a while."
"Very well. I'm thirsty enough to drink your blood. And I may if I don't get a drink of water 
soon."
Vala laughed. "If you come close enough, I'll broach you with this sword. Your blood may be thin 
and ill-smelling, but at least it should be wet enough."
Wolff said, "Somehow, we always seem to take the gate that leads us everywhere but to Urizen. 
Perhaps we should split up this time. At least some might get to our father."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (63 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
The others argued about this, Vala and Luvah only abstaining. Fi-nally, Wolff said, "I'm going 
through one gate with Vala and Luvah. The rest of you will go through the other. That's that."
"Why Vala and Luvah?" Theotormon said. He was squinting sus-piciously, and his voice had a faint 
whine. "Why them? Do you three know something we don't? Are you planning on deserting us?"
"I'm taking Luvah because he's the only one I can trust-I think," Wolff said. "And Vala is, as 
she's pointed out more than enough times, the best man among you."
He left them squabbling and, with his sister and Luvah, went through the left gate. A few minutes 
later, the others came through. They looked bewildered on seeing Wolff, Luvah, and Vala.
"But we went through the right-hand gate," Rintrah said.
Vala laughed and said, "Our father has played us another grim jest. Both gates of a pair lead to 
the same cylinder. I suspect that they all will."
"He's not playing fair!" Ariston said. At this, Wolff and Luvah laughed, and presently the others, 
Ariston excepted, had joined him in his mirth.
When the howling-which had a note of despair in it-had died, Wolff said, "I may be wrong. But I 
think that every one of these thousands of cylinders in this-this birling world-has a set of 
gates. And if we continue the same behavior, we'll go through every one of them. Only we'll die 
before we get a fraction of the way. We must think of something new."
There was a silence. They sat or lay on the hard gray shiny metal while they whirled around, the 
cylinders above them rotated about each other in a soundless and intricate saraband, and the twin 
hex-agons at the end hovered and seemed to mock.
Finally, Vala said, "I do not think that we have been left without a way out. It would not be like 
our father to stop the game while we still have an atom of breath and of fight in us. He would 
want to drag out the agony until we broke. And I'm sure that he plans on allowing us eventually to 
find the gate that will conduct us into his stronghold. He must be planning some choice receptions 
for us, and he would be disappointed if he could not use them.
"So, I think that we have not been using our wits. Obviously, these gates lead only to other sets 
on other cylinders. That is, they do if we go through the regular way, through the side which is 
set with jewels. But what if the gates are bipolar? What if the other side would take us where we 
want to go?"
Wolff said, "I tested the other side when we first came through." "Yes, you tested the initial 
gate. But have you tested any of the double gates?"
Wolff shook his head and said, "Exhaustion and thirst are robbing me of my wits. I should have 
thought of that. After all, it's the only thing left to try."
"Then, let's up and at them," Vala said. "Summon your strength; this may be our exit from this 
cursed birling world."
Once more, they corraled the twin hexagons and seized them. Vala was the first to go through the 
side opposite the gem-set side. She disappeared, and Wolff followed her. On coming through and 
seeing another cylinder, he felt his spirits dissipate like wine in a vacuum. Then he saw the gate 
at the end and knew that they had taken the correct route.
There was only one golden hexagon. It, too, hovered a few inches above the surface. But it spun on 
its axis, around and around, com-pleting a cycle every second and a half.
The others came through and cursed when they realized that they were still on a birling. But when 
they saw the single rotating gate, some brightened up; others sagged at the thought of facing a 
new peril.
"Why does it whirl?" Ariston said weakly.
"I really can't say, brother," Vala said. "But, knowing Father, I would suspect that the gate has 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (64 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
only one safe side. That is, if we choose the right side, we'll go through unharmed. But if we 
take the wrong side . . . You'll observe that neither side has jewels; both are bare. So there's 
no way of distinguishing one side from another."
"I am so weary I do not care," Ariston said. "I would welcome death. To sleep forever, free of 
this agony of body and mind, that is all I desire."
"If you really feel that way," Vala said, "then you should be the first to test the gate."
Wolff said nothing, but the others added their voices to Vala's urgings. Ariston did not seem so 
eager to die now; he objected, saying that he was not fool enough to sacrifice himself for them.
"You are not only a weakling but a coward, brother," Vala said. "Very well, I will be the first."
Stung, Ariston started towards the spinning hexagon but stopped when a few feet from it. He stared 
at it and continued to stand mo-tionless while Vala jeered him. She shoved him to one side so hard 
he staggered and fell on the gray surface. Then she crouched before the golden cycler and studied 
it intently for several minutes. Sud-denly, she launched herself forward and went through the 
opening headfirst. The gate whirled on around.
Ariston arose without looking at the others or replying to their taunts. He walked up to the gate, 
bent his knees, and dived through. And he came out on the other side and fell on the gray surface. 
Wolff, the first to him, turned him over.
Ariston's mouth hung open; his eyes were glazing; his skin was turning gray.
Wolff stood up and said, "He went through the wrong side. Now we know what kind of gate this is."
"That bitch Vala has all the luck!" Tharmas said. "Did you notice which side she went through?"
Wolff shook his head. He studied the frame in the pink dusk. There were no markings of any kind on 
either side to distinguish one from the other. He spoke to Luvah, and they picked up Ariston's 
body by the feet and shoulders. They swung it back and forth until, at Wolff's shout, they 
released the corpse at the height of its forward swing. It shot through the frame and came out on 
the other side and fell on the surface.
Wolff and Luvah went to the other side and once more swung his body and then cast it through the 
frame. This time it did not reap-pear. Wolff said to Rintrah, "Are you counting?"
Rintrah nodded his head. Wolff said, "Lift your finger, and when the right side comes around, 
point it. Do it swiftly!"
Rintrah waited until two more turns had been made, then stabbed his finger. Wolff hurled himself 
through the frame, hoping that Rin-trah had not made a mistake. He landed on Ariston's body. There 
was the sound of sea and a red sky above. Vala was standing nearby and laughing softly as if she 
were actually enjoying their father's joke.
They were back on an island of the waterworld.
XIV
The other lords came through the gate one by one, rintrah last. They did not look as downcast as 
might have been expected. At least, they were on familiar grounds, almost home, one might say. 
And, as Theotormon did say, they could eat all they wanted.
The gate through which they had entered was the right one of an enormous pair. Both stood on a low 
hill. The immediate terrain looked familiar. After the Lords had gone to the shore to quench their 
thirst, they cooked and ate the fish that Theotormon caught. They set up a guard-rotation system 
and slept. The next day, they ex-plored.
There was no doubt that they were back on the great island the natives called the "Mother of 
Islands."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (65 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Those gates are the same ones that started us off on the not-so-merry-go-round," Wolff said. "We 
went through the right-hand one. So, the left one may lead to Urizen's world."
Tharmas said, "Perhaps . . . well, this is not the most desirable of worlds. But it is better to 
enjoy life here than to die or live in pain in one of Urizen's cells. Why not forget that gate? 
There is food and water here and native women. Let Urizen sit in his seat of power for-ever and 
rot waiting for us to come to him."
"You forget that, without your drugs, you will get old and will die," Wolff said. "Do you want 
that? Moreover, there is no guarantee that Urizen will not come to us if we don't go to him. No, 
you may sit here in a lotus-eater's dream if you want, but I intend to keep fighting."
"You see, Tharmas," Vala said, smiling crookedly. "Jadawin has stronger reasons than we do. His 
woman-who is not a Lord, by the way, but an inferior breed from Earth-is a prisoner of Urizen's. 
He cannot rest while he knows she is in our father's hands."
"It's up to you to do what you want," Wolff said. "But I am my own master."
He studied the red heavens, the two huge-seeming planets that were in sight at this tune, and a 
tiny streak that could have been a black comet. He said, "Why go through the front door, where 
Urizen expects us? Why not sneak through the back door? Or, a better met-aphor, through a window?"
In answer to their questions, he explained the idea that had come to him when he looked at the 
other planets and the comet. They replied that he was crazy. His concepts were too fantastic.
"Why not?" he said. "As I've said, everything we need can be got-ten, even if we have to go 
through the gates again. And Appirmatzum is only twenty thousand miles away. Why can't we get 
there with the ship I proposed?"
"A balloon spacecraft?" Rintrah said. "Jadawin, your life on Earth has addled your wits!"
"I need the help of every one of you," Wolfi said. "It's an under-taking of large magnitude and 
complexity. It'll take tremendous la-bors and a long time. But it can be done."
Vala said, "Even if it can be accomplished, what's to prevent our father from detecting our craft 
as it comes through the space between this world and his?"
"We'll have to take the chance that he's not set up detectors for spacecraft. Why should he? The 
only entrance to this universe is through the gate that he made himself."
"But what if one of us is a traitor?" she said. "Have you thought that one of us may be in 
Urizen's service and so spying for him?"
"Of course I've considered that. So has every one else. However, I can't see a traitor putting 
himself through the extreme dangers that we just went through."
"And how do we know that Urizen is not seeing and hearing ev-erything right now?" Theotormon said.
"We don't. That's another chance well have to take."
"It's better than doing nothing," Vala said.
There was much argument after that with all the Lords finally agreeing to help him in his plan. 
Even the objectors knew that if Wolff succeeded, those who refused to aid him would be marooned on 
this island. The thought that their brothers might be true Lords again while the objectors would 
be no better than the natives was too much for them.
The first thing Wolff did was to find out the temper of the neigh-boring natives. To his surprise, 
he found that they were not hostile. They had seen the Lords disappear into the gate and then come 
out again. Only the gods or demigods could do this; therefore, the Lords must be special-and 
dangerous-creatures. The natives were more than happy to cooperate with Wolff. Their religion, a 
debased form of the Lords' original religion, determined this decision. They believed in Los as 
the good God and in Urizen as the evil one, their version of Satan. Their prophets and medicine 
men maintained that some day the evil one, Urizen, would be overthrown. When that hap-pened, they 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (66 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
would all go to Alulos, their heaven.
Wolff did not try to set them straight on the facts. Let them believe what they wished as long as 
they helped him. He set everybody to work on the things that could be done immediately and with 
mate-rials available on this world. Then, he went through the gate that led to the other planets. 
Luvah went with him. Both were buoyed up by gas-bladders strapped to their backs and armed with 
short spears and bows and arrows. Through gate after gate they traveled, searching for the things 
that Wolff needed. They knew what to expect and what dangers to avoid. Even so, the adventures 
they met on this trip and the many trips thereafter were enough to have filled several books. But 
there were no more casualties.
Later, Vala and Rintrah accompanied Wolff and Luvah. They brought back chunks of the vitreous 
stuff from the world of the skat-ing and suction-pad animals. From the Weltthier, they brought 
back piles of bird-droppings. These, added to the store of their own and the natives' excrement, 
were to provide the sodium nitrate crystals in Wolff's plan.
The mercury was gotten from the natives, who had large supplies picked up from the island after 
the showers that came with the black comets. The mercury droplets were religious objects and were 
given to Wolff only after he argued that they were to be used against Urizen. He discovered that 
one of the plants on the island was a source of wood alcohol. Other plants could be burned to give 
the charcoal he needed. And the planet of the tempusfudgers furnished sulphur.
Wolff had to have a platinum catalyst in the making of nitric acid. While on the cylinders of the 
birling world, he had thought that the cylinders might be composed of platinum or of a platinum 
alloy. This metal had a melting point of 1773.5 Centigrade and was resistant to cutting. Wolff had 
no means to melt it in the birling world or any tools sharp enough to cut out chunks from a 
cylinder. Luvah pointed this out, to which Wolff replied that they would use Urizen's own de-vices 
for the job.
He took all the Lords with him, even though Theotormon and Tharmas strongly objected. They 
cornered the mobile twin gates and then pulled them to the edge of the cylinder. Here Theotormon 
found out why it was necessary for him to make the trip. His weight was needed to force the gates 
halfway down over the arc of the edge of the cylinder. The forces that kept the gates upright were 
strong but could not resist the combined weight and muscles of the Lords.
A portion of the arc went through one of the gates. Had the gate been held motionless, the piece 
of the cylinder would merely have projected through its matching gate on another cylinder. But 
when the gate was pulled sidewise along the edge, something had to give. The gate acted like a 
shears and cut off the part which went through the frame.
After setting the gate upright, the Lords went through it to the next cylinder, where they found a 
chunk of the platinum. And they used the next gate to cut the chunk into smaller pieces.
On the cylinder of the whirling death-gate, Wolff tested it with sev-eral stones. As soon as a 
stone disappeared, he marked the safe side with a dab of yellow paint brought from the waterworld. 
Thereafter, they had no trouble distinguishing the death-side from the safe side.
Wolff had the gates that could be moved in the various worlds transported to a more advantageous 
location.
The island on the waterworld became one vast forge of smoke and stink. The Lords and the natives 
complained mightily. Wolff listened, scoffed, laughed, or threatened, as the occasion demanded. He 
drove them on. Three hundred and sixty dark moons passed. The work was slow, disappointing many 
times, and often dangerous. Wolff and Luvah kept on making trips through the gates, bringing back 
from the still perilous circuit the materials they needed.
By this time the balloon spacecraft was half-built. When finished, it would ascend with the Lords 
until it rose above the atmosphere. Here the pseudogravity field weakened rapidly---if Theotormon 
was to be believed-and the craft would use the drag of the dark moon to pick up more speed. Then 
blackpowder rockets would give it more velocity. And steering would be done through small 
explosions of power or through release of gas-jets from bladders.
The gondola would be airtight. Wolff had not yet worked out the problem of air-renewal and 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (67 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
circulation or the other problems brought on by nongravity. Actually, they should have a certain 
amount of gravity. They would not be getting into space as a rocket does, which attains escape 
velocity. Levitated by the expanding gas in the lift-bladders, they would rise until the 
atmosphere gave out. Once past the atmosphere, the craft would lose its buoyancy, and would have 
to depend upon the pull of the moon and the weak reaction of wooden-cased rockets to give them 
thrust enough to escape the waterworld's grip. 
Moreover, if they did pull loose from the waterworld, they would be in danger of being seized by 
the field of the moon.
"There's no way of determining the proper escape path and neces-sary vectors by mathematics," 
Wolff said to Luvah. "We'll just have to play it by ear."
"Let's hope we're not tone-deaf," Luvah said. "Do you think we really have a chance?"
"With what I have in mind, I think there is," Wolff replied. "Just now, today, I want to think of 
other things. There are the spacesuits to work on for instance. We'll have to wear them while in 
the gon-dola, since we can't rely on the gondola being too airtight."
The fulminate of mercury for the explosive caps was made. This was a dark-brown powder formed by 
reaction of mercury, alcohol, and concentrated nitric acid.
The nitric acid, which oxidized sulfur to sulfuric acid, was ob-tained through a series of steps. 
The sodium nitrate, gotten by crys-tallization from the bird droppings and human excrement, was 
heated with sulfuric acid. (The sulfuric acid was derived by burning sulfur with saltpeter, that 
is, potassium or sodium nitrate.)
Free nitrogen of the air was "fixed" by combining it with hydrogen (from the gas bladders) to form 
ammonia. The ammonia was mixed with oxygen (from an oxygen-producing bladder) at the correct 
tem-perature. The mixture was passed over a fine wire gauge made from smooth compact platinum to 
catalyze for catalysis.
The resulting nitrogen oxides were absorbed in water; the dilute acid was gotten by concentration 
through distillation.
The materials for the furnaces and containers and pipes were furnished by the vitreous stuff from 
the planet of skaters.
Black gunpowder was made from charcoal, sulfur, and the salt-peter.
Wolff also succeeded in making ammonium nitrate, a blasting powder of considerable power.
One day Vala said, "Don't you think that you're making far too many explosives? We can't take more 
than a fraction on the ship. Otherwise, the ship'll never get off the ground."
"That's true," he replied. "Maybe you were also wondering why I've stocked the explosives at 
widely separated locations. That's be-cause gunpowder is unstable. If one pile goes up, the others 
won't be affected."
Some of the Lords paled. Rintrah said, "You mean the explosives we'll be taking on the ship could 
go off at any time?"
"Yes. That's one more chance we'll be taking. None of this is easy or safe, you know. But I'd like 
to add a possibly cheering note. It is ironic and laughable, if we succeed, that Urizen himself 
has supplied the materials for his own undoing. He has furnished us with the basic weapons which 
might overthrow his supertechnology."
"If we live, we'll laugh," Rintrah said. "I think, however, that Urizen will be the laugher."
"Old Earth proverb: We'll at least give him a run for his money. Another proverb: He who laughs 
last laughs best."
That night Wolff went to Luvah's hut. Luvah woke up swiftly on feeling Wolffs hand on his 
shoulder. He started to draw the knife made of flint from the tempusfudger planet. Wolff said, 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (68 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"I'm here to talk, not kill. Luvah, you are the only one I can trust to help me. And I need help."
"I am honored, brother. You are by far the best man among us. And I know that you are not about to 
propose treachery."
"Part of what I plan may seem at first to be treachery. But it is necessary. Listen carefully, 
young brother."
Within the hour, they left the hut. Carrying digging and hacking tools, they went to the hill on 
which stood the twin gates. Here they were met by twenty natives, all of whom Wolff was sure he 
could trust. They began cutting and digging through the tangle of decayed vegetation and bladder 
roots that formed the island. All worked swiftly and hard, so that by the time the moon had passed 
and taken night with it, they had completed a trench around the hill. They kept on working until 
there was only a few inches of roots to go before coming to the water level. Then the natives 
placed ammonium nitrate and fulminate caps in the trench. When this was done, they threw in the 
chopped up roots and dirt and made an attempt to cover the signs of excavation.
"Anybody can see at a glance that digging has been done here," Wolff said. "I'm banking on nobody 
coming here, however. I told all of you that today would be a rest day so that you wouldn't rise 
until late."
He looked at the gates. "Now you and I must travel the circuit again. And we must do it swiftly."
When they came to the planet of the tempusfudgers, Wolff gave Luvah one of his blowguns. This was 
made of the hollow bamboo-like plants that grew on the mother-island. The natives used them to 
shoot darts tipped with a stupefacient made from a certain species of fish. They hunted the birds 
and the rats on the island with these.
Wolff and Luvah went into a canyon and there knocked out five of the fudgers. Wolff searched until 
he found the entrance to a burrow in which chronowolves lived. He placed the end of the blowgun 
in-side the burrow and expelled the dart. After waiting a minute, he reached in and dragged out a 
sleeping wolf.
The animals, still unconscious, were cast into the gate that would open into Urizen's world. Or it 
should lead there. It was possible that both gates merely led to the next secondary planet, as the 
gates on the birling world had.
"I hope the little animals will trigger off Urizen's alarms," Wolff said. "The alarms will keep 
him busy for a while. There's also the possibility that the fudgers' and wolf's time-leaping and 
duplicating abilities will enable them to survive for a while. They may even mul-tiply and spread 
through the palace and set off any number of traps and alarms. Urizen won't know what the hell's 
going on. And hell be diverted from the gate through which he expected us to come."
"You don't know that," Luvah said. "Both these gates here, and both those on the waterworld, may 
just lead to another secondary."
"Nothing's certain in any of the multitudinous universes," Wolff said. "And even for the immortal 
Lords, Death waits around every corner. So let's go around the corner."
They passed through the gate into the Weltthier. There was no sign of the chronobeasts. Wolff took 
heart at this, thinking that the chances were very good that the animals had gone into Urizen's 
stronghold.
Back upon the waterworld, Luvah went off to accomplish his mis-sion. Wolff watched him go. Perhaps 
he had been wrong in suspect-ing Vala of alliance with her father. But she had been too lucky in 
getting to a safe place whenever danger threatened. She had acted too quickly. Moreover, when they 
were in the river of the icerock planet, she had been too buoyant and just a little too assured. 
He suspected that the girdle around her waist contained devices to ena-ble her to float. And there 
was the choosing of the gates by her. Every tune, these had led to a secondary. They should have 
gone through one of Urizen's gates at least once. She had been too self-as-sured, even for her. It 
was as if she were playing a game.
Although she hated her father, she could have joined him to bring her brothers and cousins to 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (69 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
death. She hated them as much as she hated her father. She could have transceivers implanted in 
her body. Thus, Urizen would be able to hear, and probably to see, all that she did. She would 
enjoy the game as a participant, perversely enjoy it even more if she were in some danger herself.
Urizen could take pleasure in the deadly games as if he were watching a TV set. It would be a 
genuine spectator sport for him.
Wolff returned to the hill to start the next-to-last phase. The na-tives were just about finished 
loading the ship with black powder, ammonium nitrate, and mercury fulminate. The half-built craft 
con-sisted of two skeletons of hollow bamboo in which the gas cells had been installed. One was 
the lower decks of the planned ship; the upper part was supposed to be attached at a later date.
From the beginning, he had known that using the ship as a space traveler was impossible. He 
doubted very much that it would work, or, if it would, that the voyage between this world and 
Appirmatzum could be made. The odds were far too high against success.
But he had pretended confidence in it, and so the work had gone on. Moreover, any spy among the 
Lords, or any other monitor for Urizen, would have been fooled.
Perhaps Urizen was watching him now and wondering what he meant to do. If so, by the time he found 
out, it would be too late.
The natives released the two halves of the ship from its moorings. They rose several feet and then 
stopped, weighed down by the sev-eral tons of explosives. This altitude was all that Wolff 
desired. He gave the signal and the natives pushed the crafts up the hill until their prows were 
almost inside the frame. There was just enough room for the ship to slide through the frames. 
Wolff had ordered it built in two sections because the fully built ship could not have nego-tiated 
the space. Even the partial frames had only an inch on either side on top and bottom to spare.
Wolff lit the fuses on each side of the two floating frameworks and signaled his men. Chanting, 
they pushed the crafts on in. Wolff, standing to one side, could see the landscape of the island 
on the other side of the gate. The first ship seemed to be chewed up, or lopped off, as it floated 
through the gate-frame. Presently, all but the aft of the second was gone, and then that, too, had 
disappeared.
Luvah appeared from the jungle with Vala's unconscious body over his shoulder. Behind him were the 
other Lords, alarmed, puz-zled, and angry or frightened. Wolff explained to them what he meant to 
do. He said, "I could tell no one except Luvah because I could trust no one else. I suspect Vala 
of spying for our father, but she may be innocent. However, I could not take a chance on her. So I 
had Luvah knock her out while she slept. We'll take her along in case she is not guilty. By the 
time she wakes up, she'll be in the midst of it. Too late for her to do anything then.
"Now, get into the suits. As I've explained, they'll operate under water as well as in space. 
Better, since they were designed for diving."
Luvah looked at the gate. "Do you think the explosives went off?
Wolff shrugged and said, "There's no way of telling. It's a one-way gate, of course, so there'll 
be no indication from the other side. But I hope that by now Urizen's initial traps have been 
destroyed. And I hope he's very upset, wondering what we've done."
Luvah put a suit on Vala and then donned one himself. Wolff su-pervised the touching off of the 
fuses to the explosives planted at the bottom of the ditch around the hill. The fuses led through 
hollow bamboo pipes to the gunpowder, ammonium nitrate, and fulminate of mercury.
XV
There was a rumble and a shaking of the earth. up rose the decayed vegetation and the roots in a 
great cloud of black smoke. When the debris had settled and the smoke had blown away, Wolff led 
the Lords towards the hill. It was sinking swiftly; its anchorage to the rest of the island 
severed and the lower part ripped apart. Under the weight of the heavy golden hexagons, it went 
down.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (70 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Wolff threw several fuse-lit bombs at the base of the gates to has-ten the descent to the sea. The 
gates began to topple. Wolff held his men steady until the upper part struck the sides of the pit 
formed by the explosion. As the gates slid into the water below, he gave the order to jump. His 
mask over his face, the air tanks turned on, a flint-tipped spear in one hand, and a flint knife 
and flint axe in his belt, he leaped into the water.
The top of the gates disappeared just as he came up to the surface for a better look. The water 
was so foul with bits of roots and humus that he could not see anything. He grabbed the top of the 
frame and let its weight pull him down. It was on its way to the bottom of the sea, but he could 
go only a little way with it.
He felt Luvah, who was holding Vala in one arm, grab his ankle with the other. Another Lord should 
be getting hold of Luvah's ankle. Theotormon would be the only free swimmer until they got through 
the gate.
Wolff made sure, by feeling, that he was at the left gate. Then he began swimming. He had no 
trouble entering the gate. The inrush of sea-water carried him on in.
The current carried him down a long hall. The walls were self-luminous and radiated enough light 
for him to make out details.
Some of the wall-plates were partially ripped off or bent. Down at the end of the hall, two thick 
white metal doors were twisted gro-tesquely. The explosion had done its work well. It was 
conceivable that the doors could have sealed off the rest of the palace from the flood of water. 
Eventually, the pressure of water from the sea bottom would have burst them open. By that time, 
the Lords would also have been dead from pressure.
Wolff went through the crumpled doors and on down another cor-ridor. Seeing it come to an end, he 
twisted around until his feet were ahead of him. The water boiled at its end, striking the wall 
and then going off down a slightly sloping corridor. Wolff took the impact with his feet, shoved, 
and was off with the current down the hall. The light showed him a series of long metal spikes 
below him. Undoubtedly, they were prepared for the invading Lords, who were now passing above 
them.
The corridor suddenly dipped, and the water was racing down a fifty-degree angle. Wolff barely had 
time to see that it branched into two other corridors before he was carried helplessly out the 
great window at the end.
He fell, whirling over and over, seeing the palace walls rush by and a garden below. He was being 
hurled down by a cascade formed by the sea spouting out the window.
The crash into the pool at the bottom of the falls stunned him. Half-conscious, he swam up and 
away and was at the edge of the pool. Originally, the pool had been a sunken garden. Lucky for 
him, he thought, otherwise, he would have been smashed to death. He dragged himself up over the 
lip of stone, still clutching his spear.
The other Lords came bobbing up one by one. Theotormon was first. Luvah was next, with a 
conscious, and frightened, Vala behind bim. Rintrah swam in a few seconds later. Tharmas floated 
into the edge of the pool. He was face down, his arms outspread. Wolff pulled him up and turned 
him over. He must have smashed into the side of the window before being carried out. His leg was 
snapped at the knee and the side of his face was crushed in.
Vala stormed at Wolff. He told her to shut up; they did not have time for talking. In a few words 
he explained what he had done and why.
Vala recovered quickly. She smiled, though still pale, and said, "You have done it again, Jadawin! 
Turned Urizen's own devices against him!"
"I do not know if you are guilty of allying yourself with our father or not," Wolff said. "Perhaps 
I am overly suspicious, though it may be impossible to be that when dealing with a Lord. If you 
are inno-cent, I will apologize. If not, well, our father must by now be con-vinced that you have 
betrayed him and are with us. So he will kill you before you can explain, unless you kill him 
first. You have no choice."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (71 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Jadawin, you were always a fox! So be it! I will kill our father the first chance I get! Who 
knows, I may have the chance! I would have sworn up to a few hours ago that we would be trapped as 
soon as we entered his domain! But here we are, and he has a deadly problem on his hands!"
She pointed up at the great window through which the sea was cataracting. "Obviously the gate is 
on the highest level of the palace. And water flows downward. If he doesn't do something soon, he 
will be drowned like a rat caught in its own hole."
She turned to indicate the land outside the palace. "As you can see, the palace is in a valley 
surrounded entirely by high mountains. It will take some time, but the entire sea of the 
waterworld will come through the gates, unless the matching gates on the waterworld settle on a 
shallow bottom. This valley will be flooded, and then the water will spill over the mountains and 
inundate the rest of the planet."
Rintrah said, "Why don't we just climb the mountains and watch our father drown?"
Wolff shook his head. "No, Chryseis is in there."
Rintrah said, "What is that to the rest of us?"
"Urizen will have flying craft," Wolff said. "If he escapes the pal-ace in one, he will pick us 
off. Even if we should hide from him, we would be doomed. He has merely to leave us here. 
Eventually, this world will be flooded. We will be trapped, perhaps to starve again. No, if you 
want to get away from here and back to your own uni-verse, you will have to help me kill Urizen."
He said to Theotormon, "You were allowed a little freedom while you were his prisoner. If we could 
find the area you know, we could better avoid traps."
"There is an entrance at the bottom of the sunken garden, which is now a pool," Theotormon said. 
"That would be the best way to enter. We can swim up to the levels that are not yet flooded. If we 
avoid contact with the floor and walls, we can prevent setting off the traps."
They plunged into the water and, hugging the sides of the pool to avoid the impact of the falling 
waters, swam around behind the cataract. It was easy to locate the door, since a current was 
roaring through it. They let it sweep them through until they came to a stair-case. This was broad 
and built of sculptured red and black stone. They swam up it and after many turnings, came to 
another level. This, too, was flooded, so they continued their ascent. The next floor was inches 
deep in water and filling swiftly. The Lords climbed on up the stairs until they were on the 
fourth story.
Urizen's palace was like every Lord's, magnificent in every respect. At another time, Wolff might 
have lingered to look at the paintings, drapes, sculptures, and treasures, loot of many worlds. 
Now he had but two thoughts. Kill Urizen and save his great-eyed wife, Chryseis.
Wolff looked around before giving the word to advance. He said, "Where's Vala?"
"She was behind me a moment ago," Rintrah said.
"Then she's in no trouble," Wolff replied. "But we may be. If she's sneaked off to join Urizen. . 
."
"We'd better get to him before she does," Luvah said.
Wolff led the way, expecting at every second a trap. There was, however, a chance that Urizen had 
not set any here. Undoubtedly, there would be defenses at every entrance. But Urizen may have 
thought himself safe here. Moreover, the water pouring through from above and below might have 
deactivated the power supplies. What-ever contingency Urizen had prepared himself for, he had 
never thought of another planet's seas emptying themselves into his do-main.
Theotormon said, "The floor above is the one where I was kept prisoner. Urizen's private 
apartments are also there."
Wolff took the first staircase they came to. He walked up slowly, looking intently for signs of 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (72 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
traps. They came without mishap to the next floor and then stood for a moment. The closer they got 
to Urizen, the more nervous they became. Their hate was beginning to be tinged with some of the 
old awe they had felt for him when they were children.
They were in a huge chamber, the walls of which were white mar-ble. There were many bas-reliefs 
carved on them, scenes from many planets. One showed Urizen seated on a throne. Below him, a new 
universe was forming out of chaos. Another scene showed him stand-ing in a meadow with children at 
play around him. Wolff recognized himself, his brothers, sisters, and cousins. Those had been 
happy times, even though there were shadows now and then to forecast the days of hate and anxiety.
Theotormon said, "You can hear the rumble of the water above. It won't be long until this floor, 
too, is flooded."
"Chryseis is probably held in the same area in which you were prisoner," Wolff said. "You lead the 
way there."
Theotormon, his rubbery legs acting as springs, went swiftly. He traced bis way without hesitation 
through a series of rooms and halls that would have been a bewildering labyrinth to a stranger.
Theotormon stopped before a tall oval entrance of scarlet stone with purplish masses that formed 
ragged silhouettes of winged crea-tures. Beyond was a great chamber that glowed a dull red.
"That is the room in which I spent most of my tune," he said. "But I fear to go through the 
doorway."
Wolff extended his spear through the archway. Theotormon said, "Wait a minute. It may have a 
delayed reaction to catch whoever goes in it."
Wolff continued to hold the spear. He counted the seconds, es-timating how far within the chamber 
he would have gone if he walked on in. There was a flare of light that blinded him and sent him 
reeling back.
When he regained his sight, he saw that his spear was shorn off. Heat billowed out from the 
expanding air in the chamber, and there was the odor of charred wood.
"Lucky for you that most of the heat was localized and went up-ward," Theotormon said.
The trap covered about twenty yards. Beyond that the room might be safe. But how to get past the 
death that waited?
He stepped back some paces, cast the butt of the spear through the archway, and turned his back. 
Again, light burst forth, driving the shadows of the Lords down along the corridor and then 
sending a wave of heat out after them. Wolff turned and threw an arrow into the room and gave the 
archway his back again while he counted. Three seconds passed before the trap was sprung again.
He gave an order and they returned to the level staircase, which was half below the rising waters. 
They put on their oxygen masks and dipped themselves into the water. Then they ran down the hall 
as swiftly as they could, hoping that the water would not dry off them. At the archway, Wolff 
tossed another arrow through. As soon as the light died, but before the heat had thoroughly 
dissipated, he dashed into the chamber. Behind him came Theotormon and Luvah. They had three 
seconds to cover twenty yards and a few feet. They made it. With the heat drying off the film of 
water on their suits and warming their backs. But they were through.
Rintrah cast an arrow into the room, and he and Tharmas ran into the heat. Wolff had turned around 
to watch them as soon as the light disappeared. He cried out because Tharmas had hesitated. 
Tharmas did not heed his warning to wait and try again, perhaps because he did not hear it. He was 
racing desperately, his eyes wide behind the goggles. Wolff shouted to the others to turn away as 
Rintrah sped past him. There was another nova of light, a scream, and a thud. Heat billowed over 
the Lords; they smelled the charred fish skin of the suit and burned human flesh.
Tharmas was a dark mass on the floor, his fingers and toes almost burned off.
Without a word, the others turned away and went on through the room. Near its other archway, 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (73 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Theotormon led them through a very narrow doorway, although he did not do so until after it had 
been tested. They came into a hemispherical room at least one hundred yards across. Within the 
room were many large cages, all empty ex-cept for one.
Wolff saw the occupant of the cage first
He cried out, "Urizen!"
XVI
THE CAGE WAS TEN FEET BY TEN. IT WAS FURNISHED ONLY WITH A thin blanket on the floor, a pipe for 
drinking water, a hole for excre-tion, and an automatic food dispenser. The man within it was very 
tall and very thin. He had the face of a bearded and starved falcon. His hair fell down his back 
to his calves, and his beard hung below his knees. The black hairs were threaded with gray, by 
which Wolff knew that his father had been a long time in the cage. Even after the so-called 
immortality drugs were cut off, their effect lasted for years.
Urizen advanced towards the bars but he was careful not to touch them. Wolff warned the others 
back in a low voice. He walked up to the bars as if he meant to grip them. Urizen watched him with 
deep-sunken and feverish eyes but did not open his mouth. A few inches from the bars, Wolff 
stopped and said, "Do you still hate us so much, Father, that you would let us die?"
He raked the bars with the tip of an arrow; veins of light ran over the metal.
Urizen smiled grimly and spoke in a hollow, pain-shot voice, "Touching the bars is only painful, 
not fatal. Ah, Jadawin, you were always a fox! No one but you could have gotten this far. No one 
but you and your sister, Vala, and perhaps Red Orc."
"So she did evade all your traps and snared the snarer," Wolff said. "She is indeed a remarkable 
woman, my sister."
"Where is she?" Urizen asked. "Did she die this time? I know that she was with you because she 
told me what she intended to do."
"She is in the palace and still to be reckoned with," Wolff said. "All this time, she had us 
convinced that you were in the Seat of Power. She was playing with us, sharing our dangers, 
pretending to be our ally. I suspected her of working with you, but this ... I never dreamed of."
"I am doomed," Urizen said. "I cannot get out; you cannot open this cage to release me. Even if 
you wanted to, you could not. And I must die soon unless I can get help. Vala has implanted a 
slowly act-ing and painful cancerous growth within me. In fact, she has done this three times, 
only to remove it each time before I died and then nurse me back to health."
"I would be lying if I said I was sorry, and you know it," Wolff said. "You are getting what you 
deserve."
"Moral lectures from you, Jadawin!" Urizen said. His eyes blazed with the old fire, and Wolff felt 
something within him quail. The dread of his father had not died yet.
"I heard that you had changed much since your life on Earth, but I could not believe it. Now I 
know it is true."
"I did not come here to argue with you," Wolff said. "There is lit-tle time for talk left, anyway. 
Tell me, Father, how we can get to the control room safely. If you want vengeance, you must tell 
us. Vala is loose again and probably in the control room right now."
Urizen said, "Why should I tell you anything? I am going to die, but I will at least have the 
pleasure of knowing that you, Rintrah, Luvah, and Theotormon will die with me."
"Does it give you pleasure to know that Vala will triumph? That she will live on? That your body, 
too, will be stuffed and mounted in the trophy hall?"
Urizen smiled bitterly. "If I tell you what you want, then Vala might die, but you would live. It 
is a loathsome choice to make. Ei-ther way, I lose."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (74 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"You may hate us," Wolff said, "but we have never done anything to you. Yet Vala. . ."
Theotormon said, "The seas will soon be flooding this level. Then we all die. And Vala, safe in 
her control room, will laugh. And she will take whatever vengeance she has been planning against 
Chryseis."
Wolff felt helpless. He could not threaten Urizen to make him talk. What more could he do to him 
than had been done?
He said, "Let's go. We can't waste any more time." To Urizen, he said, "Good-bye forever, Father. 
You must die and soon. You hold revenge against Vala in your heart, and if you would unlock your 
lips, you would get it. But hatred blinds you and makes you rob yourself."
Urizen called after them, "Wait!"
Eagerly, Wolff returned to the cage. Urizen licked his lips and said, "If I tell you, will you do 
me one favor?"
"I can't free you, Father," Wolff said. "You know we have no time to figure out how to do it. 
Moreover, even if I could, I wouldn't. I would kill you before I would loose you upon the world."
"The favor I trade is exactly that," Urizen said. "Death. I am suffering agonies, my son. My pride 
forbade me to say so until now. But one more minute of this life seems like a thousand years to 
me. If it were not for my pride, I would have gone down on my knees be-fore you long ago, would 
have begged you to put me out of my tor-ture. That I would never do. Urizen does not beg. But a 
trade, that is another thing."
"I agree," Wolff said. "An arrow between the bars will do it."
Urizen whispered and in a few words told them what they needed to know. He had just finished when 
there was laughter at the far end of the room. Wolff whirled to see Vala walking towards them. He 
fitted an arrow to a bow-string, knowing as he did so that Vala would not have shown herself 
unless she felt sufficiently protected.
Then he saw through Vala to the wall behind her and knew that it was a projection. He hoped that 
she had not also overheard Urizen. If she had, she would be able to do what she wished with them.
"I could not have done better if I had planned it this way," her image said. "It is fitting, and 
my greatest desire, to have all of you die together. A happy family reunion! You may witness each 
other's death struggles. How nice!
"And I will be leaving this planet and this universe and may then trap the surviving brother, and 
my beloved sister, Anana. Only I will rest for a while and amuse myself with your Chryseis."
"You have failed so far, and you will continue to fail!" Wolff shouted. "Even if you kill us, you 
will not live long to enjoy your tri-umph! You know about the etsfagwo poison of the natives of 
the waterworld, don't you? How it can be served in food and leaves no taste? How it goes through 
the veins and stays there for a long time with no ill effect? And then it suddenly reacts and 
doubles the victim up in terrible pain that lasts for hours? And how there is no antidote?
"Well, Vala, I suspected you of treachery. So I had the etsfagwo put in your supper last night. It 
will soon take hold of you, Vala, and then you will not be able to laugh about us."
Wolff had not done this and until this moment had not even thought of doing so. But he was 
determined that if he died, Vala would pay for it with some hours of mental anguish.
The image screamed with fury and desperation. It said, "You are lying, Jadawin! You would not do 
this; you could not! You are just trying to scare me!"
"You will know whether I tell the truth or not in a very short time!" Wolff shouted. He turned to 
shoot the arrow through the bars of the cage to fulfill his promise to Urizen. As he shifted, he 
saw Vala's image flicker out of existence. Immediately thereafter, a green foam spurted out of 
hidden pipes in the ceiling. It shot down with great force, spread out, rose to the knees of the 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (75 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:40 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Lords, and set them to coughing with its acrid fumes. Wolff's eyes watered, and he bent over. He 
leaned down to pick up the bow and arrow which he had dropped. The fumes made him cough even more 
violently.
Suddenly, the foam was to his neck. He struggled to get through it and to the door at the far end, 
although there might be another trap waiting there. The foam rose above his head. He held his 
breath while he put his air-mask on. Then he lifted it a little from his face and blew out the 
foam it had collected. He hoped the others had enough presence of mind to think of their masks.
Within a few steps of the exit, he felt the foam begin to harden. He strove against it, pushing as 
hard as he could. It continued to resist him, to reduce his progress to a very slow motion. 
Abruptly, the foam became a jelly and the green opacity cleared away. He was caught like a fly in 
amber.
Wolff could not see the others, who were behind him. He was fac-ing the archway towards which he 
had struggled. He tried to move his arms and legs and found that he could make a little progress. 
With a vast effort, he could shove himself forward less than an inch. Then the jelly, like a tide, 
moved him back again and settled around him. There was nothing he could do except wait for his air 
supply to run out. The breathing system was a closed system, one that reused air and did not 
dissipate the carbon dioxide. If it had been an open system, he would have been dead already. The 
jelly closed in around so tightly that there would have been no place for the breathed-out carbon 
dioxide to go.
He had perhaps a half-hour of life remaining. Vala would be laughing now. And Chryseis, great-eyed 
beautiful Chryseis, what was she doing? Was she being forced to watch this scene? Or was she 
lis-tening to Vala's descriptions of what Vala intended for her?
Fifteen minutes passed by with his every thought seeking a way out. There was none. This was the 
end of over 25,000 years of life and the powers of a god. He had lived for nothing; he might as 
well never have been born. He would die, and Chryseis would die, and both would be stuffed and 
mounted and placed on exhibit in the trophy hall.
No, that was not true, at least. Vala would have to abandon this place. The waters roaring through 
the permanent gate at the top level of the palace would ensure that. She would be denied this 
pleas-ure. His body, and Chryseis', would lie beneath a sea, in darkness and cold, until the flesh 
rotted and the bones were tossed back and forth by the currents and strewn about.
The waters! He had forgotten that they were racing through the halls of the levels above and down 
the staircases. If only . . .
The first rush half-filled the corridor beyond the archway and ripped out a chunk of jelly. The 
corridor was quickly filled, and the jelly began to dissolve. The process took time, however. The 
waters crept towards him, eating their way and turning the jelly into a green foam that was 
absorbed by the liquid. More than half an hour had passed since he had estimated that he had about 
thirty minutes of air left. He felt that every breath would be his last.
The jelly became green foam and obscured his vision. The thick stuff melted away, and he was free. 
But now he was in as much dan-ger as before. Submerged in water, he would drown as soon as the air 
ran out.
He swam towards the others, whom he could see through a green veil. He yanked them loose from the 
jelly that still held them, only to find that Rintrah was dead. He had gotten his mask on in time 
but something had gone wrong. Wolff gestured at Theotormon and Luvah and swam towards the other 
exit. It opened to their only hope. To try to go through the door through which the seas were 
pushing was impossible because of the current. They were carried, like it or not, towards the 
other archway.
Wolff dug at the jelly which clogged the doorway until it broke loose, and he was carried headlong 
into the next room. His brothers came at his heels and slid on their faces across the room and 
piled into him against the opposite wall. They rolled out of the stream and were on their feet. 
Wolff turned the air off and lifted his mask. He not only had to speak to them, but there would be 
a minute or two before the room filled in which they could conserve what little supply remained in 
the tanks.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (76 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Urizen told me that there is a secret door to a duplicate control room! He had it prepared in 
case somebody ever did get into the main control room! It has controls which will deactivate those 
of the main room! But to get to it, we have to go through the doorway with the heat-ray trap. He 
didn't have time to tell me how to turn off the heat-rays! We'll put our masks back on when the 
water gets too high and then go through. The water should knock the projectors out! I hope!"
They placed the masks over their faces and crouched in a corner near the archway to gain 
protection from the full force of the cur-rent. The sea struck the wall opposite the archway and 
then raced off down the floor and through the door. Seeing that the water was not activating the 
rays, Wolff hurled his stone axe towards the door. Even through his closed lids, he saw the 
dazzle. When he opened his eyes, the water was boiling. The axe had been swept on through the 
arch.
The waters rose swiftly, carrying the treading Lords up towards the ceiling. When there was only a 
foot of air between the sea and the ceiling, they put on their masks. Wolff dived as close towards 
the floor as he could get and began swimming. Suddenly, the air shut off. He held his breath and 
continued swimming. There was a glare of light that blinded him, and the water seemed to burn his 
exposed hands and back of neck. He bumped against the side of the arch and was borne out into the 
next room. Here he shoved his feet against the floor and propelled himself upward. He held his 
hands out to soften the impact against the ceiling, which he could not yet see.
His head bumping against stone, he removed his mask and breathed in. His lungs filled with air, 
then water slapped him in the mouth and he coughed. His vision returned; Theotormon and Luvah were 
beside him. Wolff lifted his hand and pointed downward. "Fol-low me!"
He dived, his eyes open, his hands sliding along the wall. There was a green jade statue, a foot 
high, once an idol of some people in some universe, squatting in a niche. Wolff rotated its head, 
and a sec-tion of the wall opened inwards. The three Lords were carried into the large room. They 
scrambled to their feet, and Wolff ran to a con-sole and pulled on a red-handled lever. The door 
closed slowly against the pressure of the water, leaving a foot of water in the room. Identifying 
the console Urizen had told him about (there were at least thirty), Wolff pressed down a 
rectangular plate on which was an ideogram of the ancient writing once used by the Lords. He 
stepped back with the first smile he had had for a long tune.
"Vala not only won't be able to use her controls any more," he said, "she's trapped in her control 
room as well. And all gates of es-cape in the room are deactivated. Only the permanent gates in 
the palace, like the gate to the waterworld, are still on."
Wolff reached towards the button that would activate the view-screen in the other control room. He 
withdrew his hand and stood in thought for a moment.
"The less our sister knows of the true situation, the better for us," he said. "Theotormon, come 
here and listen carefully."
Wolff and Luvah hid behind a console and peered through a nar-row opening between the console and 
its screen. Theotormon pushed the button with the end of his flipper. Vala was staring at him, her 
long hair dark-red with damp and her face twisted with fury.
"You!" she said.
"Greetings, sister," Theotormon answered. "Are you surprised to see me still living? And how do 
you feel knowing that I have sealed off your escape and rendered you powerless?"
"Where are your brothers, your betters?" Vala said, trying to see past him into the room.
"They're dead. Their airtanks gave out and so did mine. But this body that our father gave me 
enabled me to hold my breath until the water washed away your jelly."
"So Jadawin is finally dead? I don't believe it. You are trying to play a trick on me, you stupid 
slug!"
"You're in no position to call names."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (77 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"Let me see his body," she said.
Theotormon shrugged. "That's impossible. He's floating some-where in the palace. I barely made it 
to this room myself. I can't go out to get him without flooding this room."
Vala looked at the water on the floor and then she smiled. "So you're trapped, too. You fish-
stinking idiot, you don't even have the brains of a fish! You just told me what your situation 
is!"
Theotormon gaped. He said, "But. . . but. . ."
"You may think you have me in your power," Vala said. "And so you do, in a manner of speaking. But 
you are just as much in mine. I know where the spacecraft is. It can get us off this planet and to 
an-other, which has a gate through which we can leave this universe. Now, what do you propose to 
do about this impasse?"
Theotormon scratched the fur on his head with the tip of a flipper. "I don't know."
"Oh, yes, you do! You're stupid, but not that stupid! You'll make a trade with me. You let me out, 
and I'll let you leave with me in the ship. There's no other way out for either of us."
Wolff could not see Theotormon's expression, but he could deduce from his tone the cunningness and 
suspicion on his face.
"How do I know I can trust you?"
"You don't, any more than I can trust you. We'll have to arrange this so neither of us can 
possibly trip the other up. Do you agree?"
"Well, I don't know. . ."
"This control room won't be harmed if the seas get a mile high and sit forever on the palace. I 
have food and water enough for a year. I can just sit here and let you die. And then I'll figure 
some way to get out, believe me. I'll discover a way."
"In that case," Theotormon said, "why don't you do it?"
"Because I don't want to stay in this room for a year. I have too many things to do."
"All right. But what about Chryseis?"
"She comes with me. I have plans for her," Vala said.
Her voice became even more suspicious. "Why should you care about her?"
"I don't. I just wondered. Maybe . . . maybe you could give her to me. From what Jadawin said, she 
must be very beautiful."
Vala laughed and said, "That would be one form of torture for her. But it isn't enough. No, you 
can't have her."
"Then it's not a deal," Theotormon said. "You keep her. See how you like being cooped up with her 
for a year. Besides, I don't really think you can swim to the spacecraft The water pressure will 
be too much."
Vala said, "You stupid selfish slimegut! You'd die yourself rather than let me have anything! Very 
well, take her then!"
Wolff smiled. He had told Theotormon to bring up Chryseis and so take her mind off him. This 
business about Chryseis was just irrel-evant enough and so Theotormonically selfish that she might 
be con-vinced that he was not hiding the truth.
Theotormon clapped his flippers together with glee. Wolff hoped that his joy was all act, since he 
was not sure that Theotormon might not betray him at the last moment. Theotormon said, "All right. 
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (78 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Now, how can we get to the spacecraft?"
"You'll have to release me first. I'm not going to tell you and then have you take off without 
me."
"But if I open the door to your room, you'll be able to get out ahead of me."
"Can't you set the controls so they'll open the doors by the time you get here?"
Theotormon grunted as if the thought were a new one. "All right Only, you'll have to come out of 
the room with absolutely no clothes on. You must both be nude and emptyhanded. I'll come out of my 
room weaponless. We'll both leave at exactly the same time and meet in the corridor that links the 
two rooms."
Vala gasped and said, "I thought . . . ! You mean you knew all the tune how to get here ... so 
that's where the other controls are! And I thought the other end of the corridor was a wall."
"It won't do you any good to know," Theotormon said. "You can't get out until I let you. Oh, yes, 
strip Chryseis, too. I don't want you to hide any weapons on her."
Vala said, "You're not taking any chances, are you? Perhaps you're more intelligent than I 
thought."
What was she planning? If she did meet him in the middle of the corridor, she would be helpless 
against Theotormon's far greater strength. He would attack her the moment she revealed the 
location of the spacecraft, and she must know that.
The truth was that Wolff, Luvah, and Theotormon knew where the ship was. Theotormon had pretended 
ignorance only to seem to give her an advantage. She had to be lured out of the room, otherwise 
she would never come out. Wolff knew his sister. She would die and take Chryseis with her rather 
than surrender. To her it was inconceivable that a Lord would keep a promise not to harm her. She 
had good reason. In fact, Wolff himself, though he never thought of himself as a genuine Lord 
anymore, was not sure he would have kept his word to her. Certainly, he did not intend that 
Theotormon adhere to his assurances.
Then what did she have in mind?
Theotormon went over the method of conduct with Vala again, pretending that he was not quite sure. 
Then he deactivated the screen and turned to Wolff and Luvah. Wolff opened the door into the 
cor-ridor so that he and Luvah could go out ahead of time. As Theotor-mon had said, the corridor 
linked the two control rooms. Both con-trol rooms and the hall between were in an enclosed unit of 
fourteen feet-thick metal alloy. The unit could hold any pressure of water and was resistant even 
to a direct hit by a hydrogen bomb. The interior wall was coated with a substance which would 
repel the neutrons of a neutron bomb. Urizen had placed the secret control room in this unit, near 
the main control room for just such situations as this. Anyone who managed to get into the main 
room would not know that there was an exit to the corridor until part of the seemingly solid wall 
of the main control room opened.
The corridor itself, though an emergency convenience, had been furnished as if a reception for 
Lords were to be held in it. It con-tained paintings, sculptures, and furniture that a Terrestrial 
billion-aire could not have purchased with all his fortune. A chandelier made from a single carved 
diamond, weighing half a ton, hung from a huge gold alloy chain. And this was not the most 
valuable object in the corridor.
Wolff hid behind a davenport covered with the silky chocolate-and-azure hide of an animal. Luvah 
concealed himself behind the base of a statue. Theotormon made sure that they were ready and 
re-turned to the control room to inform Vala that they could now pro-ceed to meet each other as 
planned. He then pressed the button that operated the door to Vala's room.
The wall at the other end of the corridor slid upwards. Light poured out of the opening, and Vala 
stuck her head cautiously around the frame. Theotormon did the same from his door. He stepped out 
quickly, ready to hurl himself back if she had a weapon. She gave a low laugh and came out of the 
doorway, her hands held out to show their emptiness. She was naked and magnificent.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (79 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Wolff gave her a glance. He had eyes only for the woman who fol-lowed her. It was his Chryseis, 
the beautiful huge-eyed nymph with tiger-striped hair. She, too, was unclothed.
"The Horn of Shambarimen," Theotormon said. "I almost forgot! Where is it?"
"It is in the control room," Vala replied. "I did not bring it be-cause you told me to be 
emptyhanded."
"Go get it, Chryseis," Theotormon said. "But when you return with it, hold it up above your head 
at arm's length and do not point it at me. If you make a sudden motion with it, I will kill you."
Vala's laughter filled the corridor. "Are you so suspicious that you suspect even her? She would 
not hurt you! She is definitely not going to do anything for me!"
Theotormon did not reply. Instructed by Wolff, he was playing the role of the overly alert Lord to 
keep Vala from suspecting any treachery. If Theotormon had been too trusting, she would have 
scented something foul at once.
Vala and Theotormon then advanced towards each other, taking a step forward slowly and in unison. 
It was as if they were partners in a formal dance, they moved so stately and in such matching 
rhythm.
Wolff crouched and waited. He had taken his suit off so that it would not hinder his movements. 
The sweat of tension covered his body. Neither he nor Luvah were armed. They had lost all their 
own weapons before they reached the secret room. And the room, to his dismay, had contained no 
arms. Apparently, Urizen had not thought it necessary. Or, much more likely, there were weapons 
hidden be-hind the walls, accessible only to one who knew how to find them. Urizen had not had 
time to give that information-if he had ever in-tended to do so.
The plan was to wait until Vala had passed Luvah, hidden on the other side of the hall. When he 
rushed out behind her, Theotormon would jump her. Wolff would hurl himself from his hiding place 
and help the other two.
Vala stopped several feet away from the diamond chandelier. Theotormon also stopped. She said, 
"Well, my ugly brother, it seems that you have kept your side of the bargain."
He nodded and said, "So where is the spaceship?"
He went forward one step in the hope that she, too, would take one and so place herself nearer. 
Vala stood still, however. Mock-ingly, she said, "The entrance to it is just on the other side of 
that rose-shaped mirror. You could have gone to it and left me to die-if you had known about it! 
You witless filth!"
Theotormon snarled and leaped at her. Luvah came out from behind the statue but bumped into 
Chryseis. Wolff rose and sped straight at Vala.
She screamed and held up her right hand, the palm at right angles to her arm, fingers stiffly 
pointing toward the ceiling. Out of the palm shot an intensely white beam no thicker than a 
needle. She moved her hand to her left in a horizontal arc. The beam slashed across Theotormon's 
neck, and his head fell off. For a moment, the body stood upright, blood fountaining upward from 
his neck. Then he fell forward.
Wolff whirled like a broken-field runner. He threw himself down on the floor behind Theotormon's 
feet. Vala, hearing Luvah curse as he recovered from his bump into Chryseis, spun around. 
Evidently she thought that this was the nearest danger and that she had enough time to deal with 
Wolff.
Chryseis had reacted quickly. On seeing the head of the seal-man fall off and roll back behind 
Theotormon, she had dived for the pro-tection of a statue. Vala's ray took off a chunk of the base 
of the statue but missed Chryseis. Then Luvah was coming in, head down. Vala leaped adroitly aside 
and chopped down with the edge of the palm of her left hand. Luvah fell forward on his face, 
unconscious.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (80 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
Why she had not killed him with the tiny beamer implanted in the flesh of her palm was a mystery. 
Perhaps she wanted someone to save as a torture victim, in keeping with the psychology of the 
Lords.
Wolff was helpless, or so Vala thought. She advanced towards him.
"You I shall kill now," she said. "You're too dangerous to leave alive for a second longer than 
necessary."
"I'm not dead yet," Wolff said. His fingers closed on Theotor-mon's head, and he hurled it at her. 
He was up on his feet at once and running towards her, knowing that he did not have a chance but 
hoping that something would happen to deflect her aim long enough.
She raised her hand to ward off the grisly projectile. The beam split the head in half, but one 
section continued to fly towards her.
The ray, directed towards the ceiling momentarily, cut the gold alloy chain. And the half-ton 
diamond chandelier came down upon her.
Wolff was still charging while all this occurred. He dived onto the floor to be below her line of 
fire in case she was still living and could use the hand. She glared up at him, the light not yet 
gone from her eyes. Her arms and her body were pinned beneath the diamond, from beneath which 
blood ran.
"You. . . did it, brother," she gasped.
Chryseis came out from behind the statue to throw herself into his arms. She clung to him and 
sobbed. He could not blame her for this, but there were still things to do.
He kissed her a few times, hugged her, and pushed her away from him.
"We have to get out while we can," he said. "Push in on the third gargoyle to the left on the 
upper decoration on that mirror."
She did so; the mirror swung hi. Wolff put his unconscious brother on his shoulders and started 
towards the entrance. Chryseis said, "Robert! What about her?"
He stopped. "What about her?"
"Are you going to let her suffer like this? It may take a long time before she dies."
"I don't think so," he said. "Besides, she has it coming."
"Robert!" 
Wolff sighed. For a moment, he had been a complete Lord again, had become the old Jadawin.
He put Luvah on the floor and walked over to Vala. She twisted, and her hand came loose, a section 
of the shorn diamond falling over onto the floor. Wolff leaped at her and caught her hand just as 
the ray shot forth from the palm. He twisted her hand so violently that the bones cracked. She 
cried out once with pain before she died.
Directed by Wolff, the laser beam had half-guillotined her.
Wolff, Chryseis, and Luvah entered the spaceship. It rose straight up the launching shaft to the 
very top of the palace. Wolff headed the ship for the exit-gate, hidden in the mountains of the 
tempusfudger planet. Only then did he have tune to find out how Vala had man-aged to get Chryseis 
from her bed and out of their world.
"The hexaculum awoke me," she said, "while you were still sleep-ing. It-Vala's voice-warned me 
that if I tried to wake you, you would be killed in a horrible way. Vala told me that only by 
follow-ing her instructions would I prevent your death."
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (81 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20Jose%20-%20World%20of%20Tiers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt
"You should have known better," he said. "If she had been able to hurt me, she would have done it. 
But then, I suppose that you were too concerned for me. You did not dare to take the chance that 
she might be bluffing."
"Yes. I wanted to cry out, but I was afraid that she might be able to carry out her threats. I was 
so terrified for you that I was not thinking straight. So I went through the gate she designated, 
one of those gates that take you to a lower level of our planet. I deactivated the alarms before 
entering it, as she ordered. Vala was waiting in the cave where our gate took me. She had already 
set up a gate to take us to this universe. The rest you know."
Wolff turned the controls over to Luvah so that he could embrace and kiss her. She began to weep, 
and soon he was weeping, too. His tears were not only from relief for having gotten her back 
unharmed and relief from the unrelenting strain of the experiences in this world. He wept for his 
dead brothers and sister. He did not mourn those who had just died, the adults. He mourned for his 
brothers and sister as the children they had once been and for the love they had had for each 
other as children. He grieved for the loss of what they might have been.
file:///F|/rah/Philip%20Jose%20Farmer/Philip%20...iers%2002%20-%20The%20Gates%20of%20Creation.txt (82 of 82) [8/27/03 9:23:41 PM]

