Fast Circuit Boards
www.ebook3000.com

Fast Circuit Boards
Energy Management
Ralph Morrison

This edition first published 2018
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from this 
title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Ralph Morrison to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance 
with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Editorial Office
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley 
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content 
that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
The publisher and the authors make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including 
without limitation any implied warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. This work is sold with 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice 
and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. In view of on‐going research, 
equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information 
relating to the use of experimental reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and 
evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each chemical, piece of 
equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of 
usage and for added warnings and precautions. The fact that an organization or website is referred to in 
this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the author or 
the publisher endorses the information the organization or website may provide or recommendations 
it may make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or 
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No warranty may be created or 
extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be 
liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Names: Morrison, Ralph, author.
Title: Fast circuit boards : energy management / by Ralph Morrison.
Description: Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, 2018. | Includes index. |
Identifiers: LCCN 2017037713 (print) | LCCN 2017046159 (ebook) |  
ISBN 9781119413929 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119413998 (epub) | ISBN 9781119413905 (cloth)
Subjects: LCSH: Very high speed integrated circuits–Design and construction. |  
Logic design.
Classification: LCC TK7874.7 (ebook) | LCC TK7874.7. M67 2018 (print) |  
DDC 621.31–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017037713
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © troyek/Getty Images 
Set in 10/12pt Warnock by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India
Printed in the United States of America
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
www.ebook3000.com

v
Contents
Preface  ix
1	
Electric and Magnetic Fields  1
1.1	
Introduction  2
1.2	
Electrons and the Force Field  8
1.3	
The Electric Field and Voltage  11
1.4	
Electric Field Patterns and Charge Distributions  14
1.5	
Field Energy  17
1.6	
Dielectrics  19
1.7	
Capacitance  20
1.8	
Capacitors  21
1.9	
The D or Displacement Field  21
1.10	 Mutual and Self Capacitance  22
1.11	 Current Flow in a Capacitance  23
1.12	 The Magnetic Field  24
1.13	 The B Field of Induction  27
1.14	 Inductance  28
1.15	 Inductors  30
1.16	 The Inductance of a Solenoid in Air  32
1.17	 Magnetic Field Energy Stored in Space  33
1.18	 Mutual Inductance  34
1.19	 Transformer Action  35
1.20	 Poynting’s Vector  35
1.21	 Resistors and Resistance  36
Problem Set  39
Glossary  39
Answers to Problems  42
2	
Transmission Lines—Part 1  43
2.1	
Introduction  43
2.2	
The Ideal World  44
2.3	
Transmission Line Representations  45
2.4	
Characteristic Impedance  47

Contents
vi
2.5	
Waves and Wave Velocity  48
2.6	
The Balance of Field Energies  50
2.7	
A Few Comments on Transmission Lines  51
2.8	
The Propagation of a Wave on a Transmission Line  51
2.9	
Initial Wave Action  53
2.10	 Reflections and Transmissions at  
Impedance Transitions  55
2.11	 The Unterminated (Open) Transmission Line  57
2.12	 The Short‐Circuited Transmission Line  61
2.13	 Voltage Doubling and Rise Time  61
2.14	 Matched Shunt Terminated Transmission Lines  64
2.15	 Matched Series Terminated Transmission Lines  68
2.16	 Extending a Transmission Line  69
2.17	 Skin Effect  70
Problem Set  71
Glossary  72
Answers to Problems  74
3	
Transmission Lines—Part 2  75
3.1	
Introduction  75
3.2	
Energy Sources  75
3.3	
The Ground Plane/Power Plane as an Energy Source  77
3.4	
What Is a Capacitor?  77
3.5	
Turning Corners  79
3.6	
Practical Transmissions  80
3.7	
Radiation and Transmission Lines  81
3.8	
Multilayer Circuit Boards  83
3.9	
Vias  85
3.10	 Layer Crossings  85
3.11	 Vias and Stripline  87
3.12	 Stripline and the Power Plane  87
3.13	 Stubs  88
3.14	 Traces and Ground (Power) Plane Breaks  89
3.15	 Characteristic Impedance of Traces  89
3.16	 Microstrip  90
3.17	 Centered Stripline  93
3.18	 Asymmetric Stripline  94
3.19	 Two‐Layer Boards  95
3.20	 Sine Waves on Transmission Lines  95
3.21	 Shielded Cables  96
3.22	 Coax  97
3.23	 Transfer Impedance  97
3.24	 Waveguides  100
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
vii
3.25	 Balanced Lines  101
3.26	 Circuit Board Materials  101
Problem Set  102
Glossary  102
Answers to Problems  104
4	
Interference  105
4.1	
Introduction  105
4.2	
Radiation—General Comments  106
4.3	
The Impedance of Space  107
4.4	
Field Coupling to Open Parallel Conductors (Sine Waves)  107
4.5	
Cross‐Coupling  108
4.6	
Shielding—General Comments  110
4.7	
Even‐Mode Rejection  111
4.8	
Ground—A General Discussion  112
4.9	
Grounds on Circuit Boards  115
4.10	 Equipment Ground  116
4.11	 Guard Shields  116
4.12	 Forward Referencing Amplifiers  117
4.13	 A/D Converters  118
4.14	 Utility Transformers and Interference  118
4.15	 Shielding of Distribution Power Transformers  119
4.16	 Electrostatic Discharge  120
4.17	 Aliasing Errors  122
Glossary  123
5	
Radiation  125
5.1	
Introduction  125
5.2	
Standing Wave Ratio  126
5.3	
The Transmission Coefficient τ  127
5.4	
The Smith Chart  127
5.5	
Smith Chart and Wave Impedances (Sine Waves)  130
5.6	
Stubs and Impedance Matching  133
5.7	
Radiation—General Comments  134
5.8	
Radiation from Dipoles  134
5.9	
Radiation from Loops  136
5.10	 Effective Radiated Power for Sinusoids  137
5.11	 Apertures  137
5.12	 Honeycomb Filters  138
5.13	 Shielded Enclosures  139
5.14	 Screened Rooms  139
5.15	 Line Filters  140
Glossary  141

Contents
viii
Appendix A: Sine Waves in Circuits  143
A.1	
Introduction  143
A.2	
Unit Circle and Sine Waves  143
A.3	
Angles, Frequency, and rms  145
A.4	
The Reactance of an Inductor  147
A.5	
The Reactance of a Capacitor  148
A.6	
An Inductor and a Resistor in Series  150
A.7	
A Capacitor and a Resistor in Series  151
A.8	
The Arithmetic of Complex Numbers  152
A.9	
Resistance, Conductance, Susceptance, Reactance, Admittance,  
and Impedance  153
A.10	 Resonance  155
A.11	 Answers to Problems  156
Appendix B: Square‐Wave Frequency Spectrum  159
B.1	
Introduction  159
B.2	
Ideal Square Waves  159
B.3	
Square Waves with a Rise Time  161
Appendix C: The Decibel  163
Appendix D: Abbreviations and Acronyms  165
Index  173
www.ebook3000.com

ix
If you are reading this preface you are probably involved in designing and 
laying out logic circuit boards. I have a story to tell you which you will not find 
on the internet or in other books. What I have to say has been put to practice 
and it works. It is not complicated but it is different. In this book, I ask you to 
go back to the basics so that I can explain the future. I hope you are willing to 
put forth the effort to go down this path.
I would like to thank my wife Elizabeth for her encouragement and help. 
She never complained when I spent days on end at my computer writing and 
rewriting. It takes a lot of dedicated time to write a book.
I would like to thank Dan Beeker of NXP Semiconductors. He is a principal 
engineer in Automotive Field Engineering. I have given many seminars 
arranged by Dan over the years. Using the material in my seminars he has been 
very effective in helping designers avoid problems. His experiences are proof 
that the material in this book, when put to practice, really works. His success 
has spurred me on. Highlights of this understanding are blocked out in the text 
as Insights.
This book presents some ideas that I have not seen in print or heard at 
conferences. I know that this does not prove that these ideas are new or 
novel. It could mean that I have not talked to the right people. My contact 
with engineers tells me they mainly come out of the same molds in school. 
The basic math and physics that is taught revolves around differential equa-
tions that in most cases solve problems using numerical techniques.
Computers work well in antenna design and in moving energy in wave guides. 
For a long time the problem of wiring circuit boards has been considered trivial 
and has not received very much attention. One of the reasons is that people 
have been getting by. That is no longer the case and it is time for a change. 
A big part of the problem is that sine waves and antenna or microwave design 
methods are not a fit for transmission lines on circuit boards where step func-
tions, delays, and reflections take center stage.
Preface

Preface
x
To whet your appetite here are a few ideas that are treated in this book:
1)  Logic is the movement of energy
2)  Not all waves carry energy
3)  We cannot measure moving field energy directly
4)  Waves deposit, convert and move electric and magnetic field energy on 
transmission lines
5)  Radiation only occurs on leading edges
6)  Energy in motion is half electric and half magnetic
7)  Via positioning controls radiation
8)  Transmission lines can oscillate
9)  Waves can convert stored electric field energy to stored magnetic field 
energy
10)  Waves can convert stored magnetic field energy to stored electric field 
energy
11)  Waves can convert stored energy into moving energy
In my career I have written 14 books, all published by John Wiley &Sons. 
I am 92 and I have been retired for some 25 years. That has not stopped me 
from giving seminars, doing consulting, and writing books. I often reflect on 
what keeps my writing and how I seem to be almost singular in my approach to 
interference issues. A lot has to do with the opportunities given to me in my 
career. Since this will probably be my last book I thought this would be an 
opportunity to provide the readers with some of my personal background. 
A lot of people have helped me over the years and my story is unique.
I was born in Highland Park, a suburb of Los Angeles, California on January 4, 
1925 to immigrant parents who had no understanding or interest in science. 
I grew up in the great depression of the thirties when a cup of coffee was 
5 cents. Cellophane and zippers were not a part of life. The last horse‐drawn 
carriages brought fresh vegetables to our street. There was the ice man and 
houses had ice boxes. Raw or pasteurized milk was delivered in bottles by the 
milkman before I got up. Radios blared soap operas all day.
My early experiences with things electrical were crystal sets, radios, and 
building an audio amplifier. I learned how to measure voltage and calculate cur-
rent flow. I used an oscilloscope in school to observe circuit voltages. I observed 
magnetics in terms of loud speakers, motors, and transformers. I formed images 
of current flow and voltage patterns. I knew about radio transmission and 
antennas from my amateur radio friends, but this area was a mystery to me. 
It was not until I entered college that I was introduced to electromagnetic fields. 
By then I had enough mathematics to work a few simple problems but my 
understanding of the electrical world was still very limited.
I started playing violin at age 4½ and my father got me a scholarship. I walked 
a mile to elementary school and I remember the Maypole in the playground. 
I walked a mile over a hill to Eagle Rock High School where I had my first brush 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xi
with geometry, algebra, physics, and electric shop. I had some fine teachers. 
Ben Culley, one of my math teachers, went on to be dean of men at Occidental 
College. We had a radio at home and that intrigued me. I pestered the local 
radio repair shop and was allowed to help out by testing tubes. We had no 
automobile but I made the effort to bicycle to the Friday night lectures at 
Caltech. I saw the 100‐inch Mount Wilson telescope lens when it was moved 
out of the optics lab. I saw the demonstration at the Kellogg high voltage lab. In 
my teen years I was leaning toward things electrical. Then Pearl Harbor was 
bombed. I remember Roosevelt’s famous “infamy” radio speech. In 3 weeks 
I turned 17. I remember the air raid sirens and the blackouts. I remember when 
the Japanese shelled the west coast and the searchlights came on. I remember 
gas masks were issued and there was gas and food rationing. Members of my 
class were volunteering into the services and big changes were taking place in 
the lives around me.
I was drafted into the army in the April of 1943 and did basic training in 
Fresno, California. The army sent me to Oregon State College as part of an 
Army Specialized Training Program. I had my first bus and train ride. At OSC 
I had a few basic engineering courses. Much of the class material was a review 
for me. It was decided that the war was not going to last decades and the educa-
tion of future engineers was not a high priority. My start in college lasted about 
6 months and I was shipped off to the 89th infantry division at Hunter Liggett 
Military Reservation in California. I was given a course in radio repair at Fort 
Benning, Georgia. The division eventually ended up crossing Germany in 
Patton’s third army. I saw bombed out cities. I watched and heard the bombing 
during the Rhine river crossing. I did my calculus through the University 
of California correspondence course in this period. I remember working 
problems when one of our own aircrafts was shot down because he was firing 
on us. The army went as far as Zwickau and I saw the exodus of slave labor. 
They were walking back to their home cities with no food or belongings. 
Our division uncovered one of the concentration camps. This was the first 
knowledge I had of what had been going on in Europe in the preceding years. 
It was hard to grasp.
After hostilities, it took months before we could return home. The war 
was still in progress in the Pacific. This meant that there were only so many 
ships available. I visited London, Brussels, Edinburgh, and Glasgow on 
passes. I saw the Loch Ness. Since I was a violinist, I took the opportunity to 
join a GI symphony orchestra. I spent a month in Paris before we were moved 
to Frankfurt. It was a big transition—from army life in war to a home in a 
French mansion. The orchestra toured Germany and Austria entertaining 
troops. I saw a lot of Europe including the war crimes trial at Nuremburg and 
the inside of Hitler’s bunker in Berlin. We played in the Schonbrunn Palace in 
Vienna, in the Wagner Festspiel Haus in Beirut, and in Garmisch Partenkirchen. 
For a kid that had never left home, I had quite an adventure in the army.

Preface
xii
Three years in the service and I finally returned home. I wanted to use the GI 
bill to get a college degree at Caltech. I was 21 years old. The first thing I did 
personally was add a room to our home so that I had a place to study. The 
backlog of students trying to continue their education was long and my only 
option was to take the junior entrance exam. I was given credit for my classes 
at Oregon State and my correspondence course. I studied all summer so that 
I could take exams in English, math, chemistry, and physics. I was one of six 
that was accepted. I chose physics as my major as I really did not know what 
direction to take. I finished my senior year without enough credits to graduate. 
I came back for two more terms and nearly finished all the courses needed to 
get a Masters in EE. I had used up my GI bill. I had a difficult time starting as a 
junior but somehow I made it. I graduated with the class of 1949. I still remem-
ber that my first physics course was given by Dr. Carl Anderson, the Nobel 
prize winner that discovered the positron. I was in a different world. I had no 
more funds and I had to go to work.
My first job was with a company called Applied Physics Corporation in 
Pasadena, CA. I worked for George W. Downs, a respected technical consultant 
with ties to Caltech, the US Navy, and the Atomic Energy Commission. My 
first assignment was to build a dc amplifier for Douglas Aircraft. In 1950, there 
were only vacuum tubes for gain. I was shown a circuit that used a mechanical 
chopper to stabilize a feedback amplifier. Vacuum tubes require hundreds of 
volts to operate and there had to be transformers to isolate the circuits from 
utility ground. My first dc amplifier and power supply weighed over 70 pounds. 
Looking back, it is hard to believe that this was progress. Based on what had 
been learned, my next dc amplifiers were much smaller and a group of ampli-
fiers shared one power supply. These early designs were bought by the aircraft 
companies to handle the signals from strain gauges and thermocouples. These 
were the days when the first jet aircraft was still on the drawing board. I was 
given the job of building four analog computers that paralleled work done at 
Caltech. Each of these computers filled a room and used the dc amplifier 
designs I had worked on. These computers were sold to Lockheed, Douglas, 
and North American Aircraft.
Digital computing was in its infancy. When my first boss was asked whether 
analog or digital computing was best, he responded—“Get them both. You 
need all the help you can get.” If I were asked whether field theory or circuit 
theory is best I would have to answer a little differently. You need to use them 
both. One alone is not sufficient.
Our group of designers were moved to Transformer Engineers, another 
Pasadena company. I invented a way to build dc amplifiers and avoid voltage 
regulation using two blocks of ac gain, feedback, and a mechanical chopper to 
reduce the size of a channel but management did not want to enter this market. 
Four of us including George, left and formed our own company called Dynamics 
Instrumentation. The new design was a viable product and within a year I had 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xiii
invented a reasonably good differential amplifier that provided a bandwidth of 
10 kHz. I began to understand that each amplifier channel needed its own 
power supply or there would be system oscillations. Following soon were the 
days of the first transistors and the instruments were getting smaller and more 
sophisticated. This was the period when rocket engines were being tested for 
space exploration. As semiconductors developed I was eventually able to build 
differential amplifiers without mechanical choppers that were extremely 
stable.
I began to write small articles that were used as sales tools. There was 
essentially no written material available for engineers to study and these 
articles were very effective sales tools. These articles about shields, the 
shielding of instruments and the grounding of cable shields, led me to write 
my first book. Much to my surprise Wiley accepted my manuscript for 
publication. What I did not know was that the engineers buying the instru-
mentation had little to say about how the facility would handle the cables 
and their terminations.
Of course, grounding and shielding involves far more than testing aircraft or 
rockets. It involves electronics in medicine, research, manufacturing, and com-
puters. Instruments had to function in adverse environments and survive when 
there was nearby lightning activity. I learned how to protect input circuits from 
significant overloads. Input noise levels of 2 microvolts rms in 100 kHz were 
accepted standards and yet the instruments were protected even if the power 
line were connected to the input. Instruments could operate with 300 volts 
ground potential differences between input and output.
As a principal in my own company I had the opportunity to visit and talk to 
engineers in facilities all over the United States. They were very willing to show 
me their testing installations and rooms full of electronics. A typical rack would 
be opened up and all I could see was a bundle of cables a foot in diameter 
coming out of the floor and fanning out to hardware. It was impressive and 
I had no idea of what this meant from the standpoint of performance. All I knew 
was that if I tested an instrument on my bench it would meet my published 
specifications. All of this contact gave me an understanding of electronics 
which I did not get in college.
Dynamics came to an abrupt halt as a company in one of the big cutbacks in 
defense spending. I went to work for a company that supplied equipment to the 
telephone industry. I remember being shown the special earth ground that had 
been brought up into the lab. This was apparently standard practice in the tel-
ephone industry. The chief engineer felt strongly that this connection would 
ensure that electronics could be tested in a “quiet” environment because this 
ground was available. I did not respond because all of my experience indicated 
that this ground was of little importance. To me it was just another earthed 
conductor along with water pipes, gas lines, and electrical conduit. The only 
difference was they each had a special title.

Preface
xiv
The telephone system in those days rang bells by placing a voltage between 
one telephone line and earth. The telephone systems would work even though 
there was a power outage as the system ran on batteries where the positive lead 
was grounded. The ground conductor I was shown was a part of telephone 
practice. I later became chief engineer of that company and never once did 
I use that special ground.
I understood the philosophy of grounding analog amplifiers. I had built 
analog circuits and found that “hum” pickup was reduced if I grounded my 
circuits to a nearby conduit. My approach in instrumentation had been that if 
I had to use special grounds to get performance, my design was inadequate. 
What I was learning was that this search for “good ground” had caught on and 
was accepted as good engineering. I found the idea that a good ground would 
work for a facility regardless of its size ridiculous. But as I traveled the country 
I found this idea had taken hold and was accepted as good practice.
As an April fool’s joke I submitted a news article to an electronics magazine 
describing that the perfect ground had been discovered near Nome Alaska and 
it was being protected against contamination by a fence.
I had occasion to visit a deep space antenna facility in the Mohave desert. 
There was a circle of buildings with a central point acting as ground for all the 
electronics. This ground was made from buried copper rod. The power for 
each building was supplied through a nearby distribution transformer that was 
grounded (earthed) at the transformer per the electrical code. The problem 
occurred during thunder storm activity. Lightning would strike the earth 
causing a potential difference between the central ground and the utility 
ground at each building. A nearby lightning strike would place thousands of 
volts across the coils of the distribution transformer. The result was that these 
transformers were being blown up. This grounding practice was written into 
law and quality control would not accept any change to this practice. What 
bothered me the most was that the engineers we talked to had no idea of what 
was wrong. They were interested in the performance of individual pieces of 
hardware and the facility issues were not their domain.
This single‐point grounding practice was what I saw in most major defense 
installations. All the shields for all the signals were bundled together and con-
nected to this “good” ground. The simple physics in my book showed why this 
could not work, but no one paid attention to what I considered to be obvious. 
Buildings are not circuits and the single point grounds that worked in many 
applications could not function in these large environments. They thought 
they knew where the interfering current entered the sink but no one asked 
where the current came back out of the earth. The idea of skin effect was never 
considered.
The first electronic instruments I designed were full of shielded conductors. 
This is labor intensive and adds a lot of bulk and cost to a design. My last 
designs used no shielded conductors. In feedback structures, most of the 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xv
interference is cancelled. Knowing how to route signals and how to control 
impedance levels, use differential techniques made for simple layouts. In the 
end, there were no calculations—just technique and it worked.
Making things work well and at the same time keeping things simple is a 
challenge. There are only so many coupling mechanisms. Understanding that 
both interference and signals obey the same laws is key to finding answers. 
When I viewed a facility problem my circuit experience served me well. 
I could see the problem in terms of the spaces not the conductors. The rules 
people usually follow involve conductors without regard to the geometry. For 
example, the service entrance to a residence requires a grounding conductor. 
The intent is to provide a path for lightning to earth. If the conductor is 
routed around a door or along a wall for any distance to get to a water pipe, 
it will not function even though it passes inspection. People follow rules. 
They have no choice.
I visited a facility in New Mexico that assembled live missiles for the air force. 
The fear was that an ESD event might arm a missile. I was called in because a 
missile had somehow been armed. Every worker at a bench wore a conducting 
wrist band that was connected to his or her bench and seat. The floors were 
conductive and the walls of the building were corrugated steel. This facility was 
located in an area where lightning frequency is high. When I arrived, there was 
a group of inspectors in white smocks and with clipboards touring the facility 
looking for any rule violations. I was told that if there was a chance of lightning, 
the building would be evacuated.
I noticed that the building had lightning arrestors on the roof eaves and that 
there were down‐conductors from these arrestors to grounding posts. Then 
I saw a television antenna that was taller than the lightning protection. What 
I saw next was that lightning would use the corrugated steel walls as a down 
conductor, not the down‐conductors provided. The problem then was that 
lightning using this path would arc to earth at floor level. Missiles were located 
on the other side of the wall just feets from the points of possible arcing. 
I recommended that the building steel be grounded at points around the 
perimeter of the building. Any arcing at this level could easily arm a missile. 
The lesson here is that following written rules does not always solve problems. 
Common sense is important.
My music provided another side to my life that was unusual. I play ­chamber 
music and this has brought me in touch with some very interesting people. 
In Pasadena, I played music with Rupert Pole who was married to Anais 
Nin, the famous diarist. I played music with Alice Leighton, wife of Robert 
Leighton, who helped write the famous Physics Lecture Series with 
Dr. Feynman. Stuart Canin, who became concertmaster of the San Francisco 
Symphony was concertmaster of the GI Symphony and played for Roosevelt, 
Churchill, and Stalin in Potsdam during our stay in Berlin. At the time, this 
was done in secret.

Preface
xvi
I had a similar experience when the GI orchestra was stationed in Frankfurt. 
I played quartets (background music) for a group of officers holding a fancy 
dinner party at a castle on the banks of the Rhine river. They were living it up 
with a group of army nurses. I would have never seen the inside of a castle if it 
were not for music.
My first book was published by John Wiley and Sons in 1967. This was a 
period in time when rocket engines were being developed. The title of this 
book was Grounding and Shielding in Instrumentation. The main problem 
I addressed was related to limiting interference to microvolts when the input 
signal lines ran thousands of feet between rocket stands and instrumentation 
bunkers. Designing instrumentation amplifiers using vacuum tubes that 
worked in this environment meant I had to understand interference from both 
internal and external sources. I had solved the instrumentation problems but 
the users had to understand their role in handling long input cables. It is a long 
story but in later years I found out that my recommendations were largely 
ignored. Performance was impacted but obviously systems worked well 
enough to get men on the moon. I have rewritten Grounding and Shielding 
every 10 years and the 6th edition just came out in 2016. I have no doubt that 
many of the shielding issues that I discuss in my books are still not being 
handled correctly. What often happens is that as new technology enters the 
scene the old problems simply fade away. It is not comforting to realize that 
progress often takes this form. A lack of understanding persists and it will 
cause problems in some future effort. We seldom argue with a practice if it 
works. I do not like invalid arguments that supported bad practice. It leads to 
problems in the future.
I found it very rewarding to put my understanding into the written word. 
Writing it down on paper forces me to be accurate. My understanding in many 
areas was challenged and I had many things to learn. My first book brought me 
consulting jobs as well as opportunities to teach seminars. The more contact 
I had with engineers the more convinced I became that they were not using the 
physics they had been taught in school. It was through my books that Dan 
Beeker found me and asked me to do a few seminars for his company.
These early seminars were not directed at the world of circuit boards. They 
covered areas of power distribution, radiation, and instrumentation. The sub-
jects of grounding and shielding were treated for both analog and rf circuits. 
Facility design, lightning protection, ESD, screen room design, and radiation 
from antennas were all key topics. My talks had one thing in common: the prob-
lems of interference were all field related. For Dan’s audience, I began to include 
topics related to transmission lines on circuit boards. Dan heard my talk dozens 
of times. I contradicted many of his pet ideas. I told a story that was different 
than other speakers. Much to his credit he began to see a light and he began 
changing his approach to board layout. He has become very successful at trouble 
shooting problems using a new set of ideas. His boards work the first time.
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xvii
Electronics has changed dramatically over the last 50 years. My early experi-
ences were analog. The world is now largely digital with the communication 
between devices being wireless. The thing that has not changed is that circuit 
board layouts can have problems. The signals have greater bandwidth but the 
same physics of electricity and magnetism applies. This book is intended to 
provide tools to designers so that logic circuit boards can function at maxi-
mum clock rates and so they will function reliably and pass radiation tests. It is 
also intended to give IC manufacturers a system view of logic operations.
There are several levels to the design of logic circuit boards. The design 
involves selecting processors, memories, clock systems, power supplies, 
buffers, and drivers. A second aspect is the layout. This includes the number 
of board layers, the location of components, type of board materials, trace 
characteristics, the number of ground planes, and how power is distributed. 
A complete design requires interconnecting the pins and pads, using 
­conducting planes, traces, and vias. This set of connections seems like an 
elementary problem, not one requiring engineering attention. There is a lot 
to “wiring” a circuit board. It is not only a problem of interconnecting logic 
but also one of moving energy.
What makes the problem difficult is that we are getting to the point where 
every picosecond is important. This is no longer the domain of circuit theory.
I could provide the reader with a set of rules to follow and then there would 
be no book to write. I feel that it is necessary to explain electrical activity in 
terms of electromagnetic fields. This way the reader will have two sets of tools 
to use in the future. I want to do this so that no matter what the future holds 
the reader will be prepared. I want to present this material in a straightforward 
way. There is no way to avoid some mathematics. The one thing I know for 
certain is that fields explain things that circuit theory misses.
Fields are not components and they cannot be seen. Progress is usually made 
by using old materials in new ways. The changes that are taking place are add-
ing to logic rates and radiation, and they are in the direction to reduce signal 
integrity. Progress is made by keeping the fundamentals in full view. The fun-
damentals I am referring to are the electromagnetic fields that define all elec-
trical phenomena. We are designing products where new tools must be put in 
the tool kit. My goal is to point out these tools. You have to learn how to use 
them. There is a recognition that a new technology is needed to make further 
progress. Until that happens we need to make optimum use of the products we 
have. Whatever is invented, it will be based on physics and circuit theory will 
have to step back a little further.
A better understanding of the electrical world did not come until I started to 
design hardware and tried to reduce noise levels, increase bandwidth, and 
interface with utility power. At every twist and turn there was some parasitic 
effect that could only be explained by using my physics background. It took 
time but I learned that every component had both an ideal and a practical 

Preface
xviii
character. Voltage sources were not zero impedance and switches were 
complex objects. I soon learned to be suspicious of everything including con-
ductor geometry. Every circuit was unstable until I ran tests. I designed some 
logic circuits and observed that there were many new performance limits to 
consider. I watched wire‐wrap technology evolve and disappear and then 
multilayer boards take over. As the technology evolved I was able to present my 
understanding every 10 years in 6 editions to my Grounding and Shielding 
book. In my seminars I started to slant materials toward circuit boards that 
perform logic functions. This led me to spend a lot of time working on trans-
mission lines that handle digital information. Most of the material that exists in 
the literature relates to sine waves and little is written as it relates to step func-
tions. I had some questions about Poynting’s vector and step functions and got 
no help from my physics friends. Eventually I put together a picture of what 
happens when waves reflect at a discontinuity. It took time but I finally realized 
that what was happening on a logic board was the movement, storage, and 
conversion of energy. I finally understood that if you give nature an opportu-
nity to move energy, you can meet goals in moving information. This energy is 
moved in fields in the spaces between conductors. The traces act as guides that 
control where the energy can flow. This book is written to describe this energy 
flow in detail. It may surprise you that there is so much to say.
The path I have taken to understand electrical behavior is perhaps unique. 
There are few books devoted to the relationship between electrical interfer-
ence and the basic physics of electricity. I know the pressure to understand the 
world is there because this is what engineers do. They make things work when 
there are forces at play that limit performance. I am familiar with the trial‐and‐
error approach and I also know that explanations of why something works are 
often in error. I know because I have been a part of this process. Fortunately, 
I had a good education and I keep challenging my own explanations. The truth 
is that in the process of learning I have often been in error. My excuse is that 
essentially no one has offered me criticisms or advice. The physicists I know 
have never built their own circuit boards or wound their own transformers, so 
they have had no experience solving the types of problems I was forced to deal 
with. I was very much on my own. There was always a feeling of recognition 
for my writing efforts but there has been essentially no feedback. One of the 
biggest problems we all have is discussing our inadequacies. Another problem 
is taking positions that are contrary to accepted practice. It is always easy to 
use the local jargon and accept the opinion of the boss. The lore that prevails 
is working (sort of), so why be contrary. I also know that spending a billion 
dollars on an approach does not make it right. It does make it very difficult to 
criticize.
I feel I have a good picture of interference processes. When I attend a 
conference, I can usually tell when a speaker has a convoluted understanding. 
The paper is published, the audience applauds, and life goes on. If I give a 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xix
presentation, the listeners react the same way. Because there is a big gap in 
understanding, both presentations are probably ignored and the listeners are 
left looking for understanding. They will come back next year hoping for a 
better experience. My hope is that I can open a door just far enough so that a 
correct understanding can take root.
Emotions often run high in areas where opinions differ. I understand the 
effort that it takes to be an engineer. It is human nature to defend a position 
that has taken years to establish. There are engineers that feel strongly that 
field theory explanations are the wrong approach. I feel just as strongly that 
they are the ones in error. Many are successful designers that are not afraid to 
speak out. My experiences tell me to remain firm. Nature is not going to change 
one iota just because we explain phenomena in different ways. Many designers 
invent new languages that seems to catch on like a virus. This practice unfor-
tunately places impediments in the communications channel. I understand the 
dynamic nature of language but I also realize the need for accuracy and stability. 
No one is changing the words voltage or inductance, but often engineers forget 
that these words are defined in terms of field theory.
Learning electricity is an ongoing process for engineers. We cannot see elec-
tricity, so we must live with a stream of interconnected concepts. Sometimes, 
what we think we understand is flawed. Until we are challenged, these flaws are 
not recognized. The first thing we try to do is fit the facts we see to the ideas we 
feel comfortable with. I remember in college studying the same material over 
and over, each time adding a level of complexity. The same thing happened 
when I went to work designing hardware. Some of the learning involved applying 
new materials and some of it was related to a better understanding of the past. 
Lately, learning has involved going back to basic physics as circuit theory is 
showing its limitations. Going back is only a part of the process. In my early 
attempts at design I had little idea of just how to proceed. First inclinations 
were to experiment with the materials at hand. When experimentation was not 
practical, I asked my boss.
I remember the first time I encountered a shield in a power transformer. 
I was not sure where to connect this shield. There were several choices includ-
ing the instrument enclosure, common signal, or equipment ground. I asked by 
boss who was a very respected engineer. His response surprised me. He pro-
ceeded to light up his pipe. The delaying tactic said he did not know. Later in 
my career I realized there was no simple answer. We were building high‐quality 
equipment and a shielded transformer represented this higher quality. In fact, 
it made little difference where this one shield was connected. I now realize he 
was being honest and that we both had a lot to learn. It took years before 
I found the answer to my question.
Later in my career I worked on differential amplifiers that required the use 
of transformers with three shields. I built my own shielded transformers 
and  found out how to use this shielding to build a wideband differential 

Preface
xx
instrumentation amplifier. I wrote the specifications and got a transformer 
house to make the transformers. The company saw this as a business opportunity 
and added “Isolation Transformers” to their product line. These transformers 
found application in the early computer installations that were being used in 
the defense industry. I wrote about these transformers in my Grounding and 
Shielding books.
One day I was scanning an electronics magazine and noticed an ad by this 
same company for a four‐shield “Isolation” transformer. I had no idea of how 
four shields might work so I called the president of this company hoping to 
learn something about shielding. I asked the obvious question “Where do you 
connect this fourth shield?” The answer was honest. “I do not know.” Then 
I asked the question “Why do you offer this shield?” The answer was equally 
honest. “It sells more transformers.” That answer has stayed with me for 
50 years. Looking back, I can see that there is an element of desperation in 
engineering that requires action even if the reasoning is not well founded.
It became obvious to me that a building was not a circuit. There was no way 
to use my meters and an oscilloscope to measure its properties. Even if I could 
describe the building as a circuit, there was no way I was not going to redesign 
it. A building and its conductors are a “given” and I was not going to change 
buildings. Experimenting with buildings is not an easy thing to do even for 
governments. I decided I had to design “islands” of space that I could control. 
Meanwhile, I saw efforts to design buildings that were supposedly “quiet,” 
“clean,” or “radiation proof” that no one could test. As we all know, engineering 
cannot be based on hope or unfounded ideas. Testing buildings is not an easy 
thing to do.
I have reached the conclusion that there are significant problems in observing 
electrical behavior whether it be a circuit board or a building. There is much 
that cannot be seen. Of course, if the circuit works, we are not apt to be 
too critical. We cannot see under traces or on traces between board layers. 
We cannot see inside of components or inside of conductors. We cannot see 
current distributions, let alone current flow. These limitations are obvious. 
What I have just mentioned only touches the surface. What we cannot see and 
what we do not look for are the shapes of the fields that occupy the spaces 
between conductors. These fields carry the energy yet in more ways than one 
they are inaccessible. Voltages give an indication of electric field, but we are 
blind to the magnetic field that must be present. Some of this blindness is of 
our own doing. It is possible to infer what is happening but it takes effort.
It is possible to study the physics of electricity and not see its relevance. The 
mathematics is one thing but sensing the movement of energy is at another 
level of understanding. The energy stored in the earth’s gravitational field 
is enormous. We walk around in this energy field and pay little heed until 
there is an event. The fact that this field warps time is completely out of our 
picture. All of this is at the heart of nature and it takes a real effort to recognize 
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
xxi
that we live in fields our entire life. To put it simply, we are blind to fields unless 
we make a very special effort. Fields dominate the first chapter. These electric 
fields are the very fields of life as they form molecules from atoms. These same 
fields operate our circuits and we know a great deal about them. That does not 
mean it is impossible. We came into this world not knowing the shape or size 
of anything. It all had to be learned. Electricity is no different. The big problem 
is we cannot touch or feel it. This means we must create our own images. 
Often these images need correction and that takes courage and time. Habit is 
at the heart of our survival. Not all habits are in our best interest. They are 
hard to change.
The beauty of physics is that it explains the present and shows us the way to 
the future. It is not dedicated to any one discipline. Physics is constantly being 
challenged and matched with experience. The links between experience and 
what is basic is not always obvious. It takes time and a strong desire for 
understanding before the cobwebs are removed. This effort is very personal 
in character and usually does not transfer to others working in the same 
­discipline. When the understanding solves problems, there is often a financial 
benefit and that does get attention.
This book presents some ideas that I have not seen published or discussed. It 
is the result of trying to connect together all the pieces of my understanding. In 
one sense it says I am making progress. In another sense it says I have a lot 
more to learn. What I have learned I have tried to put into words. It is not easy 
to accept new ideas and connect them with past experiences. It takes effort and 
time. I hope this book can help you understand better the electrical world. May 
your designs work well the first time.
Ralph Morrison
San Bruno, CA—2017

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1
1
Buildings have walls and halls.
People travel in the halls, not the walls.
Circuits have traces and spaces.
Energy travels in the spaces, not the traces.
Ralph Morrison
Electric and Magnetic Fields
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
2
1.1  ­Introduction
I have written many books that discuss electricity. The sixth edition to my 
Grounding and Shielding was published in 2016. Each time I start to write, it is 
because I have added to my understanding and I feel I can help others solve practical 
problems. The digital age is upon us and it is making demands on design that are 
not covered by circuit theory. In one sense, logic is easier to handle than sine 
waves as there is no phase shift to consider. As clock rates rise there are a host of 
other problems that must be considered. The tools of circuit theory are in many 
ways a mismatch for fast circuits and some new methods need to be introduced. 
Circuit theory does not consider time of transit and this is a key issue in logic design.
The insight that has led me to write this book involves one key word and 
that word is energy. Engineers are taught that stored energy can do work and that 
there is conservation of energy. What I want to point out is that all electrical 
phenomena is the movement or conversion of energy. When a logic signal is 
placed on a trace, the voltage that is present means that energy was placed on 
a capacitance. This energy had to be moved into position and it had to be done 
in a hurry. It cannot be done in zero time as this would take infinite power. The 
movement of voltage in circuit theory does not mention moving energy and 
that one fact leads to many difficulties. For example, energy is not carried or 
stored in conductors. It is carried and stored in spaces. This requires a different 
point of view. Providing this insight is the reason for writing this book.
I am writing this book to help you avoid problems when laying out digital cir-
cuit boards. This first chapter is about the fundamentals of electricity. You may 
opt to skim over this material but I would hope to change your mind. I want 
to show you how electricity works but not from a circuit theory viewpoint. I want to 
show you how to use the spaces that carry energy between components. This may 
be a new way for you to view electricity. Circuit theory pays little attention to 
spaces. Conductors outline the spaces used by nature to move field energy.
I am writing this book to describe the role fields play in moving energy on 
transmission lines. Most of the literature relating to transmission lines revolves 
around sine waves. There are insights to be gained when step functions are 
applied to moving energy. These insights can help you in today’s designs and 
prepare you for the future which is headed in the direction to move more and 
more digital data. Whatever the future holds, fundamentals apply.
This opening chapter will help to set the stage for discussing transmission 
lines. Once you see how nature really works, you will find it easy to accept the 
material in the later chapters. I have spent my career learning and applying this 
material and I know why basics come first. What is even more important is 
connecting these basics to real issues and that is not always easy. That is my 
objective in writing this book.
It is worth a moment to describe a problem in understanding. In reading 
posted online material, the language that is used often implies a picture of 

1.1  Introduction
3
electrical behavior that is invalid. A writer may say that “—the return path 
impedance is too high.” The impedance of a transmission path is really the ratio 
of electric and magnetic fields involving the space between the forward and 
return current conductors. It is incorrect to treat the forward and return paths 
this way. It takes care in the use of language and a clear understanding of basics 
to communicate clearly. In this book I have chosen my words carefully and 
I hope they are read with the same care. I realize there are strange explanations 
that must be unlearned and that is not always easy to do. Currents do not travel 
one way on the surface of a conductor and return down the middle of that same 
conductor. I will not spend time trying to argue this point.
There are many ways to learn electronics. Diagrams that include connec-
tions between components are common. These diagrams make no attempt to 
suggest that energy is flowing in the spaces between the connections. It is 
through experience that an engineer learns that component locations and 
wiring methods are important. Understanding the mechanisms involved is 
presented in this book. What is hard to accept is that there are a lot of habit 
patterns that develop over the years. Some of these patterns may work at the 
time but lead to problems as the logic speeds increase. Looking back, I can say 
that many published application notes I tried to apply were invalid.
A good example of the problem exists in the wiring to a metal case power 
transistor. A metal case provides for heat transfer as well as a connection to the 
die. The fields that move electrical energy cannot enter or leave through the metal 
case. Fields can only use the space around the connecting pins. This results in 
fields sharing the same space which is feedback. I remember discussions on how 
to mount these devices that involved surface roughness but never a discussion of 
field control. Because the circuits worked, I did not question the printed page.
If surface roughness was a consideration, it also meant that the characteristic 
impedance of the energy path was important and this was not mentioned. This 
issue will become clearer in later chapters.
We live in an electrical world. Atoms are made of electrical particles. All the 
energy that comes from the sun is electrical. As humans, our brains and nerves 
are electrical. We have used our understanding of electricity to communicate, 
travel, and entertain ourselves. We have learned to use electricity to light our 
cities and to run our industries. Today’s electronics gives us computing power 
that invades every aspect of life.
INSIGHT
Long before the first light bulb was invented, physicists were working on under-
standing electricity. In 1856, James Clerk Maxwell presented to the world a set of 
equations that described the physics of electricity. This is recognized as one of the 
greatest achievements in the history of science. Even with all the computing power 
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
4
Most of the energy we get from the sun each day is electrical. We also get 
energy from the hot core of the earth and some of it comes from the gravita-
tional field of the earth/moon. The sun has stored energy for us in the form 
of coal and petroleum. On a daily basis, the sun’s energy grows our food, 
heats our land, evaporates ocean water, and moves our atmosphere allowing 
us to live our lives. The actions of nature are in effect unidirectional. Sunlight 
is converted to heat but not the other way around. Water runs downhill 
except where trapped in pools. Air runs out of a balloon. We know how to 
put air back into the balloon, but it requires some other device that releases 
stored energy.
The game of life is the motion of energy through a vast complex of matter. 
One of our engineering goals is to perform logic functions. We can accomplish 
this task by providing pathways for nature to move energy. This energy flow is 
in the form of electric and magnetic fields. We use these fields because they are 
fast, efficient, inexpensive, repeatable, and available. The problem we face is 
how to do this with the materials we have at hand. To be effective, we need to 
know the rules nature will follow as we select and configure materials to build 
our circuits. Nature is very consistent.
A good place to start is to move some energy. A dropped stone gives motion 
to air as it gains kinetic energy. On impact, some of the energy is converted to 
sound, mechanical vibration, and heat. The total energy is conserved but it is 
no longer energy of position in a field of gravity. The energy cannot return to 
its initial state. In the case of a pendulum, potential and kinetic energy can 
move back and forth, but there is always friction that will remove energy and in 
time the pendulum will stop moving. I like to call this nature running down 
hill. The basic explanation involves a concept known as entropy. All systems 
tend to “spread out” if given an opportunity. We rely on nature to take this 
action. When we connect a resistor to a battery we expect it to get hot. If we 
poke a hole in a pail of water, we expect water to drain out. If we connect a 
voltage to a pair of conductors, we expect energy will flow between the con-
ductors. Nature does this the same way over and over, never changing the 
rules. The way energy moves on a circuit board is the subject of this book. 
I want to show you nature’s rules so we can perform needed tasks. It sounds 
trite to say this but it is important. We can follow nature’s rules but she will not 
follow ours. I do not care who signs the documents.
that is available today, these equations are difficult to apply to many practical 
problems. These equations describe electrical activity in terms of fields, not 
circuit elements. Remember that circuit elements as we know them had not been 
invented when these equations were developed. These equations covered electro-
magnetic radiation long before there was such a thing as radio. Another remarka-
ble fact is that these equations also agree with Einstein’s relativity concepts.

1.1  Introduction
5
Circuit theory is key in the education of electrical engineers. The physics of 
electricity is taught but the connection to practical issues is not always a goal. 
This is not surprising as there are so many possible specialties and applications. 
The basics are taught and it is assumed the engineer will make the needed 
connections on his own. Electrical engineers are taught circuit theory that 
handles linear and active circuits using sine waves up to frequencies of several 
MHz. The basic assumption made by circuit theory is that an analysis based on 
how ideal circuit elements are interconnected tells the full story. This view-
point sidesteps the issue of field theory and energy transfer which are needed 
to move logic. At frequencies above a few MHz, circuit theory begins to show 
its inadequacies. To add to the problem, logic signals are not sine waves which 
are the basis of circuit theory. Take away circuit theory and stay away from field 
theory and it becomes a big guessing game. Engineering and guessing are not 
compatible. Engineers that start their design activities using circuit theory 
rarely try to use field theory to solve problems. A change in approach will only 
occur if someone understands the need for change.
The fundamentals of electricity are properly expressed in terms of partial 
differential equations. These equations are difficult to use even with com-
puter assistance. The solutions that are provided revolve around sine waves 
and logic has voltage signals that are step and square waves. Even if the engi-
neer is a skilled mathematician it is not practical to find exact solutions using 
field equations. The mathematics tells a story that is very compact. Very few 
can understand the full story by just reading equations. Until recently, a 
common‐sense approach to interconnecting components on a circuit board 
was quite satisfactory. This approach has limitations specifically at high bit 
rates. When there are problems, the only approach is to go back to basics. It 
turns out a lot of insight can be gained by applying the basic principles of 
physics. The simplifications offered by circuit theory have reached a limit. 
What is not appreciated is that circuit theory lets us make many false assump-
tions that become habit patterns. The difficult part of applying physics to fast 
logic is not the new ideas, but the letting go of assumptions that have been 
made and that we are not aware of. The most troublesome assumption is that 
conductors carry energy. Conductors direct fields and fields carry energy in 
spaces. I will say this over and over again. This is the inverse of what most 
people sense.
When I started to design circuits, I soon learned there were issues that had 
to be faced at every corner of my reactance chart. Small parasitic capacitances 
were everywhere. Resistors above 100 megohms were not resistors above 
100 kHz. Magnetic materials were extremely nonlinear. I found out that 
capacitors had natural frequencies and that any feedback circuit I built was 
guaranteed to oscillate. I found out that power transformers coupled me to 
the power lines and test equipment connected my circuits to earth. Every 
time I started working on a new product the real world presented me with a 
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
6
new set of problems. Most of these problems were not discussed in any text-
book. These were problems that were not helped by using mathematics. 
Laying out digital circuit boards is no different. There is a lot to learn before 
designs are free of problems. This is particularly true as clock rates enter the 
GHz range. Understanding compromise requires understanding fundamentals. 
Good engineering requires a lot of compromise. The problem is compromise 
must be based on understanding.
Logic circuits are mainly the interconnection between various integrated 
circuits. It takes experience to realize that these interconnections must be 
designed. Connecting logic components together is the subject of this book. 
Until problems start to appear, the designer is not apt to think of applying any 
change in approach. In analog design, I found out that microvolts of coupling 
occurred if I was not careful in interconnecting components. Usually this 
meant avoiding placing any open spaces in the signal path. A similar set of 
problems occurs in logic. The voltage levels that cause errors are greater but so 
is the frequency content. In both cases, it is the same basic electrical phenom-
ena that must be understood. In very simple terms, keep all transmission fields 
under tight control.
In the digital world, it is not practical to experiment with layout. A redesign is 
expensive and it takes time. Tests to prove conformance with regulations are 
expensive. Making measurements that can isolate problems also has its difficulty. 
A practical sensor can pick up signals from a dozen sources. An identification of 
which source is causing a problem is not usually possible. Wiring on the inner 
layers of a circuit board is not accessible. Parts of the transmission are inside an 
IC package and there is no way to view these signals. The list of difficulties is 
long. All factors need to be considered at the time the traces are located. These 
factors are the subject of this book.
In the following chapters, I discuss logic transmission in terms of step 
functions. There is no simple mathematics that fits this type of signal. Circuit 
theory and sine waves were made for each other but logic requires different 
tools. It is not all that complicated but it is different. It takes time to study, 
review, and accept a new set of ideas and routines and put them to practice. 
What may not be appreciated is that there is insight that can be gained by 
using step functions that is hidden when sine waves are used. I point out 
these insights as I write.
We use some mathematics to discuss the principles of field theory. This will 
help in explaining what is happening on a logic circuit board as the clock rates 
cross into the GHz region. An understanding of differential equations and vec-
tor analysis is not a requirement for understanding the material in this book. 
I use both language and mathematics to explain each topic. For some, the lan-
guage of physics will be new. Both circuit components and the way they are 
interconnected will be important. An understanding will eventually lead the 
designer to follow good practices. Taking this view will make it possible to 

1.1  Introduction
7
design circuit boards without making false assumptions. Once the rules are 
known, they become the new habit pattern. The designer must keep the basics 
in mind.
I assume the reader is familiar with the language and the diagrams of circuit 
theory. I want to caution the reader that diagrams often suggest meaning that 
is misleading. A good example is the symbol for an inductor. A coil of wire has 
inductance but so does a straight conductor. A trace over a ground plane also 
has inductance as well as a volume of space. Extending the understanding of 
inductance is an objective in this book.
The symbol for a capacitor is another example. The symbol with its sym-
metrical connections gives the impression that current arrives at the center 
and spreads out symmetrically. What really happens is that current enters at 
one end and is associated with a magnetic field. As you will see, a capacitor 
looks more like transmission line than a component. This is a picture not sug-
gested by the symbol.
Another example of how we are misled is the diagram for a transformer. The 
last turns of a primary coil are capacitively coupled to the first turns of a sec-
ondary coil. The diagram implies some sort of symmetry which is rarely present. 
I am not suggesting a different symbol only an awareness that we tend to make 
assumptions. When we read we do not check spelling but a misspelled word 
sticks out. This same understanding can take place in board layout. Schematics 
and wiring lists tend to hide issues of layout. It may become necessary to add a 
requirement that a signal flow chart be a part of each design. It is an important 
part of a design.
Logic has become so complex and proprietary that the structure inside a 
component is rarely made available. The compromises taken by the manufac-
turer are not discussed with the user. The user assumes that the logic will func-
tion at the specified clock rates. The manufacturer decides just how much 
information the user needs to know.
The language of electricity is not always clear. There are words we use with 
literally hundreds of meanings. Two examples are the words ground and shield. 
Some words can represent a vector or a scalar and without help, the reader is 
left guessing. Both the writer and the reader have a responsibility to be careful 
in treating the written word. Often the meaning depends on context. Read with 
an open mind. Hopefully the picture will grow in clarity as more and more 
examples of the issues are presented. The glossary at the end of each chapter is 
there as a reminder of how much attention we must pay to language.
In any rapidly changing field there is a tendency to invent language, whether 
needed or not. Acronyms often become new words. In this book, an effort will 
be made to use well‐established language including terms used in physics. 
Words change their meaning through usage and sometimes the meaning is 
transitory. I want to use language that makes sense to old‐timers as well as to 
the next generation of engineers. I expect that newcomers will need all the help 
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
8
they can get. I will avoid acronyms as they are not always stable. I have attended 
meetings where disagreements have occurred because two definitions of one 
acronym were involved.
This book does not discuss logic diagrams, the choice of components, soft-
ware methods, or clock rates. Our interest is in describing how to move energy 
so that the functions taking place are performed without introducing errors or 
causing radiation.
1.2  ­Electrons and the Force Field
An electron is a basic unit of negative charge. It has the smallest mass of any 
atomic particle. In an atom, electrons occupy quantum states around a 
nucleus. Chemistry is a subject that treats the formation of stable molecules 
when elements share electron space. The simplest atom is hydrogen which 
has one electron and one proton. All other elements have both protons and 
neutrons in a nucleus and electrons in positions around this core. A proton 
has a positive charge that exactly balances the negative charge of an electron. 
When an electron leaves an atom, the empty space behaves as a ­positive 
charge. In effect the field of a proton has no place to terminate inside the 
atom. Another way to treat positive charge motion is to compare it to 
the motion of an empty seat in an auditorium. If a person moves left into 
an empty seat the space moves right. In a semiconductor, the absence of an 
electron is a hole that has a different mobility than an electron. In a conduc-
tor, the mobility of a vacant space is the same as an electron. In electronics, 
we consider that all protons are captive and will not leave an atom to partake 
in current flow. We also assume that the atoms in a conductor do not move 
any distance.
Copper atoms have 29 electrons with 1 outer electron that is free to move 
between atoms. Avogadro’s number tells us that in 63.54 g of copper there are 
6.02 × 1023 atoms. This is the number of electrons in this amount of copper that 
can move freely between atoms. I am giving you these numbers so that you can 
INSIGHT
I mention in Chapter 2 that forward energy flow and reflected waves travel in 
opposite directions. The fact that they are both traveling at the speed of light 
means that relativistic effects are involved. This may be the next area of physics 
that must be considered as we move into the GHz world. It is interesting to note 
that our GPS systems must be corrected for the relativistic effect gravity has 
on electromagnetic waves. Without this correction, the system could not work. 
At this point it is important to recognize that change is on the horizon. I want to 
help make the transition wherever it takes us.

1.2  Electrons and the Force Field
9
better appreciate what really happens in a typical circuit. I think you are going 
to be very surprised by the story I am going to tell you.
We know there are forces between electrons. When hair is combed on a dry 
day, the individual strands of hair will separate and stand straight out. In a 
clothes drier, the rubbing action can move electrons between items of clothing 
that can create a glow seen in a dark room. We have all seen the power of 
lightning1 where rain strips electrons off of air molecules and carries charge to 
earth. In the laboratory on a dry day, it is possible to rub a silk cloth on a glass 
rod and transfer electrons from the rod to the silk. The rod is said to be charged 
positive. Touching this rod to hanging pith balls will cause the balls to swing 
apart. If the cloth rubs a hard rubber rod, then electrons are added to the rod. 
When the hard rubber rod touches one of the pith balls, the two balls will 
attract each other. If the pith balls are ­metalized, then the charges will move on 
the conducting surface until there is a balance of electrical and mechanical 
forces. In this case, the electrons cannot leap out into space and the forces 
appear to be between the pith balls. These forces are actually between charges. 
These forces are shown in Figure 1.1.
When there are forces at a distance it is usual to call the force pattern in space 
a field. In the example above, the force field is called an electric or E field. Fields 
have both intensity and direction at every point in space. The field we are most 
familiar with is gravity. On earth the gravitational field pulls each of us toward 
the center of the earth with a force equal to our mass. 4000 miles out in space, 
the force would be reduced by a factor of 4. The electric field behaves the same 
way. A negative charge located on a conducting sphere of radius R creates a 
+Q
(a)
(b)
+Q
–Q
+Q
Figure 1.1  The forces between charges. (a) Repelling force and (b) attracting force.
1  Radiation from the sun strips electrons from gas molecules in the ionosphere. The potential from 
this surface to earth is about 400,000 volts. This surface provides a current flow to earth and a drain 
into space for accumulated charge. The rain that strips electrons from air causes a voltage gradient 
near the earth that is approximately 100 volts per meter. This voltage varies during the day as the 
result of lightning activity which is maximum in Africa at 4 p.m. Greenwich mean time. There is a 
steady flow of current to earth as a result of this gradient. It is estimated that this current world 
wide averages about 1800 A. There is a steady flow to this current as well as bursts from lightning.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
10
force field. A small positive test charge near the sphere will be attracted with a 
force F. If the test charge is moved out to a distance 2R, the force will be reduced 
by a factor of 4. We will have a lot to say about electric fields. Later we discuss 
the magnetic field, which is a force field of equal importance. This field is quite 
different because the motion of charges creates forces at a distance.
Here is another observation that is worth discussing. The chemical proper-
ties of elements depend on the number of electrons available to interact with 
other elements. In our circuits, there is no evidence that the properties of 
materials change when large currents flow. We do see property changes when 
INSIGHT
When we observe a typical circuit, nothing moves. There are no discernable forces. 
That means that hardly any of the electrons that are free to move are involved in 
electrical activity. The number of active electrons can be compared to a cup of 
sand in a mile of beach. It is an amazingly small percentage. Our sensibilities are 
challenged because for all practical purposes the charges that move in a typical 
circuit move in a continuous or fluid manner. This is the reason I brought up 
Avogadro’s number. In a typical trace there can be a trillion electrons in 
motion, yet the fraction of those in motion is only one part in a trillion.
INSIGHT
Electron flow is sparse and yet continuous at the same time. Thinking in terms 
of these large numbers is not easy. Viewed from one free electron, the nearest 
free electron is far away and hard to find. Viewed from our perspective the 
number of free electrons in motion appears continuous.
To put a trillion into perspective, there are 7.35 billion people on earth.
INSIGHT
To put the electric force field into perspective, I want to refer the reader to an 
observation made by Dr. Richard Feynman in his book Lectures on Physics. He 
asks the question: How large would the force be if we were standing 2 feet apart 
and 1% of my electrons were to repel 1% of your electrons? Would it knock you 
down? Much more. Would it lift a house? Much more. Would it lift a mountain? 
Much more. The answer is astounding. It would lift the earth out of orbit. No 
wonder the electric field force is labeled a strong force.

1.3  The Electric Field and Voltage
11
materials are dissolved in a solution. That is because all of the atoms are 
involved, not a very small percentage.
Now you know that the percentage of electrons involved in circuit activity is 
very near zero. It is easy to show that the velocity of electrons in a typical circuit 
is under centimeters per second. This is technically known as electron drift. We 
know that signals on a circuit board travel at the speed of light. This says that we 
should focus on the field that surrounds the electron, not on the electron itself. 
This is because electrons are a slow mover in every sense. The problem is they 
keep bumping into atoms. The force field is potent as we have discussed.
The changing of an electric field creates a magnetic field. This fact is stated 
in Maxwell’s field equations. The fact that the electric and magnetic field act 
together to move energy is at the center of all electrical activity. We discuss the 
magnetic field after we have discussed the electric field. Then we discuss how 
the two fields act together to move energy along transmission lines. Of course 
fields also move energy in free space but not at dc.
On earth, we live in a force field called gravity. The force field around a mass 
is proportional to that mass and falls of as the square of distance. In gravity, the 
fields between masses always attract; they never repel. A gravitational field is 
called a weak field. After all it takes the mass of the entire earth to attract a 
150‐pound person with a force of 150 pounds. There are several other force 
fields in nature and they exist in the nucleus of the atom. These fields are a 
topic for a course in nuclear physics.
1.3  ­The Electric Field and Voltage
Before we can talk about moving logic signals, we need to discuss electric 
and magnetic fields and the definition of voltage. We start our discussion by 
placing a group of electrons on a small mass. We call this a unit test charge Δq. 
We then deposit a larger charge Q on a conducting sphere. These charges 
INSIGHT
Orders of magnitude are often ignored as issues by engineers. A man can run at 
4 mph. An auto can go 40 mph. A jet can go at 400 mph and a satellite goes at 
4000 mph. That is a range of three orders of magnitude. Going from 1 MHz to 
1 GHz is also three orders of magnitude. Avogadro’s number is 23 orders of 
magnitude. It is hard to grasp the meaning of such a large number, yet that is 
the world we live in. Light is at frequencies five orders of magnitude higher 
than 5 GHz. Light is electromagnetic and it does not follow transmission lines. 
We have a lot to learn as we try to use the next few decades in the frequency 
spectrum. The answers will lie in physics not circuit theory.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
12
spread out evenly on the surface of this sphere creating an electric field around 
the sphere. When the test charge is brought into this field created by Q, the 
force between the two fields is sensed on the two masses. The repelling force is
	
f
qQ
r
4
2
0
	
(1.1)
where r is the distance to the center of the sphere and ε0 is a constant called the 
permittivity of free space. It is a fundamental constant in nature. This equation 
states that the force between two charges falls off as the square of the distance 
between the charges. The constant ε0 is equal to 8.85 × 10−12 farads per meter 
(F/m). We discuss the farad when we discuss capacitance.
A test charge must be small enough so that the charge distribution on the 
sphere is not disturbed by its presence. The force per unit charge in the space 
around the sphere is called an electric or E field. This E field intensity at a radial 
distance r from the center of the sphere is given by the equation
	
E
.
Q
r
4
2
0
	
(1.2)
The E field is called a vector field because it has intensity and direction at 
every point in space. This force field is proportional to charge and inversely 
proportional to the square of distance from the center of the sphere. The force 
direction on the test charge is in the radial direction.
Work is simply force times distance, where the direction of the force and the 
travel direction are the same. If the force is at an angle to the direction of 
motion, the work equals force times distance times the cosine of the included 
angle. The work required to move a unit charge from infinity to the surface of 
a charged sphere is given by Equation 1.3. The simplest path of integration is 
along a radial line that starts at infinity and goes to the surface of the sphere. 
Actually, if you do the mathematics correctly, any path will give the same 
answer. Using Equation 1.1, the voltage V on the spherical surface is
	
V
d
.
R
f r
Q
R
4
0
	
(1.3)
N.B.
Voltage is defined as the work required to move a unit charge between two 
points in an E or electric field. The points can be in space, between conductors, 
or between a conductor and a point in space.

1.3  The Electric Field and Voltage
13
This equation tells us the amount of work required to move a unit of charge 
from a large distance to the surface of the charged sphere.
Comparing Equation 1.3 with Equation 1.2, it is easy to see that the intensity 
of the electric field E at the surface of the sphere is V/R and that E has units of 
volts‐per‐meter.
Equation 1.3 can be used to determine the voltage between conductors as 
well as between points in space. This is shown in Figure 1.2 where the conduct-
ing sphere is at a potential of 5 V. If the integration were to stop at 4 V, it would 
be on an imaginary spherical surface that surrounds the conducting sphere. 
This sphere is called an equipotential surface. It takes no work to move a test 
charge on an equipotential surface in space or on the surface of a conductor.
The radial lines represent the force field direction. These lines terminate per-
pendicular to the conducting surface. If there were a component of the E field 
parallel to the conducting surface it would imply current flow on the surface. 
There can be no E field inside of the conducting sphere as this would again 
imply current flow. At room temperatures, electrons cannot leave the surface of 
the sphere. Extra electrons space themselves uniformly on the surface to store 
the least possible amount of energy. This energy is discussed in Section 1.5.
Q
5V
q
E ﬁeld
r
V∞= 0
4 V
3 V
2 V
1.5 V
1.0 V
0.7 V
Equipotential
surface
f =
qQ
4π ε0r2
Q is the charge on the sphere
q is small unit test charge
ε0 is the dielectric constant of free space (permittivity)
Figure 1.2  Equipotential surfaces around a charged sphere.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
14
The number of E field lines that we use to describe a field is arbitrary. The 
intent is to show the shape and relative intensity of the field. One line is assigned 
to a convenient amount of charge. In a given field pattern, the closer the lines 
are together, the more intense the field and the greater the force on a unit test 
charge. In the following diagrams, by convention, lines of force initiate on a 
positive charge Q and terminate on a negative charge −Q. A positive charge is 
the absence of negative charge. In Figure 1.2 a charge −Q must exist at infinity. 
In most of the conductor geometries we consider, the E field lines terminate on 
local conductors. Since these lines represent field shape, their termination at 
infinity has only symbolic meaning.
1.4  ­Electric Field Patterns and Charge Distributions
It is convenient to reference voltages to one conductor in a circuit. The 
reference conductor is assigned the value 0 V. This reference conductor 
is  also referred to as ground or common. There are voltages between 
­conductors which mean there are fields in the intervening spaces. In an 
analog system, it is possible to have many reference conductors on one 
board. A reference conductor can be smaller than a nail head or larger than 
a computer floor.
Reference conductors are often called ground even though they are not 
earthed. Electrically the ocean could be called a zero of potential but it is not 
often called ground. A ship’s metal hull can be called an electrical ground 
without creating any confusion.
Figure 1.3 shows the electric field pattern for several conductor configura-
tions that include a large conducting ground plane at the zero of potential. No 
significant work is required to move charges along this surface or along any 
connected conductors. Assuming no current flow, the voltage on this ground 
is constant, independent of the charge distribution on its surface. There is a 
minor conflict here because there are tangential forces needed to space these 
charges uniformly apart on the surface. These fields are small and not the 
subject of this book.
This is not a treatise on free electrons in conductors. The physics of electron 
motion in conductors involves temperature. There is an average motion of 
atoms and electrons that is statistical in nature. This average motion in the 
presence of a field determines the resistivity that varies with each material. 
For copper, the resistance increases with temperature. For some alloys the 
temperature coefficient of resistivity is near zero. Predicting the resistance of 
conductors from basic principles has not been done. Superconductivity 
occurs at temperatures near absolute zero. The explanation of this phenom-
ena involves quantum mechanics.

1.4  Electric Field Patterns and Charge Distributions
15
S
B
(a)
A
–Q
V= 0
V=0
V= 0
V=0
V=0
Q =0
Note: Charge is on the
inside surface
Faraday
shield
Wire
Q
V1
(b)
S
B
A
Charge on
outside surface
Wire
Q1
–(Q– Q1)
–(Q– Q2)
(c)
S
B
A
No net charge
on surface
+Q2
+Q2
–Q2
Q
V1
V =0
V= V2
Q
V1
Figure 1.3  (a)–(c) Electric field configurations around a shielded conductor.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
16
In the field configurations we deal with, the electric field is assumed perpen-
dicular to a conductor’s surface even if there is current flow. To illustrate this 
point, consider the following example. The spacing between a trace and a 
ground plane is 5 mils or 1.27 × 10−4 m. A trace voltage of 5 V means the E field 
intensity in the space is about 40,000 V/m. The E field in a trace that supports 
current flow is usually less than 1 V/m. This ratio tells us that the E field has a 
very small component that is directed parallel to a trace run. For all practical 
purposes, the lines representing an E field terminate perpendicular to a con-
ducting surface even if there is current flow.
In Figure 1.3a, a small charged sphere A at potential V1 is surrounded by a 
grounded sphere S. No field lines extend outside of this enclosed space. The 
field lines from A terminate on the inside surface of S. This means a charge −Q 
has been supplied to this inner surface. The sphere B has no charges on its 
surface and it is at zero potential. If voltage V1 changes then charges must be 
moved from the inside of conductor S to the surface at A. Conductor S is 
called a Faraday shield. This figure shows that if there is a voltage between 
conductors, there must be surface charges. There is no exception to this rule. 
This figure also illustrates a basic shielding principle which is the containment 
of the electric field.
Figure 1.3b illustrates what happens when a hole is placed in surface S. Some 
of the field lines from A terminate on conductor B. The result is that a charge Q1 
must be located on surface B. This charge was supplied as current on the wire 
connecting B to ground. If V1 changes, then current must flow in the connect-
ing wire to supply a different Q1. This current is said to be induced. A current 
flows only when the voltages are changing. If the voltage changes in a sinusoidal 
manner the current is also a sinusoid.
This figure illustrates several points. If hardware must be shielded, then one 
hole can violate that shield. A hole is a two‐way street. Not only can a field leave 
the enclosure, an external field can enter through this hole. What is even more 
important, one lead entering the enclosure can transport interference in either 
direction. Remember: It only takes one hole to sink a boat.
INSIGHT
When an attempt is made to measure potential differences between conduc-
tors, the probes are conductors that change the very field configuration that is 
being measured. This problem exists in all measurements.
Jumping ahead for a moment, the voltage difference that is measured along 
a conductor in a functioning circuit is not an accurate indicator of current flow. 
A probe cannot distinguish between fields that are inside and outside of a 
conductor. Only the inner fields cause current flow.

1.5  Field Energy
17
Figure 1.3c illustrates what happens when conductor B is floating. There is 
no way that new charges can be supplied to this surface, so the sum of the 
surface charges must be zero. The charges on the surface distribute themselves 
so that charges +Q2 and −Q2 group on opposite sides of the B surface. If V1 
changes then obviously currents must flow on the surface of B. These are called 
induced currents. Notice that there is an accumulation of charge on the ground 
plane under the floating conductor. There are no measureable potential differ-
ences along the ground plane. For a system of ideal conductors with changing 
voltages, surface currents will flow whenever there are terminating field lines 
in transition. Do not forget that the percentage of charges in motion is one part 
in a trillion and yet trillions of electrons are in motion. It is fairly obvious that 
these electrons are truly on the conducting surface. If there were field lines in 
the conductor there would be current flow.
Figure 1.4 shows the electric field pattern for a circuit trace at voltage V over 
a conducting plane at 0 V. The field pattern contains a lot of information. 
The E field intensity is greatest under the trace. Note that the field lines tend to 
concentrate at sharp edges and that some of the field lines terminate on the top 
of the trace. The current flow on the surface of a trace will be greatest where 
the most field lines terminate. This means that the apparent resistance of a 
conductor depends on how much of the conductor is used for current flow. 
Areas where the fields do not terminate have no current flow and cannot 
contribute to conduction. In many applications where high current is involved 
the conductor geometry must provide mechanical stability. This does not 
necessarily imply that current will use all of the conductor.
1.5  ­Field Energy
The work required to move a charge Q up to the surface of a conducting sphere 
is stored in the electric field around the sphere. There is no other explanation. 
The temperature is unchanged, there is no mechanical distortion, and there is 
certainly no chemical change. The same thing happens in the gravitational 
field. When a pail of water is lifted to a water tank, the gravitational field stores 
–Q
5 V
V=0
Q
Figure 1.4  The electric field pattern of a circuit trace over a ground plane.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
18
the energy. This concept of space storing field energy is troubling because it 
defies our senses. We see this movement of gravitational energy in the earth/moon 
system by observing tidal action. Field energy must also move when a transmis-
sion line carries a logic signal. What is actually moving is enigmatic. We discuss 
energy motion when we discuss transmission lines.
The field in Figure 1.2 extends radially and we know the field intensity at the 
surface of the sphere. If we consider a plane surface of equal area as in Figure 1.4, 
we can equate the charge density at the surface with an E‐field intensity. Since 
the E field is a constant over the area A, the increment of work dW to move a 
unit charge dq in this field is Eh dq where E equals Q/ε0A,
	
d
E d
d .
W
h q
qh
A
q
0
	
(1.4)
The work to move a total charge Q is
	
W
qh
A
q
Q h
A
Q
0
0
2
0
2
d
.	
(1.5)
Since E = Q/ε0A then Q = ε0AE. Using this value of Q in Equation 1.5 the 
work W is
	
W
V
1
2
2
0
E
	
(1.6)
where V is the volume of the E field space and W has units of joules. The energy 
E stored in the volume V is equal to this work or
There is field energy stored in the spaces defined by any conductor geometry 
where there are potential differences. It is important to point out that it is 
impossible to have a static electric field unless there are materials present. 
When there are insulators (dielectrics) there can be trapped electrons. We will 
not consider this phenomenon. In Section 1.6, we show that the presence of 
INSIGHT
	
E
V
1
2
2
0
E
.	
(1.7)
Equation 1.7 shows very clearly that space stores electric field energy. Conductors 
are needed to confine the electric field but they store little energy. If there were 
E fields in the conductors there would have to be current flow.

1.6  Dielectrics
19
dielectrics between conductors will change the field patterns and the amount 
of energy that is stored.
1.6  ­Dielectrics
Dielectrics are insulators. Glass epoxy is an insulator used in the manufacture 
of circuit boards. Other dielectric materials are rubber, mylar, nylon, air, 
polycarbonates, and ceramics. In Figure 1.3, the space between the trace and 
the conductor is air. If glass epoxy is inserted between the conductors the 
electric field will reduce in intensity by a factor of about 4. This reduction 
factor is called the relative dielectric constant εR. This factor is simply a number 
with no units. The voltage between the two conductors will drop to V/εR. The 
E field in Figure 1.4 can now be written as
	
E
.
R
Q
A
0
	
(1.8)
Insulators and dielectrics play a big role in electronics. Conductors must 
carry currents between components but they must be supported on insu-
lators, so dimensions are maintained and there is little chance of a voltage 
breakdown. The characteristics of copper are constant but the insulators 
that surround copper have continued to evolve. Every insulator is selected 
for its electrical and mechanical character. Early insulators were paper, 
Bakelite™, and cloth that have been replaced by glass epoxies, nylon, ceramics, 
and rubber.
By weight, a circuit board is mostly insulation. As we see in detail, the fields 
that carry energy use dielectrics and air. The manufacture of circuit boards 
uses dielectric materials that have proved to be effective. Board designers rely 
on board manufacturers to select the materials that are best for a design. It is 
important that board designers stay current with the changing technology. Just 
another reminder. Energy flows in insulators, not in conductors. The conduc-
tors direct where the energy flows. The only energy in the conductors involves 
moving electrons and this is a tiny fraction of the energy in the space between 
conductors.
Table 1.1 below lists the relative dielectric constants of some of the common 
dielectrics and insulators used in electronics.
It is important to note that water has a high dielectric constant. If mois-
ture is absorbed by a dielectric the dielectric constant will change. This 
means that circuit boards must be coated with a sealant to keep out moisture. 
There are several sealants available on the market and the choice is related 
to production quantities and the need to avoid pins, pads, test points, and 
connections.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
20
1.7  ­Capacitance
The ability of a conductor geometry to store charge is called capacitance. It is 
measured as the ratio of charge stored to applied voltage or
	
C
Q
V .	
(1.9)
The unit of capacitance is the farad. A farad stores 1 coulomb of charge for a 
potential of 1 V. The units in common use are usually below a millionth of a 
farad. Capacitances as small as 10−12 F can be important. This level of capaci-
tance is called a picofarad and is abbreviated as pF. 10−9 F is called a nanofarad, 
abbreviated as nF. 10−6 F is called a microfarad, abbreviated as μF.
For the sphere using Equation 1.3, the ratio of charge to voltage is
	
C
r
4
0
R
.	
(1.10)
Using Equation 1.10, the capacitance of the earth is 711 μF.
For parallel conducting planes the capacitance is
	
C
A
h
R 0
	
(1.11)
where A is the surface area and h is the spacing between conductors. This equa-
tion can be used to calculate the capacitance of most commercial capacitors. 
It can also be used for determining the capacitance between conducting planes 
Table 1.1  The relative dielectric constant for materials used in electronics.
Material
Relative dielectric constant εR
Air
1.0
Barium titanate
100–1,250
BST (barium strontium titanate)
1,000–12,000
Ceramic
5–7
Glass
3.8–14.5
Glass epoxy
3.6–4
Mica
4–9
Mylar—polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
5–7
Neoprene
6–9
Nylon
3.4–22.4
Paper
1.5–3
Teflon
2.1
Water (distilled)
78

1.9  The D or Displacement Field
21
or the capacitance of a trace over a conducting plane. Assume that a 10‐mil wide, 
10‐cm long trace is 5 mils above a ground plane. If the relative dielectric constant 
is 4 the capacitance is 7.1 pF.
1.8  ­Capacitors
A capacitor is a conductor geometry that stores electric field energy. There are 
many types of commercial capacitors that fill a wide range of needs. They can 
act as filters in power supplies. They can function to block dc in analog circuits. 
They can act as elements in active and passive filters, function generators, and 
oscillators. They come in many shapes and sizes and can handle a wide range of 
voltages. They can weigh a ton or be as small as a pin head. Depending on appli-
cation they are constructed using many different dielectrics. Most of the capaci-
tors we deal with in this book are called decoupling capacitors. They supply 
energy to transmission lines and semiconductor components. These capacitors 
are surface mounted which means they have no leads. The character of these 
capacitors will be examined in more detail later in this book.
The energy stored in a capacitor is given by Equation 1.12 where V is the 
voltage, A is the area, and h is the conductor spacing. The energy is thus
	
E
A
h
V
.
R
2
0
2
	
(1.12)
Substituting Equation 1.11 into Equation 1.12, the energy equals
	
E
C
1
2
2
V .	
(1.13)
The capacitors used on a logic circuit board typically use ceramic dielectrics. 
The dielectric is often BST (Barium Strontium Titanate). This dielectric mate-
rial can be formulated to have a dielectric constant as high as 12,000. This high 
dielectric constant allows the capacitors to be both small and inexpensive. Most 
circuit boards use dozens of these capacitors. The dielectric constant varies 
with temperature and voltage. Since the exact capacitance is not critical, this 
type of capacitor is ideal for supplying energy to transmission lines on a circuit 
board. The function of these capacitors is discussed in Chapters 2 and 3.
1.9  ­The D or Displacement Field
It is necessary to have two measures of the electric field. The E or electric field 
is known when voltages are known. A second measure of the electric field is the 
D field. Lines of D field start and stop on charges. The D field does not change 
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
22
value across a charge‐free dielectric boundary. The D field allows us to extend 
the concept of current flow to space. The D field is known when the charge 
distribution is known. In our discussions, there will be no free charges in space 
or at dielectric boundaries. There will only be a very small percentage of avail-
able charges moving on the surface of conductors.
The D field is known as the displacement field and it is related to the E field 
by the permittivity of free space and the relative dielectric constant
	
D
E.
R
0
	
(1.14)
In Figure 1.5, the D field is continuous between the two conductors. It does 
not change at the dielectric boundary. The voltage across the two dielectrics 
must sum to 10 V. The E field in the dielectric is 1/8 the E field in air. The 
voltage across the dielectric is (E/8) × 5 cm and across the air space is (E/1) × 5 cm. 
The sum is 10 V. The E field in free space is 1.78 V/cm and 0.233 V/cm in the 
dielectric. Note that most of the field energy is stored in the air space.2
1.10  ­Mutual and Self Capacitance
A mutual capacitance is often referred to as a leakage or a parasitic capacitance. 
On a circuit board where traces run parallel to a conducting plane, some of 
the field lines will terminate on nearby traces rather than on the plane. This 
situation is shown on Figure 1.6.
The self‐capacitance of a conductor is the ratio of charge to voltage on a 
conductor when all other conductors are at zero potential. The ratio of charge 
on conductor 2 to voltage on conductor 1 with all other conductors grounded 
is called a mutual capacitance C12. If the charge on conductor 1 is positive, the 
5 cm
Q
D
–Q
5 cm
E= 1.78V/cm
E= 0.223V/cm
10 V
1.1V
0.0 V
=1 
=8
Figure 1.5  The electric field pattern in the presence of a dielectric.
2  High voltage transformers are often immersed in a liquid dielectric to limit the E field near 
conductors and thus control arcing. The liquid also helps conduct heat out of the transformer core.

1.11  Current Flow in a Capacitance
23
charge on conductor 2 is negative. Therefore, all mutual capacitances are nega-
tive. It can be shown that C12 is equal to C21.
On most circuit boards with short trace runs, mutual capacitances can be 
ignored. For long trace runs, the cross‐coupling that results can impact signal 
integrity. This subject is discussed in Section 4.5.
1.11  ­Current Flow in a Capacitance
In circuit theory, the signals of interest are sine waves. In logic, the ideal signals 
of interest are step functions of current or voltage. If a steady current I flows 
into a capacitance C the voltage will increase linearly. The charge that flows is 
the current in amperes times time or
	
Q
I
t.	
(1.15)
From Equation 1.9, Q = CV. This means that
	
V
.
I
t
C
	
(1.16)
The voltage across a capacitor, when supplied a steady current, is shown in 
Figure 1.7.
Mathematically, the current I that flows into a capacitor when the voltage 
changes with time is
	
I
C
t
dV
d .	
(1.17)
A steady current flowing into a capacitor causes the voltage to rise linearly. 
The current flow accumulates a charge on the capacitor plates at a steady rate. 
In circuit theory, a surface charge is not considered and the current flow is 
assumed continuous through the capacitor. In field theory, a changing dis-
placement or D field is equated to current flow. The changing D field means 
there are changing charges present on the plates of the capacitor. This concept 
will be important in the study of waves on transmission lines.
0V
Q3
Q4
Q2
V1Q1
C11= V1
Q1
C12= V1
Q2
C13= V1
Q3
Figure 1.6  The mutual capacitances between traces over a ground plane.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
24
1.12  ­The Magnetic Field
Magnetic fields and electric fields play an equal role in moving energy. Before 
we can discuss moving energy, we need to spend some time understanding 
magnetic fields. When we observe logic signals we look at voltages. The pres-
ence of voltage immediately implies an electric field. What may not be appreci-
ated is that moving a voltage between two points requires moving energy and 
this requires both a magnetic and an electric field. When energy is not moving, 
the magnetic field is usually zero.
An understanding of magnetic fields is required in the design of transformers, 
speakers, inductors, motors, generators, MRI hardware, and particle accelerators. 
Magnetic fields are also required in moving logic signals on traces. Magnetic 
fields are a part of all electrical activity including electromagnetic radiation. 
Electromagnetic field energy in motion is always divided equally between elec-
tric and magnetic fields. Half the field energy in sunlight is magnetic.
We have all played with permanent magnets and sensed forces at a distance. 
We can duplicate these same forces when current flows in a coil of wire. A very 
simple experiment can show the shape of a magnetic field. A wire is passed 
through a piece of paper holding iron filings. When a steady current flows in 
the wire, the filings will line up forming circles around the wire. These closed 
N.B.
The essence of the electric field is simple. A voltage difference implies an E field. 
A changing D field is current flow in space. The relation between the two repre-
sentations of the electric field is the dielectric constant.
In circuit theory, the current that flows in a capacitance is related to reactance. 
This avoids relating current flow to a changing D field.
C
I
I
0
t
V
V
0
t
Figure 1.7  The voltage on a 
capacitor when supplied a steady 
current.

1.12  The Magnetic Field
25
circles show the shape of the magnetic field. The filings line up to minimize the 
amount of energy stored in the magnetic field.
The atomic structure of some elements allows their internal fields to align. 
In these materials, we can observe magnetic behavior. Common magnetic 
materials include iron, cobalt, and nickel. The rare earths samarium, dyspro-
sium, and neodymium are also magnetic. These elements, when properly 
blended and annealed, provide permanent magnets with very strong magnetic 
fields. Uses include speakers in our phones and computers. They make electric 
motors in battery‐powered automobiles practical.
The iron in the earth’s core is magnetized and forms a huge magnetic field 
that surrounds the earth. A compass needle will align with this magnetic 
field to indicate direction on the surface of the earth. The earth’s magnetic 
field concentrates near the earth’s magnetic poles. The Aurora Borealis in 
the northern hemisphere is caused when electrons that arrive from the sun 
spiral in the earth’s magnetic field and concentrate near the earth’s north 
magnetic pole. These electrons ionize air molecules in the upper atmos-
phere causing radiation in the visible part of the spectrum. In the southern 
hemisphere the effect is called Aurora Australis.
When current flows in a conductor, there is a magnetic field. When a second 
conductor carrying current is brought close, there is a force between the two 
conductors. If the current flows in the same direction, the conductors will 
attract each other. The attraction and repulsion of magnetic fields is at the 
heart of motors and generators. This same magnetic field is involved in moving 
a logic voltage on a circuit board and that is the focus of our attention.
The force between two conductors carrying current is perpendicular to the 
direction of both the magnetic field lines and the current flow. A magnetic field 
has direction and intensity at every point in space and is therefore a vector 
field. Unlike the electric field, magnetic fields are represented by closed curves. 
The simplest patterns are the field circles around a single straight conductor 
carrying current as shown in Figure 1.8.
Ampere’s law states that the line integral of the H field around a conductor is 
equal to the current I in the conductor. In Figure 1.8, the H field is constant at 
a distance r from a long conductor which means that 2πrH = I. The magnetic 
field intensity H at a distance r from a long conductor carrying a current I is
	
H
I
r
2
	
(1.18)
where H has units of amperes per meter. Just like the electric field, the 
magnetic field shape is characterized by a set of curves. Just as in the E field, 
when the lines are close together, the field intensity is greatest.
An insulated conductor wound in a coil is called a solenoid. This arrange-
ment is shown in Figure 1.9. The H field intensity in the center of the coil is 
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
26
nearly constant and it is proportional to the current and the number of turns. 
The field intensity in the coil is given approximately by
	
H
In

	
(1.19)
where I is the current in amperes, n is the number of turns, and ℓ is the length 
of the coil.
There is no element of magnetic material that corresponds to the electron in 
the electric field. This means there is no magnetic pole that can be moved in 
I
H
Figure 1.9  The H field in and around a 
solenoid.
H
H
I
Figure 1.8  The magnetic field H around a current carrying conductor.

1.13  The B Field of Induction
27
the field to add energy. To understand the work required to establish a magnetic 
field, we need to discuss the concept of inductance and the induction or B field.
1.13  ­The B Field of Induction
In magnetics, we use an H field that is proportional to current flow and a B 
field that relates to induced voltage. This parallels the case in electrostatics 
where we described the electric field as a D field that originated on charges and 
as an E field that related to voltage. In electrostatics, the E field is the force field 
and in magnetics the B field is the induction or force field. In the electric field 
the presence of a dielectric reduces the E field and the energy density. In mag-
netics, the H field intensity is reduced in the presence of magnetic materials. 
Lines of force in the B field are called magnetic flux lines. The B field has units 
of teslas. B field intensity does not change at a boundary where the permeabil-
ity changes. The H field is often called a magneto‐motive force. In a material 
with high permeability, it takes very little H field to establish a B field. In air, it 
takes a high magneto‐motive force to establish the B field.
When a changing B field flux couples to an open coil of wire, a voltage will 
appear at the ends of the coil. This is shown in Figure 1.10. A voltage can result 
if the coupled flux changes when an open coil is rotated or moved in the field. 
If the number of flux lines remains unchanged, the voltage is zero.
When there is a current there is an H field in space. At every point in space 
the H field has an associated B field given by
	
B
H
0
R 	
(1.20)
where μ0 is the permeability of free space and μR is the relative permeability. 
The value of μ0 is 4π × 10−7 Tm/A (tesla meters per ampere). This a fundamental 
constant in nature. The voltage induced in a coil is
	
V
dB
d
nA
t
	
(1.21)
where A is the area of the loop and n is the number of turns and dB/dt is the 
rate the B flux changes with time. This equation is known as Faraday’s law. This 
V
Changing B field
Figure 1.10  A voltage induced into a moving coil.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
28
equation states that if the coupled induction field B changes intensity at a fixed 
rate, a steady voltage will appear at the coil ends. It also says that if a steady 
voltage is applied to the coil ends, the B field must increase linearly with time. 
This equation is true even if the coil is in air. Generally, at low frequencies, 
magnetic materials are used in the magnetic path to limit the magnetizing 
current needed to establish the B field.
In this book, we discuss the magnetic fields that surround traces carrying 
current. There will be no magnetic materials present, but there may be cross‐
coupling between traces. Currents in traces will create an H field. Cross‐coupling 
between traces will involve the induction or B field. It will also turn out that the 
energy stored in a magnetic field involves both the B and H measure of the field.
1.14  ­Inductance
The definition of inductance is the ratio of magnetic flux to current flow or
	
L
I .	
(1.22)
As an example, the flux φ in a solenoid is equal approximately to the B field 
times the cross‐sectional area of the coil.
In general, exact equations of inductance using this definition are very diffi-
cult to generate. The inductance of a conductor geometry can be measured by 
noting the voltage that results when current changes value or
	
V
d
d .
L I
t
	
(1.23)
From this equation, it is obvious that every conductor geometry that can 
carry current generates magnetic flux and therefore has inductance. This 
includes the current flow in a capacitor. In circuit theory, magnetic fields are 
generally ignored. In transmission line theory, the magnetic field associated 
with a changing electric field is fundamental to moving energy.
Inductors are components that are designed to store magnetic field energy. 
At frequencies below a MHz, inductors usually require magnetic materials to 
direct the magnetic field to a volume of space called a gap. In later chapters, the 
inductance we consider involves traces running over plane conductors and 
N.B.
All the discussion above can be stated as follows: A changing B field generates 
voltage and a current generates an H field.

1.14  Inductance
29
involves no magnetic materials. The energy moved and stored in this induct-
ance is key to logic operations.
There is magnetic field energy stored between a trace and a plane conductor 
when current flows in this loop. There is an electric field in this same space 
when a voltage is placed between the trace and a conducting plane. A trace 
over a conducting plane is thus a combination of an inductor and a capacitor. 
It is conventional to call this conductor geometry a transmission line.
The unit of inductance is the henry. Components that are intended to store 
magnetic field energy are called inductors. The inductance of typical components 
can range from microhenries (μH) to henries (H). When we study transmission 
lines, parallel conductors will have an inductance per unit length measured in 
nanohenries (nH).
Energy can be entered into an inductor by placing a voltage across its terminals. 
The power supplied at any moment is the product of voltage and current. The 
energy stored in the inductor is the integral of power over a time t. The energy is
	
E
I t
t
0
V d .	
(1.24)
Substituting Equation 1.23 for V
	
E
LI I
LI
I
0
2
1
2
d
.	
(1.25)
In Figure 1.7, when a constant voltage is applied to an inductor, the current 
ramps up in a linear manner. This is shown in Figure 1.11.
An isolated conductor has inductance. The magnetic flux generated by current 
flow depends on conductor length and only slightly on conductor diameter. Large 
L
V
V
I
0
t
I
0
t
Figure 1.11  An inductor driven from a constant voltage source.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
30
diameters are required if high currents are involved. In a building, the I beams are in 
effect inductors that modify the fields that enter or are generated in the area. These 
fields are also modified by equipment racks, ground planes, conduit, and all metal 
surfaces. Attempting to reduce potential differences by “shorting” points together 
will usually fail. If an I beam did not affect the field, how can a no. 10 conductor be 
effective? The inductance of a length of round conductor is shown in Figure 1.12.
1.15  ­Inductors
An inductor is a component that stores magnetic field energy. The inductors 
we consider later are made using trace geometries on a circuit board. These 
inductances are effective at high frequencies and usually do not involve 
1
0.01
0.1
1.0
Inductance in microhenries
10
100
10
Length of wire in inches
100
1000
#19
#10
#0000
Figure 1.12  The inductance of round copper conductors.

1.15  Inductors
31
magnetic materials. Inductances in the range 50 nH can be used to match 
transmission lines to a transmitting antenna at hundreds of MHz.
At lower frequencies, inductances can be supplied as components. These 
components can be turns of copper in air or turns wound around a magnetic 
core. When magnetic materials are involved, they shape the field but the energy 
is still stored mainly in air. In larger inductors, the magnetic flux crosses 
through air in a controlled gap. This is where the energy is stored.
A magnetic material in common use in circuit components is called ferrite. 
A ferrite core consists of small bits of magnetic material embedded in a ceramic 
filler that when fired forms a hard insulator. As an insulator, eddy current losses 
are limited to small islands of conductive material. Ferrite is the only magnetic 
material that has a useful relative permeability above 1 MHz. A typical gap 
structure is shown in Figure 1.13.
Cup cores can be used to build an inductor. This core construction is shown 
in Figure 1.13. The core surfaces that touch are ground flat and polished. 
A controlled gap can be provided in the center of the core by grinding the 
center contacting surface. For transformer action, no gap is provided. This type 
of construction is shown in Figure 1.14.
A single turn threading a small ferrite bead forms an inductor. The 
­reactance at 1 GHz is theoretically under an ohm and this assumes there is 
permeability at this frequency. Using a bead as a filter element to reduce 
noise is usually ineffective and is not recommended. The best approach in 
design is to avoid reflections, not add them. Often the role of the bead is to 
Coils of wire
B field in the iron
Toroid
Gap
V
Figure 1.13  A magnetic circuit with an air gap.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
32
space conductors which reduce cross‐coupling. This can be done without 
adding a component.
1.16  ­The Inductance of a Solenoid in Air
A solenoid is a multiturn coil much like the symbol for inductor. The solenoids we 
are interested in consist of a few turns made from traces and vias. Magnetic mate-
rials are not considered as they are ineffective at the frequencies of interest.
From Equations 1.18 and 1.19, the B field in a solenoid is
	
B
.
0In

	
(1.26)
From Equations 1.21 and 1.26
	
V
dB
d
d
d .
nA t
n A
I
t
2
0

	
(1.27)
Referencing Equation 1.23, the self inductance of a solenoid is approximately
	
L
n A
2
0

	
(1.28)
where A is the area of the coil, ℓ is the length of that coil, and n is the number 
of turns. The dimensions are in meters, μ0 = 4π × 10−7 tesla meters per ampere 
and the inductance is in henries.
An inductance of 10 nH has a theoretical reactance of 6.28 ohms at 100 MHz. 
It is not possible to build an inductor with zero parasitic capacitance. The natural 
Polished
surfaces
End view
Ferrite
Plastic
bobbin
Figure 1.14  Ferrite cup core construction.

1.17  Magnetic Field Energy Stored in Space
33
frequency that results places an upper limit to what might be considered 
a simple inductor. It would be safe to say that at 1 GHz there are no simple 
components.
An imbedded inductor in the form of a solenoid can be formed on a circuit 
board using vias and traces. If the coil pitch is 15 mils where a single turn is 
60 mils square, 10 turns will have an inductance of 76 nH. An increased pitch 
and more turns will help to increase the natural frequency.
1.17  ­Magnetic Field Energy Stored in Space
To calculate the magnetic field energy in a volume of space, consider a trace 
over a conducting plane as shown in Figure 1.15.
If the spacing h is small, most of the field energy will be stored in the volume 
under the trace. Ampere’s law requires that line integral of H around the cur-
rent in the trace is equal to the current I. In this figure, most of the current 
flows out on the underside of the trace and returns under the dielectric on the 
conducting plane. Assuming that the only part of the path that contributes to 
the integral is along the width w under the trace,
	
Hd
.
w
I 	
(1.29)
If we assume H is uniform under the entire trace then
	
H
.
I
w
	
(1.30)
E field
H field
Dielectric
Conducting plane
for return current
Copper
trace
Terminating
resistor
w
h
l
R
V
Note: In logic, the forward current flows mainly on the underside of the trace and returns 
under the dielectric on the conducting plane. 
Figure 1.15  A trace over a conducting plane showing fields.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
34
The magnetic B flux in an area hℓ is
	
B
.
h 	
(1.31)
Substituting Equations 1.22 and 1.28 into Equation 1.25, the energy in the 
magnetic field is
	
E
I
1
2
.	
(1.32)
Since I = Hw, φ = Bℓh, and the product ℓhw is volume V, the energy in the field is
	
E
V
1
2BH
.	
(1.33)
In magnetic material, the H field is very small and there is little energy storage. 
In a volume of space 
1.18  ­Mutual Inductance
The current flowing in one conductor geometry can generate magnetic flux in 
a second conductor geometry. The ratio of this flux to the initial current is 
called a mutual inductance.
	
L
I
21
2
1
.	
(1.35)
This changing flux can cross‐couple an interfering voltage into a nearby cir-
cuit. This coupling is most likely to happen when transmission lines run in 
parallel over a distance. Unlike mutual capacitance, mutual inductance can be 
of either polarity.
This coupling is discussed in Section 4.5.
INSIGHT
	
E
V
1
2
2
0
B
	
(1.34)
Equation 1.32 shows very clearly that space stores magnetic field energy. Just 
as in the electric field, it takes a conductor geometry to contain this field. In the 
case of the capacitor, energy can be stored for long periods of time. For induc-
tors, sustained energy requires a sustained current. This is possible when a 
superconductor is involved.

1.20  Poynting’s Vector
35
1.19  ­Transformer Action
It is often very useful to generate multiple dc voltages to operate logic. Dc–dc 
converters can provide several voltage levels that can be referenced to points 
on a board. Converters are available as components.
One method of adding needed operating dc voltages uses transformer action. 
A square‐wave voltage is connected to a coil wound on a magnetic core with-
out a gap. The voltage creates a steadily increasing B field. The B field intensity 
in iron depends only on voltage, the number of turns, the area of the core, and 
the time the voltage is connected. If a secondary coil is wound over the first 
coil, the magnetic flux will couple to this second coil. If the ratio of turns is 4 : 1, 
the voltage on the secondary coil is reduced by a factor of 4.
The magnetic flux in a core increases as long as a voltage is placed across a 
primary coil. When the flux level is near the permitted maximum, the voltage 
is reversed in polarity and the flux intensity starts to reduce. In time, the flux 
level goes through zero and reaches its negative limit. At this time the voltage 
polarity is again reversed. In a core with high relative permeability, the current 
that is needed to establish the H field is very small. This assumes there is no gap 
in the core. If a load is placed on the secondary coil the current that flows will 
obey Ohm’s law. The primary current will increase to supply the required 
energy into the load. The secondary voltages must be rectified, filtered, and 
regulated to serve as a dc power supply.
1.20  ­Poynting’s Vector
The idea that energy is moved in coupled electric and magnetic fields is fun-
damental in nature. The practical problem we face is that there are no direct 
tools for measuring energy flow or energy storage in space. The parameters we 
can measure are voltage, current, capacitance, and inductance. Poynting’s vector 
is a statement of power flow at a point in space using field parameters—not 
circuit parameters. This vector further presses the point that energy flows in 
space and that the conductors direct the path of energy flow. This vector is also 
valid in free space where there are no conductors. Figure 1.16 shows Poynting’s 
vector applied to a simple transmission line. The vector is mathematically the 
cross‐product of the E and H vectors or
	
P
E H.	
(1.36)
The total power crossing an area is the integral of the Poynting’s vector com-
ponent that is perpendicular to that area. It will be shown later that Poynting’s 
vector does not exist behind every wave front. Some waves convert field energy 
while others carry field energy.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
36
Poynting’s vector has no frequency limits and applies to dc fields. The term 
dc implies an unchanging field in a region of space over a period of time. Utility 
power is carried in slowly changing fields in the space between conductors. A 
flashlight carries power from the battery to a lamp in space. A transmission 
line carries energy from a decoupling capacitor to a logic gate in the space 
between a trace and a ground plane. Space carries energy. Conductors direct 
where the energy travels.
1.21  ­Resistors and Resistance
Circuit theory is about resistors, capacitors, and inductors and how they 
function in networks at different frequencies. On a logic circuit board, resis-
tors play a secondary role by terminating transmission lines. Resistance in a 
parasitic sense plays a role in dissipating the energy needed to move signals on 
these lines. This energy is dissipated in logic switches as well as in the traces 
that carry current. Initial currents stay on the surface of conductors. This effect 
means that most of the copper is not used and this raises the effective resistance. 
This is called skin effect and will be discussed later in the book.
The resistors that are used in analog work cover the range from 10 ohms to 
perhaps 100 megohms. All resistors have shunt parasitic capacitances of a 
few picofarads and the leads have an inductance of a few nanohenries. 
Circuit designers recognize these parasitic effects and design accordingly. 
In logic design, a typical impedance level is 50 ohms. This impedance is 
E
E
P
P
P
H
H
+V/2
−V/2
H
Figure 1.16  Poynting’s vector for parallel conductors carrying power.

1.21  Resistors and Resistance
37
nominal whether the clock rate is 1 MHz or 1 GHz. This value is bounded 
above by the impedance of free space which is 377 ohms and the fact that it is 
impractical to work with 5‐ohm circuits. It is interesting that the geometric 
mean between 5 and 500 ohms is exactly 50 ohms. You may have noticed that 
over the years the characteristic impedance of transmission lines has remained 
constant even though clock rates have risen.
All resistors have a shunt parasitic capacitance. The shunt capacitance can be 
lowered by reducing the diameter and increasing the length of the resistor. 
Even the lead diameter must be considered. In this text, the resistors that are 
mentioned are ideal. To deal with a network that represents a practical resistor 
in a real environment is not useful. What is important is that compromise is 
necessary and being too idealistic will make it impossible to proceed.
The losses in conductors play a role in carrying a logic signal to its destina-
tion. If this resistance were zero, then the losses would be limited to the logic 
switches. As you will see, this energy cannot be saved or put back into the power 
supply. There is a good argument for limiting line losses as this maintains signal 
integrity. At the same time this puts a greater burden on the logic switches to 
dissipate this energy. A perfect switch cannot dissipate energy. Energy that is 
not dissipated or radiated must oscillate between storage in inductance and 
capacitance. All conductor geometries have capacitance and inductance.
The general engineering problem involves the resistance of conductors. If a 
trace is solder plated the surface resistance is raised and the losses increase. If 
a trace is silver plated the surface resistance drops and the losses drop. If a trace 
is treated with a conformal coating the current will use the copper. It is impor-
tant to realize that there is no way to avoid dissipating energy. The resistivity ρ 
of various conductors is shown in Table 1.2. This table assumes the entire con-
ductor is carrying current.
Table 1.2  The resistivity of common conductors.
Conductor
Resistivity (μΩ cm)
Aluminum
2.65
Copper (annealed)
1.772
Gold (pure)
2.44
Iron
10
Lead
22
Nichrome
100
Platinum
10
Silver
1.59
Lead‐free solder
12
Tin
11.5
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
38
The resistance of a conductor assuming an even flow of current is
	
R
A
	
(1.37)
where ℓ is the conductor length and A is the cross‐sectional area.
If the strip is a square where the width is equal to the length, the resistance is 
equal to
	
R
t .	
(1.38)
Thus, a square of material has the same resistance regardless of its size. 
The resistance in units of ohms‐per‐square depends only on thickness. This 
assumes that the current flow is uniform across the square and uses all the 
conducting material. The resistance does increase with frequency as skin effect 
limits the current penetration (see Section 2.17).
The resistance of copper and iron squares for moderate frequencies is shown 
in Table 1.3. This table is for sine waves, not step functions. Skin effect domi-
nates the resistance for logic where most of the current flows on one surface.
It is interesting to apply this table to a lightning pulse where the current flows 
uniformly across a square of copper. Assume the square has a resistance of 
300 micro‐ohms per square. A current of 100,000 A would cause a voltage drop 
of 30 V. For a 0000 conductor the inductance of a 10‐foot section would be 
about 10 μH. The voltage drop for a lightning pulse would be about 4 million 
volts (see Figure  1.8). Connecting surfaces together using large diameter 
conductors is ineffective. To limit voltage drops, surfaces should be connected 
together so that current flow is not concentrated.
Table 1.3  Ohms‐per‐square for copper and iron.
Frequency
Copper
Steel
t = 0.1 mm
t = 1 mm
t = 10 mm
t = 0.1 mm
t = 1 mm
t = 10 mm
10 Hz
172 μΩ
17.2 μΩ
17.2 μΩ
1.01 mΩ
101 μΩ
40.1 μΩ
100 Hz
172 μΩ
17.2 μΩ
3.35 μΩ
1.01 mΩ
128 μΩ
126 μΩ
1 kHz
172 μΩ
17.5 μΩ
11.6 μΩ
1.01 mΩ
403 μΩ
400 μΩ
10 kHz
172 μΩ
33.5 μΩ
36.9 μΩ
1.28 mΩ
1.26 mΩ
1.26 mΩ
100 kHz
175 μΩ
116 μΩ
116 μΩ
4.03 mΩ
4.00 mΩ
4.00 mΩ
1 MHz
335 μΩ
369 μΩ
369 μΩ
12.6 mΩ
12.6 mΩ
12.6 mΩ
10 MHz
1.16 mΩ
1.16 mΩ
1.16 mΩ
40.0 mΩ
40.0 mΩ
40.0 mΩ

39
Glossary 
Problem Set
1	 Assume a grain of sand is 0.1 mils in diameter. How many grains are there 
in a cubic foot?
2	 Assume the current on a copper trace penetrates uniformly to a depth of 
0.2 mils. What is the resistance per meter of a copper trace 5 mils wide?
3	 A 50‐ohm resistor has a parasitic capacitance of 2 pF. What is the frequency 
where the reactance falls to 45 ohms? Use admittances.
4	 The capacitance of a trace is 2 pF/cm. The relative dielectric constant 
is 4. What is the inductance per cm if the characteristic impedance is 
50 ohms?
5	 What is the current flow in a capacitance of 100 pF if the voltage across the 
capacitance changes 5 V in 2 ns?
6	 The charge on an electron is 1.602 × 10−19 coulombs. How many electrons 
pass a point per second for a current of 100 mA?
7	 Now many free electrons are in a gram of copper (about 1 cm of trace)?
8	 Assuming only the top 0.01% of the copper contributes to current flow, 
what is the electron velocity?
9	 What is the voltage across an inductor of 1 nH if the current rises 100 mA in 
2 ns?
Glossary
Ampere.  A flow of charge at the rate of one coulomb per second. It is also the 
flow of displacement current represented by a changing D field.
Ampere’s law.  The H field around a long current carrying conductor is equal 
to I/2πr. The field lines are circles. The law stated in mathematical terms is: 
The line integral of H around any closed path is equal to the current passing 
through that loop (Section 1.12).
Avogadro’s number.  The number of atoms in a gram‐mole of any element. 
The number is 6.02 × 1023. For copper the number of grams in a mole is 63.54 
(Section 1.2).
B field.  The B field is the field of magnetic induction. The intensity of the 
field at a point is measured in teslas. A B field is represented by lines that 
form closed curves that do not change intensity when the  permeability 
changes at a boundary. The B field is related to the H field by the equation 
B = μRμ0H, where μ0 is the permeability of free space, and μR is the relative 
permeability. μ0 is equal to 4π × 10−7 T/A m (Section 1.13).
Capacitance.  The ability of space to store electric field energy. In a capacitor 
it is the ratio of stored charge to voltage. The unit of capacitance is the farad 
(Section 1.7).
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
40
Capacitor.  A circuit component designed to store electric field energy 
(Section 1.8).
Charge.  A quantity of electrons gathered on a conductor or insulator. 
A coulomb of charge moving past a point per second is a current of one 
ampere (Section 1.2).
Coulomb.  The unit of charge. One coulomb per second is one ampere.
D field.  The electric field represented by charge distribution. The field lines 
are continuous across a dielectric boundary when there are no trapped 
electrons. The D field is proportional to the E field and is equal to ε0εRE 
(Section 1.9).
Dielectric.  An insulating material such as glass epoxy (Section 1.6).
Dielectric constant (relative).  The property of a material to reduce the 
electric field intensity (Section 1.7).
Dielectric constant (permittivity).  The constant that relates forces between 
charges. The permittivity of free space ε0 is 8.85 × 10−12 F/m (Section 1.3).
Displacement current.  A changing electric field that is equivalent to a current 
and results in a magnetic field (Section 1.14).
Displacement field.  The D field (Section 1.9).
E field.  The force field that surrounds every charge. This is a vector field as it 
has intensity and direction at every point in space. Electric fields can attract 
or repel (Section 1.2).
Electric field.  See E field.
Energy.  The state of matter that allows work to be done.
Farad.  The unit of capacitance. The ratio of charge to voltage (Section 1.7).
Faraday’s law.  The voltage induced in a conducting loop by a changing 
magnetic flux (Section 1.13).
Ferrite.  A magnetic material in the form of a ceramic insulator.
Flux.  Fields are often represented by lines through points of equal intensity. 
These lines as a group are often called flux. It is common to refer to 
magnetic flux. Lines that are closer together represent a more intense field 
(Section 1.13).
Force.  That which changes the state of rest of matter.
Force field (Electric).  A state that attracts, repels, or accelerates charges.
H field (static).  The magnetic field associated with current flow. Magnetic fields 
are force fields that can attract or repel other magnetic fields. The H field 
is a vector field as it has intensity and direction at every point in space. 
The H field has units of amperes per meter (Section 1.12).
Henry.  The unit of inductance. Abbreviated as H (Section 1.14).
Impedance.  The opposition to current flow in a general circuit. For sine 
waves the real part is resistance, the imaginary part is reactance. Abbreviated 
as Z.
Inductance.  The ability of a space in or out of a component to store 
magnetic field energy. The correct definition of inductance is the amount 

41
Glossary 
of flux generated per unit of current. The unit of inductance is the henry. 
Abbreviated L (Section 1.14).
Induction.  The ability of a changing field to move charges on conductors or to 
create a potential difference in space (Section 1.13).
Induction field.  The magnetic or B field.
Inductor.  A component or conductor geometry that stores magnetic field 
energy (Section 1.15).
Lines.  A representation of field shape and intensity.
Magnetic field.  The force field surrounding current flow. The force field 
surrounding magnetized materials.
Magneto‐motive force.  The H field.
Mho.  An earlier unit of conductance. It is now the siemen.
Mutual capacitance.  Electric field coupling between different conductor 
geometries. Mutual capacitance is always negative (Section 1.10).
Mutual inductance.  Magnetic field coupling between different conductor 
geometries. Mutual inductance can be of either polarity (Section 1.18).
Permeability.  The ratio between the B and H magnetic field vectors. 
Abbreviated μ (Section 1.19).
Permeability of free space.  A fundamental constant. The relationship 
between the induction or B field and the H field in space. Referred to as μ0 
(Section 1.13).
Permittivity of free space.  A fundamental constant. The relationship between 
the D and E fields in a vacuum. Referred to as ε0 (Section 1.9).
Potential differences.  Voltage differences between conductors or between 
points in space.
Poynting’s vector.  A vector formed by cross multiplying the electric and 
magnetic field vectors. The vector is equal to the intensity of power flowing 
perpendicular through an increment of area in space. The vector can be zero 
behind many wave fronts (Section 1.20).
Reactance.  The reciprocal of susceptance. The opposition to sinusoidal 
current flow in capacitors and inductors. In circuit theory the reactance of 
an inductor is a plus imaginary number of ohms. The reactance of a capacitor 
is a negative imaginary number of ohms.
Resistance.  The opposition to current flow. The real part of impedance.
Self capacitance.  The ratio of charge to voltage on the same conductor 
(Section 1.10).
Self inductance.  The ratio of the magnetic flux to current flow in the same 
conductor geometry (Section 1.16).
Siemen.  The unit of admittance. Reciprocal of impedance.
Tesla.  The unit of magnetic induction (B field) (Section 1.13).
Transmission line.  Parallel conductors that can direct the flow of energy.
Vector.  A line (and arrow) in space where length represents magnitude, 
intensity, and direction of a force field.
www.ebook3000.com

1  Electric and Magnetic Fields
42
Vector field.  A parameter that varies both in intensity and direction in space. 
The most common fields are gravity, electric or E field, displacement or D 
field, magnetic or H field, and induction or B field.
Voltage.  Correctly, a voltage difference. The work required to move a unit 
charge a distance in an electric field. Measurements are usually measured 
between conductors. Voltage at a point in space has no meaning (Section 1.3).
Work.  Force times distance where the force direction is in line with the 
distance traveled (Section 1.3).
Answers to Problems
1	 1.73 × 1015 grains in a cubic foot.
2	 R = 0.274 ohms.
3	 Use admittances. 782 MHz.
4	 5 nH.
5	 250 mA.
6	 6.24 × 1017 electrons per second.
7	 Avogadro’s number divided by 62.55 = 9.5 × 1021.
8	 About 1 cm/second.
9	 50 mA.

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
43
2
●
●Waves on transmission lines imply energy activity.
●
●They can indicate that electromagnetic energy is being transported.
●
●They can indicate that electric field energy is being deposited as magnetic 
energy.
●
●They can indicate that magnetic field energy is being deposited as electric 
field energy.
●
●They can indicate that electric field energy is being converted to magnetic 
field energy.
●
●They can indicate that magnetic field energy is being converted to electric 
field energy.
●
●Several of these activities can occur in parallel.
To understand which activity is occurring is not obvious. Measuring voltages 
is just a part of the story. The explanations that follow will take two full chapters.
2.1  ­Introduction
Chapter  1 introduced the electric and magnetic fields. These fundamental 
fields exist around static and moving charges. These fields are basic to all elec-
trical activity including radiation. It was shown that it takes work to move fields 
into a volume of space. Without conductors, the fields we have been discussing 
simply radiate into space. To store and move energy in a circuit, fields must be 
confined in a conductor geometry that has capacitance and inductance. On a 
transmission line, energy is stored, converted, or moved by wave action. These 
transitions take place when sine waves are involved but it is difficult to present 
these mechanisms graphically. Step functions provide an opportunity to appre-
ciate how energy is stored, moved, and converted.
There are many ways to move electromagnetic energy. Examples are lasers, 
fiber optics, light, radio transmitters, waveguides, and radar. Our interests 
are in moving waves on transmission lines on circuit boards. Even if other 
Transmission Lines—Part 1
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
44
INSIGHT
When there are two or more conductors, energy can be transported on a con-
trolled basis using electromagnetic fields at low frequency. This one fact makes 
it practical for us to power our homes and industrial society at 60 Hz. This same 
property allows us to run our logic circuitry where the spectrum can go to dc. It 
is this two‐conductor transport of energy that is the focus of this book.
The role conductors play in confining fields is not entirely obvious. The parallel 
with a river is not perfect but it can help. Rivers do not leave their banks as it 
requires “going uphill.” The water goes where the constraints permit flow. If there 
is a dam, the water rises. The dam has capacity measured in volume (acre‐feet). 
The parallel with electrical phenomena is obvious but usually considered trivial. 
The river banks are the equivalent of the conductors. For a river that spreads out, 
the water will slow down. On a circuit board the spreading will allow energy to 
reflect and take alternate paths. Energy does not slow down. The slowing down 
takes place by storing parts of the energy in capacitance and inductance. Then 
later, the energy is released from storage by another wave action.
methods are used to transport energy, in nearly every case the information 
being transported ends up being processed on a circuit board where there is 
access to data processing, data storage, and energy.
The problem in logic circuit board design is twofold. Energy must be stored 
near points of demand and then sent to receiving points to represent informa-
tion. Both parts of the problem involve transmission lines and both parts are 
equally important. The time it takes to acquire energy is as important as the 
time it takes to transport this energy. As you will see, the available energy levels 
are quantized and limited by the geometry of the conductors. It is like a water 
pipe. Given a fixed pressure, the amount of water that can be delivered in a 
given time depends on the diameter of the conduit. Given a fixed voltage, the 
amount of initial current flow is defined by geometry of the conductors. As you 
will see, this is called characteristic impedance.
2.2  ­The Ideal World
We begin our discussion by connecting an ideal voltage source to parallel con-
ductors called a transmission line. To keep the problem simple, the switch 
making the connection has no dimensions and closes in zero time. An ideal 
voltage source means that the source impedance is 0 ohm at all frequencies. 
This assumption is used in circuit theory to simplify the analysis. Fortunately, 
in logic, we can make these same assumptions and not get into trouble. This is 

2.3  Transmission Line Representations
45
because every connection to a voltage source or logic signal involves a 
transmission line and this added path dominates the flow of initial energy. 
Also, every practical logic switch has a finite operating time. There is both a 
time delay and a time to transition from open to its closing resistance.
A typical source of energy on a circuit board is a regulated power supply. It is 
common practice to use an active circuit for this function. A capacitor is 
usually placed across the output terminals of the supply to make certain that 
the voltage source is unconditionally stable for any load. First energy usually 
comes from this capacitor. In circuit theory, an ideal voltage source can both 
accept or provide current. The fact that an active source may not be able to 
accept current is of little concern. The fact that a transmission line is used to 
transport this energy is a more significant issue. A power supply for each active 
device is impractical. The approach we use involves decoupling capacitors 
which can allow current flow in either direction.
The partial differential equations that describe field behavior are difficult to 
use. Most of the equations we use to describe transmission lines can be devel-
oped by using a simple set of relationships. Logic signals, by their very nature, 
involve step functions of voltage or current. The leading edges of voltage have 
near constant slopes, which means that the time derivatives of voltage and 
current are nearly constant. This allows us to use simple algebra to develop 
the relationships that describe electrical behavior. Hopefully, this approach 
will provide insight and we will not need to solve differential equations.
2.3  ­Transmission Line Representations
The textbook representation of a transmission line usually shows increments 
of series inductance and shunt capacitance. For parallel traces, a circuit repre-
sentation is shown in Figure 2.1.
It is convenient to use the language of circuit theory to get us started. In this 
network, the current that flows into the first increment of inductance charges 
the first increment of capacitance. As time progresses, a wave, observable as a 
C
C
C
L /2
L /2
L /2
L /2
L/2
L /2
L/2
L/2
Figure 2.1  The lumped parameter model of a transmission line. L is inductance per unit 
length. C is capacitance per unit length.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
46
voltage, propagates through the network storing energy in distributed capaci-
tance and inductance at a constant rate.
The electric and magnetic field patterns around a trace over a ground plane 
are shown in Figure  2.2. This field pattern propagates with time along the 
transmission line.
The voltage that is applied to the transmission line cannot be an ideal step 
function as this creates many philosophical problems including the need for 
infinite power. To avoid this issue, we assume that all voltages applied to a 
conductor geometry have a finite rise time. As you will see, what happens in 
this rise time is important and will be discussed in more detail later.
When a voltage is first connected to a transmission line, the resulting action 
is called a wave. This initial wave consists of a rising voltage and a rising cur-
rent flow. The current is placing charge into the capacitance of the line. The 
voltage implies an electric field and the current flow implies a magnetic field. 
As the wave propagates, the current must continue to flow at a steady rate. 
Behind the wave front the electric and magnetic field intensities are unchang-
ing. The magnetic field is supported by a forward and return current that must 
flow behind the wave front. This current crosses the transmission line at the 
leading edge of the wave. One way to describe this current flow is to say it is 
charging the capacitance of the line. Figure 2.3 shows the nature of the current 
as a wave moves along a transmission line.
We are very limited in our ability to make useful displays of wave action. It is 
difficult enough to display what takes place at one point on a transmission line, 
let alone observing the action as if it were a moving train. Waves do things that 
trains cannot do. Wave reflect and transmit at discontinuities and trains crash. 
This inability to see the waves contributes to our difficulties. We try to picture 
each event on a time scale we can deal with. We might be able to animate volt-
age but what is really happening is the movement of energy. Animating energy 
Ground plane
E
E
Trace
H
H
V
V = 0
Figure 2.2  The field pattern around a trace over a ground plane (microstrip).

2.4  Characteristic Impedance
47
or energy flow is not going to accomplish very much as this is really something 
we cannot see or measure. I will discuss this point later in the chapter. Energy 
flow is three dimensional and for traces it is cylindrical. Unlike water flow, the 
energy is confined even though the trace edges are not closed.
2.4  ­Characteristic Impedance
When a steady voltage V is first connected to a transmission line, current flows 
in the inductance of the line and charge is stored in the capacitance of the line. 
The charge Q in a unit of capacitance C is equal to the current I multiplied by 
time t. The capacitance C is thus equal to
	
C
Q
It
V
V 	
(2.1)
An increment of magnetic flux in space has an inductance equal to voltage 
multiplied by time t. The inductance L is the ratio of flux to current or
	
L
I
t
I
V .	
(2.2)
Dividing Equation 2.2 by Equation 2.1 and taking the square root, we see that
	
L
C
I
Z
1 2
0
/
V
	
(2.3)
where Z0 is called the characteristic impedance of a transmission line. It has 
units of real ohms. It is a measure of the first current that will flow into a trans-
mission line. Thus initially, a transmission line behaves like a resistance where 
the voltage wave shape is the same as the current wave shape. It also means that 
V
V
Leading edge
I
I
I
I
t
I
Figure 2.3  The flow of current in a wave as it moves along a transmission line.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
48
if the voltage is a sine wave the initial current is also a sine wave. Even though 
the characteristic impedance is measured in real ohms, there is no dissipation. 
The energy that enters the line is stored in the electric and magnetic fields on 
the line.
In circuit theory, an ideal transmission line has no losses and the input 
impedance for sine wave voltages is a reactance. This sinusoidal measure of a 
transmission line assumes all transient effects have attenuated. We will discuss 
sine waves and transmission lines later.
Circuit theory sees transmission lines as reactances. As strange as it sounds 
we are going to discuss transmission lines as resistances that store energy. This 
points out the difference in viewpoint between circuit theory and the one we 
take when we transport energy (logic). It is a different world.
The characteristic impedance of a transmission line on a logic circuit board 
is selected to optimize the performance of integrated circuits and at the same 
time limit cross‐coupling. In many designs, 50 ohms is the preferred imped-
ance level. Board manufacturers usually add traces that can be tested in the 
manufacturing cycle to verify that both plating and etching processes are held 
within expected limits.
In many designs, the trace lengths are short enough that the properties of the 
transmission line are not critical. The control of characteristic impedance is 
still important to control initial current demand, cross–coupling, and manu-
facturing repeatability. The control of characteristic impedance is a key factor 
in providing signal integrity (SI).
2.5  ­Waves and Wave Velocity
Waves are a common occurrence in nature. We see ocean waves and light 
waves and hear sound waves. We expect a flag or a tree to wave in a breeze. In 
many ways, we expect nature to use a wave mechanism to move or trap energy. 
We expect waves when potential and kinetic energy are linked together. The 
waves we are interested in move electrical energy back and forth in transmis-
sion lines. Within a short period of time, there may be hundreds of waves 
resulting from one switching event taking energy from a source. In one sense, 
there is only one block of energy in action but for many reasons it is practical 
to break up the action into waves that reflect and transmit at transition points. 
The rule we follow is that a wave at a transition point becomes one or two new 
waves and the first wave is discarded. At a 0 impedance point there is no 
transmission. At an open circuit there is no transmission but the arriving 
voltage doubles. The voltage at any point in a transmission is the sum of the 
wave amplitudes that pass that point. It makes no difference which direction 
the wave is traveling. This is why it is necessary to idealize a wave as being 
its transition (leading edge). A wave contributes a voltage to a point after the 

2.5  Waves and Wave Velocity
49
leading edge has passed that point. With the rules we have set up, a wave 
cannot pass a point more than once. We break up the action into waves that we 
can handle and then put the waves back together to see the end result which we 
can measure.
When a voltage is switched onto a transmission line, nature takes this as an 
opportunity to spread energy into a new volume of space. We know that energy 
begins to propagate as a wave along the line based on the geometry of the line. 
The leading edge adds charge to the line linearly with time. Using the definition 
of capacitance, we can relate the time it takes for the leading edge to pass one 
point
	
C
Q
It
C
w
h
V
V
and
0 	
(2.4)
where w, ℓ, and h are width, length, and conductor spacing, respectively. Solving 
for the permittivity of free space,
	
0
Ith
w
V .	
(2.5)
Using the definition of permeability and knowing the magnetic flux increases 
linearly during the passage of the leading edge, we can relate time to the dimen-
sions of the transmission line.
	
0
B
H
V
w
hI
tw
Ih

.	
(2.6)
The product of Equations 2.5 and 2.6 shows that
	
0 0
2
2
t

.	
(2.7)
INSIGHT
From Equation 2.7, the velocity ℓ/t of the voltage wave is
	
v
1
0 0
1 2
/ .	
(2.8)
Using μ0 = 4π × 10−7 Tm/A and ε0 = 8.85 × 10−12 F/m, the velocity is equal to
	
v
c
300 106m s
/ 	
(2.9)
which is the speed of light in a vacuum.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
50
On a circuit board, traces are usually spaced from a conducting plane by a 
dielectric called glass epoxy. This material has a relative dielectric constant εR 
of about 4. At a GHz the value falls to 3.5. The permittivity of a dielectric is 
equal to εRε0. The wave velocity in a dielectric is the speed of light reduced by 
the square root of the relative dielectric constant or
	
v
c
R
1 2
/ .	
(2.10)
The field energy of a typical surface trace on a circuit board is located mainly 
in the dielectric under the trace. The field energy above the trace is in air. The 
energy in air travels faster than the energy in the dielectric. The effect is to 
spread out the leading edge of the wave using the transmission line.
2.6  ­The Balance of Field Energies
The initial energy that enters a transmission line is simply VI times time. This 
must be equal to the sum of electric and magnetic field energy or
	
V
V
I
t
LI
C
1
2
1
2
2
2.	
(2.11)
The ratio of electric to magnetic energy that enters a length of transmission line is
	
1
2
1
2
2
2
C
LI
V
.	
(2.12)
Using Equation 2.3, it is obvious that this ratio is unity.
Thus, in every initial transmission, the moving energy is divided equally 
between electric and magnetic fields.
INSIGHT
The electric and magnetic fields that move energy are coupled to each other. 
At each point in space, the electric field vector is perpendicular to the magnetic 
field vector and both fields are perpendicular to the direction of energy motion. 
When energy is in motion, equal amounts of magnetic and electric field energy 
are required. As we see, in a transmission line, the two fields are static and at the 
same time they are the movement of energy. When viewed separately they are 
energy in storage. Transitions back and forth between storage and motion can only 
take place in the presence of conductors at the leading edge of a wave. In many 
situations there can be energy storage and energy motion in the same space.
It is important to note that the magnetic and electric fields contribute equally 
to any losses.

2.8  The Propagation of a Wave on a Transmission Line
51
2.7  ­A Few Comments on Transmission Lines
The transmission lines used on a typical printed circuit board are traces over a 
conducting plane or traces between two conducting planes. The literature 
treats several other trace arrangements including side‐by‐side traces, asym-
metrical traces between conducting planes, and traces between grounded trace 
pairs. Beside trace arrangements, transmission lines can be coaxial cables or 
ribbon cables. There are issues of cost and application but our concern is basi-
cally SI on circuit boards. The important factors we consider include termina-
tions, reflections, crosstalk, energy containment and energy movement. The 
specific trace geometry will be mentioned only when it is relevant.
Circuit theory stresses loop or node analysis. For transmission lines, the 
return current path forms a loop that has little to do with circuit analysis. If the 
loop area relates to cross‐coupling or radiation we will be very specific. The 
return current path is critical because it defines the characteristic impedance 
of the transmission line. In our discussions, a controlled return current path is 
assumed even though it is not shown.
We often use single‐line diagrams showing individual waves traveling in either 
direction. The waves will be shown as having a leading edge that is symbolic. In 
practice the leading edge may spread out over the entire transmission path 
making an actual wave depiction somewhat impractical. Whatever the picture, if 
energy is in motion it will move at the speed of light in the dielectric involved. 
The symbolic leading edge of a wave indicates the direction of wave travel which 
is of course key information. The leading edge also makes it easier to see how the 
voltage derivative explains current flow in the capacitance of the line.
2.8  ­The Propagation of a Wave on a Transmission Line
To start, let us connect a voltage source to a transmission line. An initial voltage 
would require immediate field energy. Since this is impossible, an initial voltage 
must start from 0 and rise in a finite time. Since there cannot be magnetic field 
INSIGHT
Every conductor pair is a transmission line. Conductors include the earth, 
conduit, building steel, racks, cabinetry, power conductors, as well as traces over 
or between conducting planes on a circuit board. Given an opportunity, electro-
magnetic fields will couple to every conductor pair because it is a way to “spread 
out” the energy. In particular, all conductor paths have a lower characteristic 
impedance than free space. In the design of a logic board the object in design is 
to control the field paths so that logic/energy will arrive where needed in an 
effective way using a dedicated path.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
52
energy present in zero time, the current must also start from 0. In a rise time, the 
full voltage and full current must be present at the input terminals. In the second 
rise time period the wave has progressed at the speed of light and the voltage and 
current are at their limiting value at the input terminals. The ratio of voltage to 
current flow is the characteristic impedance of the line as given in Equation 2.3. 
Along the transmission line, where the voltage is in transition, a displacement 
current crosses the transmission line in the changing D field. This current path is 
continuous from the voltage source, along the trace, through the space between 
the conductors, and on the return conductor. In the third rise time period the 
current loop is one increment longer and a fixed voltage and current are present 
on the line. Stated again, the forward current crosses the line in the space of the 
leading edge as it moves down the line. The changing D field in this space is equal 
to the return current flow. This is a very important idea to grasp.1
1  One of Maxwell’s equations is in part ∂HZ/∂y - ∂HY/∂z = iZ + ∂DX/∂t. This general equation 
relates the pattern of the magnetic field H in the xy plane to the time changing D field in the x 
direction and to the current flow IZ. Recall that D = εE where E is the electric field in volts per 
meter and ε is the permittivity of the dielectric. This equation shows that both a current or a 
changing D field creates a magnetic field. In transmission lines there is no current flow in the 
space between conductors except at the leading edge. There is current flow in a resistor 
termination and on the surface of the transmission line conductors.
The second and third part of this equation (not shown) relates the H field in the xy and xz 
directions to the current flow in the z and y directions.
It is convenient to depict waves in motion using short rise times. In some logic, the transitions 
in voltage occur over an entire trace length and wave action is not easily displayed. Displacement 
currents still flow but across the entire line at the same time.
INSIGHT
Behind the wave front, the E and H fields are unchanging. Poynting’s vector 
indicates that energy is in motion but there is no such thing as a Poynting’s 
meter. The only motion that can be detected are the slow moving charges on 
the conductor surfaces. This is one area where circuit theory gets it right. Current 
times voltage equals energy flow per second or power. We measure these 
parameters on conductors but the energy flows in space.
A mechanical parallel may help in explaining energy flow. Consider the drive 
shaft in an automobile. Energy is coupled to the wheels by a drive shaft, yet no 
part of the shaft is moving forward. The energy is transferred in the shaft by rota-
tion and in shaft torque. The energy is carried forward in rotational stress in the 
steel. The stress is greatest near the outer surface of the shaft. The velocity of a 
pressure wave in steel is surprising. It is nearly 10,000 mph. The parallel with the 
transport of electromagnetic field energy is food for thought. This leads to the 
conclusion that electromagnetic fields are a stress in space that transfers energy 
at the speed of light. In a transmission line the fields and the conductors play a 

2.9  Initial Wave Action
53
The movement of energy in a transmission line is often paralleled with the 
action of a group of pendulums. When the first pendulum hits a series of sus-
pended balls, the last pendulum receives the energy and moves. The velocity of 
the energy motion depends on the elastic properties of the balls. This parallels 
the transfer of energy in a drive shaft where mechanical stress is propagated. In 
this analogy, the energy flow is an impulse.
2.9  ­Initial Wave Action
The wave action that first propagates on the transmission line carries energy in 
an electric and magnetic field. As the wave propagates, energy is deposited in 
the capacitance and inductance of the line. This deposition occurs as the 
leading edge passes each point. The energy behind the wave front is carried at 
the speed of light in both the E and H fields although the fields are unchanging. 
When the wave reaches the end of the line, energy has been deposited in the 
line capacitance and inductance and field energy is still moving along the entire 
line toward the termination (load).
role in propagating a stress in space. Wheels, gravity, and the mass of a chassis 
are needed or the drive shaft could not be stressed. Conductors play this role in a 
transmission line. Without conductors, space cannot be electrically stressed at dc.
It is difficult to accept the idea that the fields are not moving although they 
are changing at leading edges. The problem is that at dc, the fields are unchang-
ing and it is the energy that is moving at the speed of light. In a logic transmis-
sion, the fields behind the leading edge are static and they are carrying energy. 
To say the fields are moving is a common misconception. It serves no purpose to 
make this assumption. The only motion we can sense is at the wave front where 
we can make measurements. The idea of field motion is somewhat supported 
when we modulate the energy flow sinusoidally. This modulation allows us to 
see the wave movement but in no way can this activity be assigned to actual 
energy motion. Waves indicate transition.
INSIGHT
The fields behind the first wave action serve two purposes. First it represents 
the energy that has been stored in the line and at the same time it is involved in 
the movement of energy behind the wave front. The fields behind the wave 
front are unchanging and yet energy is in motion. The fields thus have the ability 
to store and move energy at the same time. In the drive shaft analogy, the 
torque on the shaft stores static energy, the rotation of mass stores kinetic 
energy, and this energy does not move down the shaft to the wheels.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
54
If the transmission line is terminated in a resistor equal to the characteristic 
impedance Z0, the energy in the wave flows along the line and into the resistor 
and all apparent wave action stops. There is field energy in motion and energy 
stored in the line capacitance and inductance. The resistor will dissipate energy 
until the voltage source is removed and all the energy in the transmission line 
reaches the resistor. This energy cannot be put back into the power source. 
This wave action is shown in Figure 2.4.
A second representation showing wave action is given in Figure 2.5.
X
V
V
Switch
R=Z0
Time
1
2
3
4
Parallel
termination
1
2
3
R
Z0
Steady voltage
Figure 2.4  The wave action associated with a transmission line shunt terminated in its 
characteristic impedance.
X
V
0
0
W1
V
V
0
Wave action R =Z0
Voltage at R
l
t
t
W2
W2
ρ = 0
Z0
R=Z0
Figure 2.5  The wave action on a transmission line shunt terminated in its characteristic 
impedance.

2.10  Reflections and Transmissions at Impedance Transitions
55
In this representation, time is shown on the vertical axis and wave activity 
along the transmission path is shown on the horizontal axis. The U‐shaped 
“cups” on the diagram represent points in time and position where waves will 
transition. Usually a transition is a reflection back and a transmission forward. 
For the cup at time t = 0 and position ℓ, the closure of the switch results in a 
transmission W1 forward into the line. When the wave reaches the resistor R, 
there is no reflection. The forward transmission wave W2 is a voltage V.
In some applications, it may be desirable to terminate a line in a Zener diode 
in series with a terminating resistor. The Zener clamps the reflected voltage 
and terminates the line until wave action stops. This avoids damage to the 
input gate and allows the final voltage to hold without dissipating energy.
2.10  ­Reflections and Transmissions 
at Impedance Transitions
There are many places on a circuit board where the characteristic impedance of 
the transmission path changes. This can include sources of logic and energy, as 
well as at logic terminations. The wiring from an IC to pads or from pads to a 
capacitor are examples of short transmission lines that are often not considered. 
A termination can be an open circuit, a resistor, or another short transmission 
line. Terminations involving a general RLC network will not be considered.
On many board designs, the leading edges may transition slowly enough so 
that reflections do not occur. We assume zero rise times to develop equations 
for reflection and transmission coefficients. The criteria for when to apply 
these equations is given in Section 2.13.
At a transmission, the initial forward voltage is V1, the reflected voltage is VR, 
and the transmitted voltage is VL. Using circuit theory the relationship between 
these three voltages is
	
V
V
V
R
L
1
.	
(2.13)
Assume the initial transmission line has a characteristic impedance of Z0 and 
the terminating transmission line or resistance is ZL. The currents must satisfy 
the relationship
	
V
V
V
R
L
L
1
0
0
Z
Z
Z .	
(2.14)
Eliminating VL between Equations 2.13 and 2.14 and solving for the ratio VR/V1
	
V
V
R
L
L
1
0
0
Z
Z
Z
Z 	
(2.15)
where ρ is called the reflection coefficient.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
56
The reflected wave has a voltage equal to
	
V
V
R
1
	
(2.16)
Eliminating VR between Equations 2.13 and 2.14 and solving for the ratio VL/V1,
	
V
V
L
L
L
1
0
2Z
Z
Z
	
(2.17)
where τ is called the transmission coefficient.
The transmitted or forward wave is equal to
	
V
V
L
1 	
(2.18)
The reflection coefficient ρ at an open circuit is 1. This means that the 
reflected wave amplitude equals the forward wave amplitude. The resulting 
voltage at the open circuit is double the forward wave voltage. Energy continues 
to flow into the transmission line doubling the voltage. If the transmission 
line is terminated in a short circuit then the reflection coefficient is −1. This 
means that the voltage of the reflected wave is reversed in polarity. Short 
circuits do not dissipate energy; they simply reflect the wave. If the termina-
tion is equal to Z0, then there is no reflection and the energy flows directly 
into the termination.
The transmission coefficient τ at an open circuit is 2. The voltage at the 
output terminals is double the arriving wave voltage. If the output is shorted, 
the transmission coefficient is 0. If the output is terminated in Z0 the trans-
mission coefficient is 1, which means that there is no reflection and all the 
energy proceeds forward.
When a wave reaches the end of a transmission line terminated in a voltage 
V, the terminating impedance is 0 and there is no transmission. The reflec-
tion coefficient is −1 and the reflected voltage is the terminating voltage less 
the reflected voltage. In effect, the reflected wave returns the voltage on the 
line to V.
The reflection and transmission equations given above are very general 
and apply to any waveform. For sine waves, the voltages and loads can use 
the complex notation of circuit theory. See Appendix A for a review of this 
notation. When sine waves are involved, sums and differences are also sine 
waves. When other waveforms are involved this simplification is not availa-
ble. The voltages on the following transmission line terminations are all 
step functions. Each reflected or transmitted wave is assumed to be another 
step function with the same rise and fall time. Each combination of wave-
forms is unique. This makes it more difficult to represent each method of 
termination. This is why it is helpful to use two different representations to 
display the wave action.

2.11  The Unterminated (Open) Transmission Line
57
2.11  ­The Unterminated (Open) Transmission Line
The voltage representation of this wave action is shown in Figure 2.6. The rise 
time is assumed to be a small part of the forward transit time.
A second representation of this wave action is shown in Figure 2.7. Note the 
reflections at the voltage source and at the open circuit. At the open circuit, two 
new waves W2 and W3 are generated. At the voltage source there are no trans-
mitted waves. The reflected waves are the incident waves reversed in polarity.
When the reflected wave W3 reaches the voltage source, a second reflec-
tion W4 takes place. This reflected wave W4 must have an amplitude of –W3. 
V
Switch
2
3
1
A
B
V
−V
4
−V
V
V
5
∞
(a)
Time
V
V
2V
2V
Point A
Time
Point B
(b)
X
Figure 2.6  The voltage waveforms on an ideal open circuit transmission line for a step input 
voltage. (a) Individual waves and (b) The sum of the waves.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
58
The current for this wave is supplied by half the charge stored in the line 
capacitance.2 The conversion to a negative current and a magnetic field 
takes place along the line at the leading edge of W4. The voltage at the source 
supplies no further energy to the line.
2  The third wave in the unterminated line converts electric field energy to magnetic field energy. 
One of Maxwell’s equations is in part ∂EY/∂x + ∂EX/∂y = ∂BZ/∂t. This equation relates the pattern 
of the electric field E in the xy direction to the time rate of change of the magnetic field B in the z 
direction. Recall that B = μ0H where μ0 is the permeability of free space. The letter subscripts 
indicate coordinate directions. The voltage that is produced by the changing magnetic field at the 
leading edge is approximately the E field intensity times the distance between conductors in the 
transmission line. The second and third parts of this equation (not shown) relates the E field in 
the yz direction to the changing B field in the x direction and the E field in the xz direction to the 
changing B field in the y direction.
W9
W7
W4
W1
+v
l
+v
–v
t
0
V
W2
t
Voltage at B
W2+W5
W2+W5 +W8
3
2
1
0
Wave action when a switch
closes on an uncharged line
–v
W6
Z0
A
0
B
Open circuit
V
X
W3
+2V, W8
–2V, W5
2V, W2
+ v
+ v
Figure 2.7  The voltage 
waveforms on an ideal open 
circuit transmission line for a 
step input voltage.

2.11  The Unterminated (Open) Transmission Line
59
When W4 reaches the open end of the line, the negative current cannot 
flow in the open circuit; so, a new wave must return the output voltage to 0. 
The leading edge of this wave W6 converts the remaining energy in the 
capacitance to current and stores energy in the magnetic field of the line. The 
full cycle is complete when the last or sixth wave reaches the source. Without 
losses, this wave sequence will repeat over and over.
Four waves (W3, W4, W5, and W6) constitute one full cycle of what might be 
called a resonance. Two waves place electric field energy on the line. Then the 
next two waves convert this energy from an electric field to a magnetic field. 
After two round trips of waves, the next electric field energy comes from the 
existing stored magnetic field, not from the voltage source. This assumes no 
losses.
The open transmission line behaves just like the LC tank circuit of circuit 
theory. The difference is that step voltages are involved instead of sine waves. 
The lesson is simple. Without a way to lose energy, an ideal open transmission 
line must oscillate. Note that the voltage pattern at points A and B are different.
INSIGHT
Consider a voltage V connected to an unterminated line. When the switch 
closes, the first wave of current is I
Z
V/
0. When the first energy reaches the end 
of the line, the energy cannot go off into space. The arriving energy continues to 
flow placing charge into the capacitance of the line. This requires a reflected 
voltage or second wave that moves toward the source at the speed of light. At 
this point, the reflected wave and the energy are moving in opposite directions. This 
contradicts the idea that each wave has a trailing voltage and current. This 
doubling of charge deposited on the line means that the voltage is being 
doubled along the entire line. Note that we can theoretically monitor the move-
ment of voltage but not the movement of energy. Note that Poynting’s vector 
behind the first reflected wave is 0 as there is no current flow and thus no 
magnetic field. The conversion of energy is not the flow of energy.
The wave action and the flow of energy are both moving at the speed of 
light. This implies a relative velocity of 2c which would seem to violate the 
rules of relativity. What is observed depends on the position and velocity of 
the observer. The apparent velocity does not involve moving matter and can 
be greater than c.
There have been observations in astronomy where the apparent velocity of 
an event appears greater than the speed of light. A parallel with ocean waves 
will help explain this phenomenon. When an ocean wave hits a sea wall at a 
slight angle, the return wave appears to move along the wall at a very high 
velocity. If the angle is 10° and the forward wave travels at 5 mph, the wave peak 
will seem to move along the wall at about 50 mph. This has been called a phase 
velocity. It does not represent the velocity of the energy flow.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
60
In the oscillating transmission line, the voltage source supplies no energy 
after the first round trip. The waves that are moving back and forth convert 
field energy back and forth between the magnetic and electric forms. In these 
waves, there is no net energy flow, only energy conversion. Remember, we 
showed that the initial wave carried exactly equal amounts of electric and 
magnetic field energy.
The fact that an ideal open transmission line oscillates when excited by a 
step wave should not be a surprise. There is inductance, capacitance, energy, 
and no intentional losses. In circuit theory, this is a tank circuit that sup-
ports a decaying sine wave. In this example the reflections are step func-
tions. We know that in practice there are losses and the voltage soon 
stabilizes at the level of the initial wave. When the logic state is changed 
back from a 1 to a 0, the voltage changes but the energy stored on the capaci-
tance of the line is not removed. This means that the line must oscillate. 
In circuit theory voltages just disappear from the circuit. The truth is that 
when energy is transported or is in transition it must eventually be dissi-
pated and this takes time.
When the logic switch shorts the open line, the leading edge of a wave 
converts the energy in the line capacitance to magnetic field energy which we 
can sense as current flow. This current does not come through the logic switch 
as there is no new energy added to the line. When this wave reaches the 
open end of the line, the reflection converts the magnetic field energy back 
to electric field energy which appears as a negative voltage. What we see is 
wave action that appears as a square wave of voltage that goes from +V to –V. 
It may seem strange, but when there is voltage there is no current and when 
there is current there is no voltage. As before, when there is energy on a trans-
mission line and there is no terminating resistor, the energy will transfer back 
and forth in a pattern we recognize as a resonance.
The presence of a negative voltage assumes the logic gate will accept this 
voltage without causing a diode to conduct. A conducting diode dissipates 
energy and this modifies the wave action. There is always the issue of whether 
this dissipation is within the rating of the integrated circuit. A parallel external 
diode would only provide protection if it conducted at a lower voltage. 
INSIGHT
The reflection process described above takes place along a transmission line. 
Energy is not reflected, only transferred back and forth between capacitance 
and inductance. When fields in free space reflect from a conducting surface, 
energy is not constrained by a conductor geometry; so there is no energy 
storage.

2.13  Voltage Doubling and Rise Time
61
A germanium diode conducts at a lower voltage than silicon. It is temperature 
limited and may not be an acceptable protection device.
The following sections discuss various transmission line configurations. 
The wave action is discussed mainly in terms of voltage transitions. The 
function of the individual waves is not always discussed. Note that some 
energy is dissipated when energy is moved in and out of a magnetic field. 
Some energy is dissipated when it is moved into and out of a capacitance.
2.12  ­The Short‐Circuited Transmission Line
The pattern of voltage waves is shown in Figure 2.8a and the corresponding 
pattern of current waves is shown in Figure 2.8b. Unlike the open‐circuit case, 
there is no oscillation and the current builds up in a step manner.
The initial voltage wave stores energy in both the line capacitance and 
inductance. The first reflected wave converts electric field energy to 
­magnetic field energy. This results in doubling the current flow behind the 
wave front. When this wave returns to the source, the voltage source must 
support three units of forward current: the initial current, the converted 
current, and the current for the next forward wave. After the next round 
trip of wave action, the current increases to 5 units. The arrows in the 
­figures indicate the wave direction and not the current direction which 
always points toward the short on the transmission line. This is another 
example of where the current flow direction and the wave directions are 
not the same.
A second representation of wave action for a shorted transmission line is 
shown in Figure 2.9.
2.13  ­Voltage Doubling and Rise Time
In Section 2.10, we saw that there is voltage doubling on an open transmission 
line. This occurred because we assumed zero rise time for the initial step 
voltage. With a finite rise time, a doubling of voltage can only occur if the line 
is longer than 2.5 times the distance traveled by the wave in the rise time. In 
many circuit board applications, line terminations are not required. Because 
clock rates are increasing, this problem needs to be addressed as each design is 
considered.
At 1 GHz, a wave travels about 15 cm in one clock cycle. The distance 
traveled in a rise time is about 1.5 cm. Voltage doubling will begin to 
appear if the line is longer than 3.7 cm. Since there can be about 1.5 cm of 
line inside a component, the maximum trace length before voltage 
www.ebook3000.com

Figure 2.8  The voltage pattern of waves on a short‐circuited transmission line. 
(a) Individual waves and (b) The sum of the waves.
X
V
Switch
(a)
Wave
1
1
V
2
3
4
X
V
Switch
(b)
Transmission line
Short
1
1
I
2
3
3I
4

2.13  Voltage Doubling and Rise Time
63
doubling occurs is about 0.7 cm. It is safe to say that termination resistors 
are needed above 1 GHz. If the forward wave is at half voltage, the reflec-
tion will double the voltage and no termination resistors are needed 
(see Section 2.16).
This doubling action is shown in Figure 2.10 where the line length is given 
in terms of the distance traveled by the wave. This figure can easily be scaled 
by increasing the line length and using this same factor on all of the rise 
times.
+V
+V
–V
2V
Z0
W8
W6
W5
Short
V
X
Z0
W7, I=
W4, I=
W1, I=
W3
W2
7
5 
3
1
W1+W4+W7
W1+W4
W1
–V
+V
t
–V
0
Wave action
Current buildup
Current
t
l
2V
Z0
V
Z0
Figure 2.9  The staircase current pattern for a shorted transmission line.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
64
2.14  ­Matched Shunt Terminated Transmission Lines
In Figure 2.11 an ideal voltage source V is connected to a length of 50‐ohm 
transmission line terminated in a matched (shunt) 50‐ohm resistor. When the 
switch X connects the transmission line to the resistor, the voltage at the switch 
drops to 2.5 V and a wave of −2.5 V travels back toward the source. At the source, 
this wave reflects and a wave of +2.5 V travels forward. At the load this voltage 
adds to the initial voltage making the total voltage 5 V. There is no reflection as 
the line impedance matches the termination resistor and all wave action stops.
This wave action occurs any time a circuit makes a request for energy from a 
remote point. The intervening transmission line determines the level of initial 
current and the time it takes for the request to be met. The voltage source 
could be a decoupling capacitor.
This method of line termination dissipates energy as long as the logic switch 
is closed. It is used on long lines where voltage doubling is a problem. When 
the switch is opened, a wave must travel toward the voltage source that sets the 
current to 0. In an ideal line the energy in motion before the switch opens can-
not be lost. In this case, the arriving energy is stored in the line capacitance. 
This means that the return wave doubles the voltage across the open switch 
which can destroy the switch. If the logic is to be disconnected from the trans-
mission line it should be done on the other side of any termination. This avoids 
any voltage doubling. Once the switch opens, the line has inductance, capaci-
tance, and energy and there is no terminating resistor. The result is an oscilla-
tion on a resonant transmission line.
1.0
1.0
X
20 ps
∞
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
10 ps
20 ps
40 ps
50 ps
A
Signals are measured at point A.
A 1-V signal is at the source.
Rise time
2.0
Figure 2.10  Rise times and the reflections from an unterminated transmission line.

2.14  Matched Shunt Terminated Transmission Lines
65
A second method of displaying wave action on this transmission line termi-
nation is shown in Figure 2.12.
When the switch closes, a wave W1 of amplitude V/2 enters the resistor. 
Wave W2 moves toward the voltage source and reflects. There is no wave 
transmission into a voltage source. The reflected wave W3 reverses the polarity 
of W2. When W3 reaches the resistor R there is no reflection as the resistor 
matches the characteristic impedance of the line. The transmission coefficient 
is unity and the wave W4 = W3 enters the resistor. Two waves of amplitude V/2 
have arrived at the resistor R making the final voltage equal to V.
If the transmission line characteristic impedance is higher than the load, 
then the reflected waves will be smaller and more wave action is required to 
bring energy to the load. This is shown in Figure 2.13.
If the resistor R is 25 ohms in Figure 2.11, then the wave into this resistor 
would be 0.666 V and the reflected wave would be −0.333 V. The current for 
this wave comes from the charge stored in the line capacitance. At the source, 
the reflection reverses the wave polarity and a wave of +0.333 V moves 
forward. At the load, another reflection and transmission takes place. The 
voltage at the load increases in the steps 0.666 V, 0.888 V, 0.962 V, 0.986 V, and 
so on. In most practical situations, it is not possible to see these step voltages. 
X
5 V
R
10cm
50Ω
50 Ω
W0 = 2.5V
W1 = –2.5 V
W2 = –2.5V
W0+ W2
W0
2.5V
5 V
0 0
Voltage
at R
Time
Figure 2.11  Matching shunt termination using a remote switch.
www.ebook3000.com

R
V
2 , W4
0
X
0
t
l
ρ=0
V
Z0
V
Wave action
2 , W1
0
0
W2
W3
V
– 2
V
+ 2
t
W1
V
V
Shunt termination
Voltage at R
2
W1+W4
Figure 2.12  A matching termination using a remote switch.
x
5 V
R
10cm
150 Ω
50 Ω
5 V
0
Time
0
Voltage
at R
1.25V
3.12V
4.06V
4.53 V
Figure 2.13  The voltage at a termination when there is a mismatch in impedances.

2.14  Matched Shunt Terminated Transmission Lines
67
What is seen is a smooth leading edge that appears exponential in character. 
Remember that wave character involving transmission lines is not the same 
as transient behavior described by linear circuit theory. In circuit theory, this 
exponential rise in voltage would be explained by assuming a parasitic series 
inductance or a parasitic shunt capacitance. In this example, the time it takes 
for the voltage to reach its final value involves the path length as well as the 
capacitance, the dielectric constant, and the inductance in the transmission 
path. Assuming the delay is the result of inductance alone is incorrect. It is 
the result of moving energy which is a very different picture. This wave action 
is shown in Figure 2.14.
X
0.666 V
V
Wave action
V
0
Volatge at A
l
0.88 V 0.962 V
0.986 V
0.666V
V
0.222V
0.074V
0.024V
0
A
25Ω
50Ω
+0.333V
–0.333V
+0.111 V
–0.111 V
t
t
Figure 2.14  The voltage at a termination when there is a mismatch in terminating 
impedance.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
68
2.15  ­Matched Series Terminated Transmission Lines
In Figure 2.15 an ideal voltage source is connected to a series switch, a line 
matching series resistor of 50 ohms, and a length of 50‐ohm line that is 
unterminated. When the switch connects a voltage to the line, a wave of 
amplitude V/2 travels down the line. At the open end of the line the voltage 
doubles to V. The reflected wave converts the magnetic field energy to elec-
tric field energy. When this wave reaches the matching resistor at the source, 
the voltage across the resistor is 0 and all wave action stops. This is an ideal 
transmission line configuration for short rise time logic. The matching series 
resistor must be located very close to the voltage source and the logic switch 
for this wave action to take place. If the integrated circuit is built with an 
internal series line‐matching resistor, then no external series matching resis-
tor is needed. When the switch returns the logic voltage to 0, the forward 
wave is –V/2. At the open circuit the wave voltage is doubled and the result-
ing voltage at the open circuit is 0 V.
X
Switch
R = Z0
V
V/2
Time
1
V
Z0
2
3
4
5
∞
Figure 2.15  A series (source) terminated transmission line.

2.16  Extending a Transmission Line
69
2.16  ­Extending a Transmission Line
Logic operations can involve extending transmission lines from a source of 
energy such as a decoupling capacitor through a switch to a remote gate G. In 
Section 3.2, we will discuss the fact that there are several sources of immediate 
energy in the IC. Assume for the moment that these energy sources are not 
present. The transmission line to the left of a switch is labeled d1. The line to 
the right is labeled d2 and stores no energy. This transmission line arrangement 
is shown in Figure 2.16. Initially the switch is open.
At the moment where d1 connects to d2, waves must propagate on each transmis-
sion line. The connected voltage drops to V1. The voltage of the wave going left is 
–(V–V1). The voltage of the wave going right is V1. The energy in d1 in a distance s 
must travel a distance 2s to get to the point s on d2. The initial energy in a distance s 
is ½CV2. The energy in motion is half magnetic. Therefore, in a distance 2s, the 
energy in the electric field is ¼CV2. This equation shows that V1 = V/2. This means 
that there is a wave growing in length traveling in both directions moving energy 
from d1 to d2. The wave moving left is depleting energy in d1 and this energy is mov-
ing right into d2. If the relative dielectric constant is 4, the wave velocities are c/2. A 
full understanding of what occurs requires a relativistic treatment.
The energy flowing into d2 comes from d1. Since the wave in d1 is traveling 
left and the energy in d2 moving right, the rise time for the forward wave in d2 
is doubled over the rise time in the initial switching action. This doubling of 
rise time does not usually occur as there is usually enough local energy in para-
sitic capacitance to fill in the gap. The wave that travels right into d2 carries 
energy forward. This energy flow as required is half electric and half magnetic. 
When the wave front traveling left reaches the voltage source, the wave reflects 
and a positive wave moves forward. This wave converts the magnetic field 
energy moving left into electric field energy that is stationary (stored in the line 
capacitance.) This wave action returns the energy to d1. Remember that the 
combined stationary E and H field along the line implies energy flow.
When the wave moving forward in d2 reaches the open end of the line, the 
wave reflects. The wave front converts arriving magnetic energy into electric 
field energy doubling the voltage on the line. This wave action places energy in 
the line capacitance of d2. When this wave reaches the forward wave, all wave 
activity stops as the currents are 0 and the voltages are equal. Wave action has 
moved a block of energy from d1 to d2 and supplied a block of energy to d1.
V
X
IC
G
d1
d2
Figure 2.16  A typical transmission line.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
70
At first glance this seems like a perfect solution where no terminating resis-
tor is needed. In practice, several logic elements can make a demand for energy 
at the same time. If these demands are made on one transmission line to an 
energy source the wave action does not stop as described above. A separate 
power trace for each logic line is impractical. The only viable solution is to 
provide an energy source in or at the IC. In this situation, the full voltage moves 
forward and voltage doubling can do damage. This is the reason why a series 
matching resistor is needed.
2.17  ­Skin Effect
A full treatment of skin effect on circuit traces is complex. An approximate 
picture of this effect can be helpful.
The textbook approach to skin effect assumes a plane electromagnetic field 
reflecting from an infinite conducting plane. The field is sinusoidal so that the 
surface currents that flow are also sinusoidal. The field intensity at any depth is 
a function of frequency, conductivity, and permeability. For copper the relative 
permeability is unity. A skin depth at a given frequency is the depth where the 
field intensity is reduced by a factor of 1/e or 36.8%. The frequency that is used 
when logic is involved is obviously a compromise. The frequency that is often 
used is 1/πτR where τR is the rise time of the logic.
The attenuation factor for an infinite conducting plane and a plane sinusoi-
dal wave is
	
A
e
h	
(2.19)
INSIGHT
Wave action that converts electric field to magnetic field poses a philosophical 
problem. We are used to thinking of electric field energy in a capacitance as 
being static. An increment of electric field energy is not a problem. Thinking of 
an increment of magnetic field associated with an increment of current as being 
static is not as obvious, yet that is an important part of understanding wave 
action on transmission lines. The leading edge of a wave converts an increment 
of electric field energy into an increment of magnetic field which implies an 
increment of current. Having an increment of static current out in the middle of 
a transmission line is counter intuitive and yet that is what happens.
The movement of energy requires both an electric field and a magnetic field 
which are static. These fields are the energy in motion which we cannot see or 
measure directly. This phenomenon can only occur when there are conductors. 
I am reminded of the flashlight where nothing changes but energy moves. 
There is a static electric and magnetic field.

71
Problem Set
where h is the depth and
	
(
)
α
σ
= πµ
½
0
.
f
	
(2.20)
The permeability μ0 of space is 4π × 10−7 T m/A. The conductivity of copper 
is σ = 0.580 × 108 A/V m and f is frequency.
When h = 1/α the field intensity is reduced by a factor of 36.8%. This is called 
one skin depth. For copper at 1 MHz, the skin depth is 0.65 µm. At 100 MHz, 
the depth is 0.065 µm. This approximation is a reminder of just how little of the 
copper gets used in a single transmission. If the copper is plated this is where 
the initial current flows.
It is interesting to point out that a static voltage without current flow along a 
transmission line requires a surface charge. These charges are the first to move 
when wave action takes place. Just a reminder, electron velocity in a transmis-
sion line is only centimeters per second.
Problem Set
1	 If the dielectric constant increases by 2%, what is the change in characteris-
tic impedance?
2	 A transmission line is 10 cm long. The dielectric constant is 4 at 10 MHz 
and 3.5 at 1 GHz. What is the arrival time difference for sine waves?
3	 Show that 1 − τ = ρ
4	 A 5‐V wave on a 50‐ohm line terminates on a 60‐ohm line. What is the 
voltage of the transmitted wave? What is the reflected voltage?
5	 A 50‐ohm line terminates in two 50‐ohm lines. What are the reflected and 
transmitted voltages if the initial voltage is 5 V?
6	 What is the field intensity at two skin depths?
INSIGHT
Transmission line processes are not represented by circuit theory. When a 
voltage is connected to a transmission line, the source can only react to the 
characteristic impedance. Until a first reflected wave returns, the source cannot 
react further. This is not the case in circuit theory where the source senses the 
entire network in the first moment. We deny this idea of instantaneous reac-
tion and yet we do not fault circuit theory. The way of the future requires 
some changes in approach because time delay is a real issue that must be 
faced in moving energy.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
72
7	 An unterminated transmission line is oscillating. The dielectric constant is 
3.5. What is the frequency if the length of the line is 5 cm?
8	 A request for energy is made over a 50‐ohm line that is 4 cm long. The 
dielectric constant is 3.5. The logic is 5 cm away. Assume two round trips 
are needed. What is the delay?
Glossary
Characteristic impedance  The ratio of initial voltage to initial current on a 
transmission line. On an ideal line the ratio is constant until a reflected wave 
returns to the source (Section 2.4).
Conductivity  A measure of a material to conduct current. It is the reci­
procal of resistivity. The resistance of a conductor is R = ρl/A where ρ is 
resistivity, l is the length of the conductor, and A is the cross‐sectional 
area (Section 2.17).
Exponential  Growth or decay of physical phenomena where the activity is 
proportional to the amount present involves a natural constant e which is 
2.718. The voltage on a capacitor discharged by a resistor is said to be 
exponential decay (Section 2.14).
Flux  Usually a representation of the magnetic B field. Line density indicates 
field intensity.
Free space  Ideally a vacuum removed from conductors or charges. Practically, 
the space around a circuit not near conductors.
Ground plane  A conducting surface usually larger than any associated 
components. On a circuit board, it can be a conducting layer (Section 2.3).
Leading edge  The voltage pattern at the front of a wave.
Line  A transmission line. A trace running parallel to a conductor.
Lumped parameter  A circuit representation of a conductor geometry 
where distributed parameters are represented by series and parallel 
elements. On a transmission line, every increment of the line has inductance 
and capacitance. The lumped parameter model is a series of inductors 
interspersed with shunt capacitors (Section 2.3).
Matching termination  Usually a resistor equal to the characteristic 
impedance of a transmission line. A terminating transmission line with a 
matching characteristic impedance.
Reflection coefficient  The ratio of a reflected wave amplitude to a forward 
wave amplitude at a transmission line termination. For a transmission line 
this ratio can cover the range −1 to +1. At a short circuit the reflection 
coefficient is −1. For an open circuit the reflection coefficient is +1. This 
means the voltage is doubled (Section 2.10).

73
Glossary
Relative permittivity  The dielectric constant.
Resonance  A condition where energy is in constant transition between two 
storage mechanisms. On a transmission line the energy transfers back and 
forth between electric and magnetic fields. On a pendulum, energy 
transfers back and forth between energy of motion and energy of position 
(Section 1.11).
Rise time  The length of time it takes a wave to transition from 10 to 90% of 
final value. It is usually a voltage measure. Other definitions are frequently 
used.
Series termination  A termination, usually a resistor, that is in series with the 
source voltage on a transmission line.
Shunt termination  A termination that is placed across a transmission line 
usually at the end of the line.
Skin depth  A measure of how far into a conductor surface currents 
penetrate. One skin depth implies the current falls to 1/e or 36.8% of the 
surface value.
Skin effect  A phenomena that occurs in conductors where changing currents 
tend to flow on the surface of conductors. The measure is made for sine 
waves but applies to any waveform (Section 2.17).
Step voltage  A voltage that changes value in zero time. This is of course 
impossible as the energy stored in parasitic capacitance would have to 
appear in zero time and this would require infinite power. In practice a step 
voltage has a finite rise time (Section 2.11).
Termination  The impedance at the ends of a transmission line. A termination 
can be an open circuit, a short circuit, or a resistor.
Transmission coefficient  The ratio between a transmitted wave and an 
arriving wave at a transmission line termination. The coefficient can cover 
the range 0–2. At a short circuit, the coefficient is 0. At an open circuit, the 
coefficient is 2, which means the voltage is doubled (Section 2.10).
Transmission line  A conductor geometry that supports the flow of 
electromagnetic energy.
Unterminated line  A transmission line terminated at an open circuit. The 
actual termination is a small capacitance that can modify the leading edge of 
an arriving wave.
Wave  A transition in voltage that travels along a transmission line usually 
characterized by a leading edge followed by a steady voltage. A wave can 
carry, deposit, or transform energy. The term wave is also used for sinusoidal 
transmissions where there is no leading edge. Waves can be confined by 
conductors or they can move in free space. There are wave patterns that 
appear stationary. A steady pattern moving in or on a media can also be 
called a wave.
www.ebook3000.com

2  Transmission Lines—Part 1
74
Answers to Problems
1	 The capacitance increases by 2% and the characteristic impedance drops 
by 1.414%.
2	 42 ps.
4	 τ = 1.091, ρ = 0.091.
5	 Both the reflected and transmitted waves are 3.333 V.
6	 One skin depth is 36.8%. The square of this percentage is 13.5%.
7	 802 MHz or four different wave patterns.
8	 The distance travelled is 27 cm at a velocity of 160 m/µs. The time is 1.7 ns.

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
75
3
3.1  ­Introduction
There is no polarity associated with field energy. One field does not cancel 
another. Consider the wakes of two boats on a lake. The waves will cross each 
other without any cancellation. Currents and voltages add and subtract in cir­
cuit theory and this represents one of the basic differences in how electrical 
phenomena is viewed. Another problem is that a rise in electric field intensity 
might occur while the magnetic field intensity is decreasing. This means that 
the term “rise time” must be used carefully. It would have been better to refer 
to transition time instead of rise time but that would defy convention. In the 
discussions that follow, it will be convenient to stress waveforms in terms of 
voltage. Keep in mind that there will usually be an associated current wave­
form present. These waveforms are drawn two‐dimensionally and what they 
represent are three‐dimensional fields. For traces on a circuit board the fields 
are usually cylindrical. When the path spreads out there are reflections and 
delays. This spreading of waves is three dimensional and not easily shown on 
the printed page. When there is spreading, there can be problems. The reader 
is asked to use his or her imagination to picture the wave action as outlined by 
the current path. The fact that the field lines are perpendicular to the direction 
of wave motion adds to the difficulty.
3.2  ­Energy Sources
Circuit boards can be operated from batteries, utility power, or even solar cells. 
In many cases the energy is supplied by an external power supply and brought 
to the circuit board on a cable or through a board‐edge connection. There is 
often an on‐board voltage regulator that conditions the voltage to the require­
ments of the circuitry. Converters are available that can supply different voltages. 
A shunt capacitor is often placed across active voltage sources to ensure 
Transmission Lines—Part 2
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
76
stability and supply peaks of current if needed. The energy source we concen­
trate on is the simple decoupling capacitor. This capacitor is usually supplied 
energy over a transmission line from a nearby power supply.
The voltage that is switched onto transmission lines implies a supply of 
energy at the point of switching and this is the energy that is discussed in this 
section. In the analog world, wiring of a few inches to a regulated voltage would 
be entirely adequate. In logic, the problem is much more complex. It is impor­
tant to accept the fact that initial current is controlled by the characteristic 
impedance of any connecting transmission lines. Fortunately, there are several 
immediate sources of energy near points of demand. This energy is stored in 
the capacitance of “connected” transmission lines.
A logic switch is usually a part of the die in the integrated circuit. In the die 
there may be other logic lines connected to the power potential through logic 
switches. Some of these lines extend through wiring to pads and out on to the 
board. Each of these connected paths is a transmission line storing electric 
field energy. In fact, many of these lines are physically no different than the 
lines that are usually labeled “power.” Energy taken from a connected logic 
trace introduces interference on that line. Nature pays no attention to the labels 
we attach to conductors. We, on the other hand, have to look beyond labels to 
see what is happening.
A second source of energy can be the capacitance between the power and 
ground planes if they are used. Drawing from this source of energy adds inter­
ference to logic using this same space. The third source of energy are any 
decoupling capacitors mounted on the board near the integrated circuit. If these 
local energy sources were not available, then a logic switch would connect two 
transmission lines together. One line might lead to a voltage source and one is 
a logic line. At this midpoint, the voltage would drop by about 50%. Because 
there are these local sources of energy, any drop in voltage is moderated. These 
sources of energy are shown in Figure 3.1.
×
Connected trace
Driven trace
Connected trace
Power plane/
ground plane
Logic
switches
To power source
Decoupling
capacitor
Via
o
Figure 3.1  The first energy sources when a logic trace is connected to the nearest power 
conductor.

3.4  What Is a Capacitor?
77
3.3  ­The Ground Plane/Power Plane 
as an Energy Source
A limited amount of embedded energy is available from a ground/power plane pair. 
The capacitance is εRε0A/h, where A is the area and h is the spacing. The energy that 
flows into a central point from parallel conducting planes is pulled from concentric 
circles or rings. The characteristic impedance of a ring falls off inversely propor­
tional to the radius. To increase the energy storage, a closer conductor spacing plus 
a higher dielectric constant is possible. The wave velocity falls off as the square root 
of the dielectric constant and this slows down access to this energy. The best way to 
increase the energy storage without adding delay is to decrease the conductor spac­
ing. The characteristic impedance at the entry point will still be approximately 
50 ohms. A single decoupling capacitor can outperform this energy source and 
provide a 3‐ohm source impedance. The economics are obvious. Accept any energy 
that is available but rely on decoupling capacitors as the principle energy source.
A power plane using the entire board is not recommended as traces using the 
ground/power space will couple to noise. Reducing the spacing between con­
ducting planes makes it impractical to control the characteristic impedance of 
traces using this same space. At first glance, it seems like a good idea to make 
double use of this space. The problem is that space for logic transmission 
should be dedicated and the space used for energy storage must be shared.
3.4  ­What Is a Capacitor?
INSIGHT
A capacitor is a component that stores electric field energy. It is a single‐port 
device which means it cannot supply energy and be recharged at the same 
time. Capacitors are available with various entry configurations. Regardless of 
how the component is designed, it is usually mounted as a stub on a transmission 
line and this alone limits its performance. The water analogy on a hydroelectric 
dam makes the point. Water is never supplied and taken from the same conduit. 
If you want more water on demand you provide a larger conduit. The size of the 
lake does not change the flow rate. This is also true for capacitors. The initial flow 
is not controlled by capacitance but by the characteristic impedance of three 
paths: the path requesting energy, the path in the capacitor, and the path to the 
termination.
Even if capacitors could be made using two ports, the problem is that a high 
dielectric constant slows the flow of energy from the second port to the point of 
demand. This points out that the problem is much more complex than just 
capacitor geometry.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
78
The simplest capacitors are formed by placing a dielectric between two con­
ductors. The capacitance is a function of conductor area, dielectric thickness, 
and the dielectric constant. Small size is achieved by using thin dielectrics 
with high dielectric constants. For example, BST (Bismuth Strontium Titanate) 
can have dielectric constants as high as 12,000. The capacitance can vary with 
voltage and temperature, but these variations are not considered important 
in decoupling applications where the exact amount of stored energy is not 
important.
Capacitors are basic to all circuit design. They serve to block dc, to shape 
frequency responses, to reject noise, and to supply energy. On a board dedi­
cated to processing logic, decoupling capacitors are the principle source of 
immediate energy.
We have already discussed the fact that it takes both inductance and capaci­
tance to move energy along a transmission line. A capacitor has a series induct­
ance that can be measured by observing its natural frequency. In circuit theory, 
this inductance might be considered a parasitic element. In logic, this induct­
ance plus capacitance makes up a transmission line that can move energy. 
In circuit theory, the reactance of a stub depends on line length, frequency, the 
dielectric constant.2 In logic, the movement of energy from a capacitor is not 
defined by its stub parameters (reactances) but by the entire transmission path 
from the capacitor to the point of energy demand. The traces that connect 
the capacitor to a load are an impedance mismatch the flow of energy from the 
capacitor requires considerable wave action. The characteristic impedance of 
INSIGHT
An important factor that is often not considered is that field energy in a dielectric 
moves slower than it does in air. If the dielectric constant is 10,000, then energy 
travels at 1% the speed of light. This means that a capacitor that is 0.1 cm long 
appears to be electrically 10 cm long which implies a capacitor acts like an 
unterminated transmission line stub.1 Wave action that moves stored energy 
from a stub must make many round trips on both the stub and on the connecting 
transmission line.
1  Bill Herndon, working at Motorola in Phoenix Arizona, in the early 1960s proposed that capacitors 
are transmission lines. This is not a new idea.
2  The “sinusoidal response” of a transmission line or stub usually means the ratio of current 
flow to voltage at one frequency and all transient effects are ignored. In logic, the opposite is true. 
The transient behavior of transmission lines is important and the steady state behavior is 
assumed to be unimportant. The ratio of first voltage to first current is not the same as the steady 
state ratio.

3.5  Turning Corners
79
a capacitor at its terminals is about 3 ohms. If the rise time is long enough then 
wave action will not be apparent. Delays in moving energy are usually blamed 
on series inductance which is an over simplification.
In applications where a group of transmission lines carry parallel bit streams, 
the demand for energy can be high. Increasing the capacitance of a single 
decoupling capacitor will not usually support the step demands for more 
energy. A solution that is effective is to cluster a group of small capacitors at the 
integrated circuit. These parallel sources can provide the initial energy that no 
other conductor geometry can supply. An obvious help is to reduce the charac­
teristic impedance of the line that connects the decoupling capacitors to the IC. 
If the characteristic impedance of the trace is reduced from 50 to 25 ohms, it 
will double the energy provided by each wave. The best solution is to mount 
capacitors at the IC pad and limit the transmission path to the die/pad 
distance.
3.5  ­Turning Corners
There is a sense that there is “mass and velocity” associated with any energy 
flow. This is a common feeling with no foundation. In Section 2.7, the point 
was made that the electric and magnetic fields behind a wave front are static 
and yet the coupled fields are carrying energy at the speed of light.
Many efforts have been made to detect reflections when a transmission line 
turns a right angle. Assumptions have been made that the traces should follow 
an arc or at least the sharp edges should be chamfered. There is no evidence 
that the wave action is affected by these efforts. This understanding must be 
extended to other minor transitions in transmission. It also applies to via tran­
sitions through board layers provided that the return current path is carefully 
controlled. Right‐angle transitions are not the problem. The spreading of fields 
is far more important. Another way to look at this type of transition is to notice 
the difference in path length as energy turns the corner. For a 5‐mil trace width 
INSIGHT
Step waves move energy in a transmission line in electric and magnetic fields. 
In a sinusoidal analysis where reactances are involved, the energy flow 
involves phase relationships between voltages and currents. Mixing disci-
plines leads to confusion. A capacitor has all the physical attributes of 
an unterminated transmission line, namely, two conductors separated by a 
dielectric. A capacitor is a transmission line with no access to its open end. 
Treating it as a transmission line allows all the paths of energy flow on a 
­circuit board to be treated the same way.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
80
the path length difference at the edges of the trace is only 5 mils. This is one 
wavelength at 2300 GHz. It is not surprising that we cannot see a reflection at 
a right‐angle bend.
3.6  ­Practical Transmissions
The intent in logic is to move energy from points of storage onto transmission 
lines. These transmission lines terminate on logic gates and the voltages at these 
gates will then control an action in an integrated circuit at a next clock time.
As we have shown, the first energy for a transmission comes from several 
sources (see Figure 3.1). The next level of complication relates to transitions in 
the characteristic impedance as waves progress back from the die to the volt­
age source and forward on a trace to a second pad and on IC wiring to a nearby 
logic gate. The voltage source in the following figure is ideal, but in practice it 
could be a decoupling capacitor with a 3‐ohm characteristic impedance.
In this figure, there are about 100 waves shown, most of them in the short 
wiring lengths in the ICs. These waves travel in the space between a conductor 
and an unspecified return path. The vertical axis is time (approximately). 
Note that the wave velocities vary depending on the dielectric constant and the 
transit time depends on the path length. The voltage at the open gate is the sum 
of all the waves that exit to the right on the diagram. The arrival time depends 
on the path taken. Obviously, the wave action continues beyond the 100 waves 
shown with ever‐decreasing wave amplitudes.
In Figure 3.1, it takes wave action to move energy inside an IC. This means 
that the total wave action is even more complex than the wave action shown in 
Figure 3.2. If all the transmission segments were 50 ohms, then there would be 
far fewer transitions. This example shows that higher bit rates will require more 
attention to detail both in IC packaging and on the board pad and trace struc­
ture. The reason is simple. All of this wave activity results in a delay in moving 
information. The energy is available but it is delayed as a result of wave action.
INSIGHT
A delay in the arrival of a logic signal can be a problem. It is sometimes blamed 
on a single parameter such as an inductance or a capacitance. In reality, a delay 
is often the result of hundreds of reflections and transmissions. Faster logic will 
not function unless these transitions are considered. It only works when an 
arriving wave converts energy to an electric field and no other wave arrives.
On a circuit board, the wave actions described above rarely lasts more than a 100 ns. 
For GHz logic, picoseconds are counted and every aspect of delay is important. 
A reminder: There are three orders of magnitude between 100 ns and 100 ps.

3.7  Radiation and Transmission Lines
81
In Figure 3.2, a switch connected a logic line to 0 V and opened the connec­
tion to the supply voltage. The energy stored on the line begins to move. The 
wave action that follows must eventually dissipate the stored energy in switch 
and trace resistances. Some of this energy will be radiated. None of this energy 
can be returned to the source. This shows again that energy flow is a one‐way 
“downhill” path.
3.7  ­Radiation and Transmission Lines
Radiation in the form of a pulse can occur in nature. Examples are lightning, 
ESD, and solar flares. Step waves are the type of signals that radiate from trans­
mission lines. Electrical engineering has methods of describing any electrical 
event in terms of its spectrum. Measurements are made by scanning the arriv­
ing field energy using narrow‐band filters. In the logic systems we consider, the 
signals have a frequency content that is determined by rise times and clock 
rates. Repetitive signals are characterized by signals at the fundamental clock 
rate and its harmonics. A single step function is characterized by a continuous 
spectrum with an upper frequency characterized as having a frequency of 
1/πτR, where τR is the rise time. See the comments made in Appendix B.
At 1 MHz, a wavelength in space is 300 m. Unless a significant effort is made, 
circuits do not radiate very much energy at this low a frequency. A 100‐MHz 
square wave has frequency content well above 500 MHz and radiation efficiency 
N.B.
The delay caused by wave action involves the transitions located in the IC 
between the die and the circuit board pads. A part of the problem involves the 
use of shared commons to limit the pin count. Shared commons are not neces-
sarily bad as this is what happens for traces over a conducting plane. What is 
important is that signal spaces be kept separate and this implies that the return 
currents use dedicated paths on the same conductor. There are many ways to 
configure a single return conductor so the fields use a different space. As an 
example, a single round conductor with multipole slots could support say eight 
separate conductors forming eight transmission lines. I did not say this was easy 
to do. I mention this because making an IC faster does not mean this speed can 
be used. Speed is a system problem that requires the entire transmission path 
for each signal be controlled. The first change in approach is to provide energy 
storage inside the IC. This energy can be replaced at a slower pace from outside. 
The second change is to control the characteristic impedance of each fast logic 
line that connects the IC to the pad structure. After this, it becomes the designer’s 
problem to complete the transmission paths on the board.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
82
increases as the square of frequency. This means that at this clock rate, the 
spectrum will allow for radiation. Errors in layout that invite board radiation are 
discussed in Chapter 5.
Many products in common use today function based on receiving radiation 
in the range 1 MHz to 10 GHz. Uncontrolled radiation could cause real prob­
lems for these products. For this reason, permitted levels of radiation are con­
trolled by government regulations. A cell phone is expected to radiate but only 
over a controlled portion of the spectrum. Circuit boards intended for logic 
operations must pass strict radiation tests before they can be placed on the 
open market. These rules are important as the number of circuits in operation 
that radiate or receive radiation at any one time in an urban area can number 
in the thousands. The count is growing exponentially. The many circuit boards 
operating in a modern automobile is an example of the problem.
Coaxial transmission lines are used to confine fields. On a circuit board, 
transmission lines are not coaxial and some fields extend above surface traces 
0
Start
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
l
(t)
V
X
100 Ω
100 Ω
Open
W12
W11
W10
W9
W8
W7
W6
W5
W4
W3
W2
W1
50Ω
Figure 3.2  Wave action for a simple logic transmission. Note: Each wave is on a different 
time scale.

3.8  Multilayer Circuit Boards
83
and along trace edges. Regulations do allow for some radiation. Cables that 
enter a board can bring in field energy or provide a path for energy to leave the 
board.
Radiation is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
3.8  ­Multilayer Circuit Boards
Component density and pin counts on circuit boards have risen steadily. This, 
in turn, has resulted in the need for multilayer boards to accommodate the 
large number of interconnecting traces, most of which are transmission lines. 
Trace widths have dropped to accommodate larger trace counts and also to 
reduce board size. This need has reduced the diameter of drilled holes and 
made it more difficult to solder plate inner surfaces.
Board manufacturers can supply multilayer boards with layer counts over 60.
The manufacturing process involves plating and etching of copper layers 
separated by insulators. Many of the layers are laminates (cores) that are drilled 
and plated before being bonded together in a stack. Bonding a stack usually 
involves layers of partially cured epoxy called prepreg. Bonding of a layup takes 
place under pressure at an elevated temperature. A four‐layer board is made 
up of a core placed between sheets of prepreg and copper. Figure 3.3 shows 
a four‐layer board layup.
INSIGHT
Radiation from a circuit board transmission line only occurs at the leading 
edge of a wave. In effect, the leading edge is a moving transmitting antenna. 
Of course, if the leading edge is spread out over the transmission path then 
the entire path radiates. The energy moving behind the leading edge requires 
a static electric and magnetic field that does not radiate. Remember that wave 
direction and energy flow direction can be opposites.
Copper foil
Copper foil
Copper clad
laminate
Prepreg layer
Prepreg layer
Dielectric
Core
Figure 3.3  A four‐layer board layup.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
84
There are several ways to assign functions to these layers. The core material 
is thick and separates the top two conducting layers from the bottom two 
­conducting layers. This means that the outer logic layers are probably not 
going to cross‐couple. One arrangement assigns ground to the outer layers and 
logic and power to the inner layers. If power is distributed on traces then power 
planes are not required. A second arrangement assigns ground to the core 
­conductors and logic and power to the outer layers. This has the advantage that 
traces make direct connections to components. These two arrangements are 
shown in Figure 3.4.
Six‐layer boards are built using the four‐layer structure with added layers 
of prepreg and copper on the top and bottom surfaces. The core laminate 
thickness is adjusted to control the overall board thickness. The conducting 
layers can be used for traces, ground planes, power planes, or a mix of these 
functions. There are good arguments for limiting power planes to the areas 
under large IC structures. The power space under an IC is apt to be noisy and 
any logic sharing this space will couple to this interference. Power connec­
tions can always be made using traces. This geometry controls fields and 
limits cross‐coupling. Figure 3.5 shows an acceptable layer assignment for 
a six‐layer board.
The core layers can be ground planes and all the remaining layers can be 
a mix of logic and ground or power planes.
Ground
Logic/power
Logic/power
Ground
Ground
Ground
Logic/power 
Logic/power 
(a)
(b)
Prepreg
Prepreg
Prepreg
Prepreg
Core
Core
Figure 3.4  (a) and (b) Two four‐layer board configurations.

3.10  Layer Crossings
85
3.9  ­Vias
Vias are plated holes that make electrical connections between conductors on 
different layers of a circuit board. It is common practice to connect a via to a 
pad at each conducting layer. Buried or embedded vias are not visible from the 
outside surfaces. Blind vias are visible from the outside surface but where 
the center holes are blocked by a conductor or plating.
The hole in a via is not a passage for fields. E field lines must terminate 
perpendicular to a conducting surface and can only exist if there is a potential 
difference. There is usually no potential difference across the walls of a small 
hollow conducting cylinder. It is safe to say that all wave activity and current 
flow involving vias will stay on their outer surfaces. Next, we treat trace transi­
tions between layers using vias. These transitions are often a source of 
radiation.
3.10  ­Layer Crossings
When a logic line crosses between layers, the return path for current must be 
provided that controls the characteristic impedance. If this path is not pro­
vided, the field will spread out and the return current will use all available 
­surfaces. The result will be reflection and radiation from the board edges. 
This problem is shown in Figure 3.6a. If a return path via is correctly posi­
tioned as in Figure 3.6b, this problem is significantly reduced.
Power
Ground
Short logic
and power
Short logic
and ground
Logic and
ground
Logic and
power
Figure 3.5  An acceptable six‐layer board configuration.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
86
Figure 3.6  (a) A via crossing conducting planes with radiation and (b) Two vias crossing 
conducting planes.
Ground
(a)
Ground
Field
Via
Via
Radiation
Trace
Input IF
IR
IR
IR
IR
IR
IR
IR
IR
IR
IF
Trace
To logic
IF
Via
Trace
(b)
Ground
Via
Input
Ground
IR
IR
IF
IF
IR
IF

3.12  Stripline and the Power Plane
87
The spacing between vias at a layer crossing controls the characteristic 
impedance of the transmission path. The characteristic impedance of parallel 
round conductors is
	
Z
d
r
0
12
276
R
log
	
(3.1)
where d is the spacing between via centers and r is the radius of the via. 
If  d/r = 2.2 and the relative dielectric constant is 3.5, the characteristic 
impedance will be 50 ohms.
3.11  ­Vias and Stripline
Stripline is a trace between two conducting planes. Field energy is carried in 
parallel paths. At the transition to and from the microstrip, vias are needed to 
merge the two field paths into one. If the transition is handled incorrectly, 
some of the field energy will not merge correctly and the result can be board 
edge radiation. The use of vias to merge the field is shown in Figure 3.7. As rise 
times shorten this merging problem becomes more critical.
3.12  ­Stripline and the Power Plane
If stripline is placed between a ground and power plane, the merging of fields 
at the microstrip transition requires that the return current path use decou­
pling capacitors. This is a requirement at both ends of the stripline. Sharing 
decoupling capacitors can result in cross‐coupling. The current path is usually 
convoluted and this can result in reflections and delays. This is the further 
argument for using two ground planes in stripline transmissions. This return 
current path in a stripline transition is shown in Figure 3.8.
INSIGHT
When a trace crosses through conducting planes, the path taken by the return 
current must be provided by positioning vias. Gaps must be provided at each 
conductor crossing. Sharing gaps invites fields to share the same space and this 
is direct cross‐coupling.
Note that a typical trace spacing from a ground plan is 5 mils. This means that 
a via providing a return current path should maintain characteristic impedance 
to be effective. If the return current path is 1 inch away, the field will no longer 
be controlled and there will likely be board edge radiation. Vias are cheap and 
should be provided.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
88
For multilayer boards with many stripline traces, a lack of field control can 
result in very noisy transmissions and board edge radiation. As rise times 
shorten, the problem will only get worse.
3.13  ­Stubs
A stub is a branch transmission line usually of limited length. A stub is 
sometimes used to connect a logic signal to a second nearby location. 
If the stub length is less than two and a half times the rise‐time distance 
there will be little impact on transmission. Beyond this distance, the 
reflection at the junction will reduce the forward transmission to one 
third and many reflections are needed before the logic level is acceptable. 
The preferred method is to connect the two terminal points in tandem 
and avoid the stub. There might be a difference in arrival time but there will 
be no delay caused by multiple reflections. The delay caused by a midpoint 
stub is shown in Figure 3.9.
The wave voltage after the matching resistor is V/2. When the forward wave 
reaches the stub, there are three waves: two forward waves and a reflected 
wave. Each forward wave has an amplitude of V/6. When a wave reaches the 
open end of the transmission line the voltage doubles to V/3. There are now 
Ground-to-ground
Via
Field
Microstrip
Ground plane
Ground plane
Field
Field
Stripline
Figure 3.7  Using vias in the transition from stripline to microstrip.
G
G
P
S
S
P
D
C
Via
Signal trace
Planes
Signal trace
Decoupling capacitor
Dielectric
Dielectric
Planes
Return
signal current
Signal current
Return signal
current
Figure 3.8  The return current path for stripline when a power plane is used.

3.15  Characteristic Impedance of Traces
89
three reflected waves returning toward the source. It will take several round 
trips and a dozen or more waves before the waves attenuate and a voltage of 
value near V reaches the two open ends. Without the stub, the arrival time is 
20 ps. With the stub the arrival time is about 100 ps. If arrival time is critical 
then stubs are a mistake.
3.14  ­Traces and Ground (Power) Plane Breaks
If the return current for a transmission line must detour to get around a break 
in a ground plane, the break will act as a double stub and reflect energy. The 
only “fix” for this situation is a ground strap that completes the return current 
path near the trace crossing. A different layout is preferred. If the break is 
between a power and ground plane, a decoupling capacitor at the crossing 
point is needed but this situation should be avoided.
3.15  ­Characteristic Impedance of Traces
The control of characteristic impedance in a logic board layout is a focal 
point in design. In many layouts, trace lengths are short enough where ter­
minating resistors are not required. A measure of characteristic impedance 
is still used to control manufacturing processes. It is an excellent quality 
control method that gives repeatability in both manufacturing and board 
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
00
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
10 ps
10 ps
R
V
X
A
Voltage at C
Time (ps)
Rise time of V=10 ps
Stub
B
10 ps
S
C
∞
∞
Figure 3.9  The delay caused by a stub on a transmission line.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
90
performance. Controlling this one parameter does not guarantee that boards 
from different manufacturers will perform equally well.
There are several parameters that control characteristic impedance. For a 
microstrip, there are trace width and thickness, trace spacing, and dielectric 
constant. The manufacturer is limited in several ways. For example, trace 
thickness depends on available copper laminates that requires etching, plating, 
and cleaning. Spacings depend on the prepreg thicknesses that are available. 
The dielectric constant can vary with location depending on the grade of epoxy 
selected for cores and prepreg. This means that the board manufacturer must 
be consulted before parameters can be set. There are also economic considera­
tions that must be considered. Smaller trace dimensions raise the cost of drill­
ing holes and require tighter controls. The manufacturer must also allow for 
rejects in his pricing.
The following curves for different trace configurations are intended as a 
guide. Some of the configurations are rarely used and not all possible geome­
tries are included. There are many computer programs available on the inter­
net that can be used to calculate characteristic impedances. There are often 
variables that are not specified. Dielectrics can partially embed the trace. There 
are often conformal coatings that can affect the impedance. Since the dielectric 
constant varies with frequency, one number does not tell the full story. Step 
functions have a spectrum and this means that the leading edge can be affected 
in a nonlinear way.
The equations that are given below are approximations. Equations 
in the literature will vary depending on the accuracy desired and the range 
of the variables. The board manufacturer will have optimized his manu­
facturing techniques to control impedances. The curves are presented 
so  that the reader can see how the characteristic impedance relates to 
various parameters. This information is not obvious by looking at the 
equations.
3.16  ­Microstrip
The traces on the outer layers of a logic board are called microstrips. 
The parameters for this trace geometry are shown in Figure 3.10.
The characteristic impedance of a microstrip is given by Equation 3.1
	
Z
h
w
0
12
87
1 41
5 98
0 8
1
.
ln
.
.
R
	
(3.2)
where 0.1 < w/h < 3 and where εR < 15.
There are several ways of presenting the relationship between parameters. 
Figures 3.11, 3.12, and 3.13 show the trace thicknesses of 1.5, 2, and 2.7 mils. 

3.16  Microstrip
91
In each figure, curves of characteristic impedance 40, 50, and 60 ohms are 
shown. The curves show that if all the dimensions are scaled, the characteristic 
impedance is nearly constant. The one parameter that is not controlled by the 
thickness of available materials is trace width.
The parameters that are used for the embedded microstrip are shown in 
Figure 3.14.
Dielectric
Trace
Conducting plane
w
t
h
Figure 3.10  Microstrip geometry.
60Ω
50Ω
40Ω
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Dielectric height h (mil) 
Trace width w (mil)
Trace thickness t =1.5 mils
Dielectric constant=4 
Figure 3.11  Microstrip parameters. Constant characteristic impedances for trace thickness 
of 1.5 mils.
www.ebook3000.com

60Ω
50Ω
40Ω
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Dielectric height h (mil)
Trace width w (mil)
Trace thickness t =2 mil
Dielectric constant =4 
Figure 3.12  Microstrip parameters. Constant characteristic impedances for a trace 
thickness of 2 mils.
60Ω
50Ω
40Ω 
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Dielectric height h (mil)
Trace width w (mil)
Trace thickness t= 2.7 mil
Dielectric constant= 4
Figure 3.13  Microstrip parameters. Constant characteristic impedances for a trace 
thickness of 2.7 mils.

3.17  Centered Stripline
93
The equations for characteristic impedance for an embedded microstrip is 
given by
	
Z
h
w
0
12
56
5 98
0 8
1
R
ln
.
.
	
(3.3)
where h1 is >1.2h and εR < 15. The effective dielectric constant is given by
	
R
R
e
1
1 55
1
.
.
hh
	
(3.4)
The benefit of an embedded microstrip is that surface currents for logic use 
the resistance of copper rather than the higher resistance of any solder plate.
3.17  ­Centered Stripline
Stripline refers to traces that are run between conducting planes. In centered 
stripline there are two paths for the energy flow. For a characteristic impedance 
of 50 ohms, each path has a characteristic impedance of 100 ohms.
Curves of constant characteristic impedance for a centered stripline for a 
trace thickness of 1.5 mils are shown in Figure 3.15.
The equation for characteristic impedance is
	
Z
h
w
0
12
60
1 9 2
1
0 8
1
R
ln .
.
	
(3.5)
where 0.1 < w/h < 2, t/h < 0.25, and εR < 15.
Dielectric
Trace
Conducting plane
h
w
t
h1
Figure 3.14  Embedded microstrip geometry.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
94
3.18  ­Asymmetric Stripline
The parameters associated with an asymmetric stripline are shown in Figure 3.16.
The equation for characteristic impedance is
	
Z
h
t
h
h
h
w
0
12
1
1
90
1 9 2
4
4
0 8
1
R
ln
.
.
	
(3.6)
where h1 > h, 0.1 < w/h < 2, and t/h < 2.5.
60Ω
50Ω
40Ω
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Dielectric height h (mil)
Trace width w (mil)
Trace thickness t=1.5 mil
Dielectric constant=4 
Figure 3.15  Centered stripline. Curves of constant characteristic impedance for a trace 
thickness of 1.5 mils.
Dielectric
Trace
Conducting plane
Conducting plane
h
w
t
h1
Figure 3.16  Asymmetric stripline.

3.20  Sine Waves on Transmission Lines
95
3.19  ­Two‐Layer Boards
It is practical to use a two‐sided board for fast logic. Ground and power planes 
are replaced by a grid of traces that carry both power and signal. Every logic 
line consists of three parallel traces called a triple. The triple consists of a logic 
trace between a ground and power trace in either order. The top of the board 
carries the triple in the x direction and the bottom of the board carries the 
triple in the y direction. Vias are used to transition the triple from the x to the 
y direction. On a 1/16‐inch board for a trace width of 10 mils, a trace separa­
tion of 10 mils, and a trace thickness of 2.7 mils, the characteristic impedance 
is about 50 ohms. Decoupling capacitors are placed across the triples at each 
IC. Care must be taken to add enough copper to feed power to the grid of tri­
ples. The grid supplies power and logic to each IC. A ring should connect all 
the grid ground and power traces together at each IC. Any board areas not 
used can be flooded with ground (see Figure 3.17).
3.20  ­Sine Waves on Transmission Lines
There are many applications where sine waves are processed on a circuit board. 
An application might involve a communications link. The role of characteristic 
impedance is somewhat different in these applications. In logic it was impor­
tant to transfer a logic state in a short period of time. In a communications 
link, it is important to deliver a steady flow of sinusoidal energy to an antenna. 
Vias 
P
S
G
P
S
G
P, power
G, ground
S, signal
Vertical traces
are on back surface
S
P
G
S
G
P
Figure 3.17  Trace pattern for use on a two‐sided board.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
96
What happens to the first cycles that reach the antenna can be ignored. 
The steady state energy that reaches the antenna is important.
Step waves gave us a unique understanding of how energy is managed on 
transmission lines. The effective handling of logic requires that reflections, if 
they occur, are handled correctly. In logic, one round trip should complete 
wave activity. An ideal transmission line has no losses. As we have seen, there 
can be step‐wave oscillations on a transmission line that is open or short cir­
cuited. Without resistance there is no way to lose the energy and it reflects 
back and forth. This means that an unterminated transmission line connected 
to a voltage generator cannot draw any real energy after the line is once ener­
gized. This is also true if the line is terminated in a capacitor, inductor, or any 
reactive network.
For a sine waves generator and an unterminated transmission line, there may 
be reactive energy flow where equal amounts of energy are added and sub­
tracted on each cycle. This is exactly what happens when a sine wave voltage 
generator is placed across a capacitor or an inductor. A shorted or open trans­
mission line looks like a capacitor or inductor that depends on line length and 
frequency. There are reflections at both ends of a line that obey the rules that 
were developed in the first chapters.
When a transmission line is used to carry sine wave energy to an antenna, 
reflections are not desired. The hope is that the arriving energy enters the 
antenna and radiates. Antennas must couple to the impedance of free space or 
377 ohms and transmission lines on boards are typically 50 ohms. The problem 
of matching impedances and optimizing radiation is treated in Chapter  5. 
It  is  worth commenting that the impedance of free space is a resistance. 
Energy cannot be radiated into a reactance.
3.21  ­Shielded Cables
Shielded cables when used in microphones are a braid made from woven 
tinned small copper wires. This cable often carries conductors that supply 
power for preamplification. Wireless technology has largely replaced the 
standing microphone and the need for a cable. This technology has also 
replaced the cable connectors located at the receiving hardware. Power for the 
microphones is supplied from small batteries.
Instrumentation for strain gauges requires up to 10 conductors. Excitation 
and remote sensing takes up 4 lines, signal and calibration lines take up 5 lines, 
and the guard shield makes 10 conductors. The shielding for this cable is often 
aluminum foil that is anodized on the inside surface. The foil is folded along 
the cable and does not allow surface currents to circulate radially. A braided 
drain wire is run along the outside surface of the cable making it practical to 
terminate the foil at the cable ends. The shielding against interference fields 

3.23  Transfer Impedance
97
below 100 kHz is excellent. For analog work, any rf coupled to the inner con­
ductors can be filtered passively at the instrumentation.
Cables that connect piezoelectric transducers to signal conditioning must 
treat the triboelectric effect. In applications with a high ambient noise level, 
rubbing of the braid against the dielectric generates unwanted signals. Cables 
that limit this noise are available from transducer manufacturers.
3.22  ­Coax
The need to control the characteristic impedance in the transport of fields 
requires controlling the conductor geometry. Shielded cables that control 
the characteristic impedance are called coax. The geometry can be con­
trolled by using a dielectric to center the inner conductor. The characteristic 
impedance of a coaxial transmission line with an air dielectric is shown in 
Figure 3.18.
When a coaxial cable is needed for a transmission over any distance, the use 
of a dielectric allows a distributed reflection that is undesirable. To solve this 
problem, the inner conductor is centered by a spiraling nylon cord. The surface 
of braid also causes a distributed reflection. The preferred outer conductor is a 
thin smooth‐wall conductor that can flex. The copper center conductor is an 
alloy that will not easily bend or kink. A corrugated outer conductor can add 
flexibility but it adds to the distributed reflection and limits performance at 
high frequencies.
3.23  ­Transfer Impedance
Braided coax has a limitation that is caused by the conducting braid. Current 
on the inner surface will tend to follow individual strands of copper to the 
outer surface. In a like manner interfering external fields cause current flow to 
follow the individual strands into the cable. Any current on the inside surface 
is field and this is interference. This interference travels in both directions and 
appears as a voltage on the center conductor. This coupling can be reduced by 
using a double braid, but the added attenuation is not that useful.
The ratio between half the open‐end voltage and the shield current flow is 
called the transfer impedance of the cable. Figure 3.19 shows a typical termi­
nated cable under test.
The transfer impedance for several cable types is shown in Figure 3.20. Note 
that thin wall at high frequencies provides excellent shielding where braid fails 
above 100 MHz. A transfer impedance of −40 dB ohms means that the transfer 
impedance is 0.01 ohms/m. A current of 1 A will develop an output voltage of 
50 mV in 10 m of cable.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
98
H
E
(a)
(b)
0
50
100
150
200
1.5
2
3
5
7
10
15
25
50
100
r
d
d/r
Impedance (Ω)
Figure 3.18  The characteristic impedance of a coaxial geometry.
Z
I
I
Z
V
2
V
2
V Ω/m
Zt=
Figure 3.19  Transfer impedance test for a coaxial cable.

3.23  Transfer Impedance
99
The important thing to note is that the shielding of braided cable fails to be 
effective above about 300 MHz. For distances under 30 cm and frequencies 
under 1 GHz, the type of cable shield is usually unimportant.
The ideal termination of a shielded cable provides a smooth transition of 
interference current from the cable shield to the connector shell to the mount­
ing surface. When the interference levels are severe, the best practice is to use 
backshell connectors. There must be a 360° shield termination without gaps. 
The connector body must be bonded electrically to the mounting enclosure 
preferably with a conducting gasket. For many applications where circuit 
boards are not enclosed, cable shields are used to control characteristic imped­
ance not to limit interference. Closure does not necessarily control character­
istic impedance.
Cables are often used to interconnect power supply leads, control leads, indi­
cators, as well as logic. If any of these leads carry any interference current, then 
there is a good chance of cross‐coupling and the logic will be compromised. 
Here is a story that will illustrate this point.
I received a call from a friend on a Saturday morning. He had a piece of new 
hardware that had to be shipped. He had worked late the previous night, but 
had made no progress in solving an interference problem. This hardware 
30
100
1
3
10
100
300
1
3
10
MHz
MHz
kHz
MHz
Frequency
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
Semirigid
coax (1mm)
ZT = (V0/lC) dBΩ/m
RG-62B/U
RG-8A/U
RG-174/U
RG-58C/U
0.2-mm
wall coax
RG-55U
(double braid)
Transfer impedance (dB Ω/m)
30
300
GHz
GHz
Figure 3.20  The transfer impedance for several standard cables.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
100
measured oil flow and every time the pumps were operated there were errors. 
I got in my car and drove the 30 miles to see if I could help. He had connected 
a separate control panel to a computer using a shielded cable. I looked at the 
signal list and I found that he had added a conductor that connected the equip­
ment ground of the control panel to the equipment ground of the computer. 
We cut this connection and the problem was solved. Normally transient effects 
would cause currents to flow on the outside cable shield. This added conductor 
brought the interfering field into the cable.
3.24  ­Waveguides
Transmitting high power at high frequency requires both a low characteristic 
impedance and a high voltage. In Figure 3.18, a low characteristic impedance 
in coax requires the spacing between conductors to be small. At a spacing of 
5 mils, a 5‐V signal already has a voltage gradient of 1000 V/inch. This means 
that coax is not going to be effective for high‐power transmissions.
A waveguide is a hollow conducting cylinder like a rectangular air duct. At a 
frequency where one dimension of the opening is a half wavelength, sine wave 
electromagnetic energy will propagate along the cylinder without a center con­
ductor. At specific higher frequencies, a waveguide will support propagation. 
A good example of this wave action is the operation of a microwave oven. 
A klystron supplies energy to a waveguide terminated in the oven compartment. 
The load in this case is the food in the oven. Without a center conductor, the 
field voltages in a waveguide can exceed 100,000 V/m. Waveguides are used in 
radar and in supplying energy to UHF transmitters.
As the frequency is raised the number of modes that can be carried on a 
microwave link increases until there is a continuum. The lowest frequency that 
can be transported is called the cutoff frequency. Driving the waveguide below 
this frequency is said to be driving the waveguide beyond cutoff.
The attenuation of wave energy beyond the cutoff frequency is given 
approximately by
	
AWG
30h
d 	
(3.7)
where d is the largest aperture dimension, h is the aperture depth, and AWG is 
the wave attenuation in decibels.
A seam that is a few millimeters wide and 30 cm long will not be effective 
in shielding high‐frequency energy as AWG is unity. This is why a gasket is 
needed to seal the door on a microwave oven. The gasket must make ohmic 
contact with the entire seam so that surface currents can flow freely across 
the boundary.

3.26  Circuit Board Materials
101
FM radio operates on a carrier at about 100 MHz. The half wavelength is 
about 1.5 m. FM radio signals easily propagate into a road tunnel or an under­
ground parking garage. An added conductor is needed to bring an AM signal 
into these same structures.
3.25  ­Balanced Lines
A balanced transmission line is a pair of conductors surrounded by a shield. 
Each conductor and the shield is a 50‐ohm line. The shield is a shared return 
path for two transmission lines. The term balanced means that the two trans­
mission paths have the same characteristic impedance.
3.26  ­Circuit Board Materials
Board manufacturers have many choices in the glass epoxy used for board 
manufacture. Many forces have been at work to change board material. 
Increasing clock rates have brought on the need for a finer glass weave. Traces 
that by chance were located over a single glass ribbon would have a different 
characteristic impedance. One way to average the character of the weave is to 
use two layers of prepreg. This raises the cost but usually stabilizes the charac­
teristic impedance. One of the biggest changes in board manufacturing 
occurred when lead was removed from solder. This directive is known as RoHS 
which stands for the Restriction of Hazardous Materials. Circuit boards must 
be cured at a higher temperature and this requires changes to the epoxy resin. 
Another problem is that smaller trace size requires more accurate drilling. 
Drilling and the use of thinner layers has increased the issue of mechanical 
stability. Many products require that boards be halogen free. If there is a fire, 
the gases that result could be lethal. Prepreg must match the mechanical prop­
erties of the copper laminates. All of this variability has made the problem of 
inventory difficult. It also leaves very little opportunity for a company to exper­
iment with different materials.
INSIGHT
For a balanced line, the field pattern for each transmission path is unsymmetric. 
This means that the return current for each transmission path tends to concen-
trate on the shield surface where it is closest to the forward current. It is impor-
tant to realize that fields do not combine their energy even though they share 
the same space. If a termination is required, two resistors are needed for the two 
transmission paths.
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
102
Board manufacturers build products for many different users. Some users 
worry about dielectric losses while others worry about signal delays caused by 
variations in the dielectric constant. In most logic boards these are not critical 
parameters.
A board designer must be aware of these issues and should consult with 
board manufacturers so that a manufacturing specification can be agreed 
upon. As mentioned earlier, boards from different sources my not function the 
same way.
Problem Set
1	 Describe the wave action when a voltage is switched onto a 100‐ohm trans­
mission line in series with a 50‐ohm line.
2	 A capacitor of 1 nF has a natural frequency of 100 MHz. What might the 
characteristic impedance be?
3	 A 50‐ohm line connects to a 100‐ohm resistor. What is the reflection 
coefficient?
4	 A 50‐ohm transmission line is charged at 10 V. A wave of 1 V is added to the 
line. What is energy in this wave? Assume the line length is 30 cm.
Glossary
Balanced line  Two conductors carrying odd mode logic. When one con­
ductor is at logic 1, the other is at logic 0. The average value is kept at ½ 
(Section 3.25).
Coax  A shielded single conductor cable with a controlled geometry intended 
for high‐frequency applications (Section 3.22).
Cross–coupling  The unwanted transfer of energy between two controlled 
energy paths.
Cutoff frequency  The lowest frequency that can propagate on a waveguide 
(Section 3.24).
Decoupling capacitor  A capacitor in a logic circuit intended to supply local 
energy to transmission lines (Section 3.2).
Die  The core of a semiconductor product. A group of interconnected logic 
switches and semiconductor components usually made from silicon that 
performs a set of logic functions.
Distributed reflection  The reflection of wave energy along a cable. This 
reflection can result from irregular conducting surfaces or from variation in 
the dielectric constant (Section 3.22).
Embedded energy  The energy between conducting planes on a circuit board. 
The energy on transmission lines with a conducting plane as the return path 
(Section 3.3).

103
Glossary
Energy  The state of a system that allows it to do work. Energy is stored in 
electric and magnetic fields. It is stored in a mass based on its position in a 
gravitational field. It is stored in a mass based on its velocity. A 5 V signal 
in transit on a 50‐ohm transmission line consumes ½ W of power. Energy is 
power times time. In 0.1 µs the energy moved is 0.5 × 10−7 joules (Section 3.2).
ESD  Electrostatic discharge.
Glass epoxy  The board material in common use in the manufacture of 
circuit boards. The term “glass” refers to a woven glass fabric used in the 
manufacture. The fineness of the glass mesh determines how constant 
the dielectric constant will be.
Ground  A conducting surface used as a local zero of potential. It can also be 
earth, power neutral, or a wire. The term has a very specific meaning in 
utility power.
Ground plane  A conducting surface on a circuit board at zero potential. 
The return current path for transmission lines (Section 3.3).
IC  Integrated circuit.
Microstrip  Traces on the outer surfaces of a circuit board (Section 3.16).
Power  The unit of power is watt. The rate at which energy is moved. A joule 
per second is 1 W. A 5‐V signal on a 50‐ohm line carries ½ W (Section 3.2).
Power plane  A conducting surface on a circuit board at the power supply 
potential (Section 3.3).
Prepreg  Sheets of partially cured glass epoxy used in board manufacture. 
Sheets of prepreg comes in many standard thicknesses (Section 3.8).
Radiation  The transfer of electromagnetic energy into free space (Section 3.7).
Reactance  The opposition to sinusoidal current flow in capacitance or 
inductance (Section 3.4).
Return path  In a transmission line, the path taken by current to return to the 
driving point. Vias provide both signal and return current paths.
Shielding  The use of conductors to contain an electric or magnetic field. 
Shielding can be a braid on a cable, a conductive housing, or a conductive 
layer in a transformer. It can also be a layer of magnetic material (Section 3.21).
Stripline  Traces located between conducting planes on a circuit board used 
as transmission lines. Centered lines are preferred as the energy is divided 
equally in two paths (Section 3.11).
Stub  A short transmission line usually connected to a main transmission line 
at some midpoint. A stub can be used to terminate a transmission line. Stubs 
can be terminated or used open or short circuited (Section 3.13).
Transfer impedance  The ratio of voltage coupled into a shielded cable from a 
current flowing on the shield’s outer surface. Because the coupled wave 
reflects and doubles at the open ends, the measured voltage is divided by 2 
(Section 3.23).
Vias  Plated through holes on a circuit board that connect traces located on 
different conducting layers. Buried vias are not visible from the outer surface. 
www.ebook3000.com

3  Transmission Lines—Part 2
104
Blind vias have the drilled holes filled with solder. Vias are supported by pads 
at each layer. Fields do not penetrate the holes associated with vias (Section 3.9).
Waveguide  Any hollow conducting cylinder that propagates electromagnetic 
energy without a center conductor. Usually used for sine wave propagation 
at high‐power levels at frequencies above 500 MHz (Section 3.24).
Waveguide beyond cutoff  A waveguide driven at a frequency that is too low 
to propagate energy.
Answers to Problems
1	 The voltage V sets a wave in motion that reaches the 50‐ohm transition. 
The transmission coefficient is 0.667 V. The reflection coefficient is 
−0.333 V. When this wave reaches the voltage source the reflection reverses 
the polarity and a wave of +0.333 V moves forward. When this wave reaches 
the transition, two new waves are generated. The forward voltage thus 
increases in steps that reach V in the limit.
2	 Assuming the entire capacitance resonates with the entire inductance, 
then fn = 1/6.28(LC)½. The inductance is 2.54 nH. Using this inductance the 
characteristic impedance is (L/C)½ = 1.2 ohms.
3	 0.333.
4	 A wave takes 1 ns to travel 30 cm. At 10 V and 50 ohms the power level is 
2 W. The energy in a ns is 2 × 10−9 joules.

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
105
4
4.1  ­Introduction
Radiated interference can be roughly divided into two parts: energy that 
couples within a circuit and energy that enters from outside sources. Entering 
interference can come from radiation or cable connections. We discuss lightning 
and electrostatic discharge (ESD) separately.
This chapter deals with interference of all types and ways to limit its impact. 
Errors can occur in the sampling process. Utility power can be a source of 
interference when there are voltage surges, voltage dropouts, neutral voltage 
drops, and capacitive coupling. There can be instabilities in active circuits. 
Logic errors can occur when there are reflections, insufficient signal, or a lack 
of energy to carry the logic.
High‐speed logic requires greater bandwidth and this adds to the radiated 
levels. Reducing operating voltages limits radiation but makes circuits more 
susceptible to interference. The use of hard wires to carry signals through any 
distance has always been a problem. One difficulty is the coupling to interfer-
ing fields. The use of fiber optics and high‐frequency carrier links has elimi-
nated many problems but this comes at a price. The data must first be put into 
a form where it can be transmitted.
We have already discussed two sources of interference generated on a circuit 
board: radiation from traces at the leading edges of waves and board edge 
radiation caused if fields are not provided a controlled space to use. The cross‐
coupling of logic signals is another type of interference that is controlled by the 
layout. Cables that interconnect devices can couple to both local and remotely 
generated fields. This is nature taking every opportunity to spread energy out 
over any available conductor geometry.
When energy leaves the confines of transmission lines, the waveforms lose 
their step function character. The best way to measure and analyze this 
interfering is to use a sine wave analysis. The rise time character as discussed 
in Appendix B, shows that the frequency of interest for an analysis is given by 
Interference
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
106
1/πτR where τR is the rise time or transition time. The approach that is taken is 
to assume that the interference can be represented by a sine wave signal at this 
rise‐time frequency and amplitude. The amplitude of the response using this 
one frequency represents the degree of coupling or interference. This approach 
can be used to estimate the effect impulses such as ESD or lightning can have 
on a circuit. This same approach can be used to estimate the impact logic 
signals will have in cross‐coupling.
As an example, an ESD event can be characterized as a 5‐A pulse. A typical 
pulse discharges field energy stored within a distance of 10 cm in about a 
nanosecond. The rise‐time frequency is about 300 MHz. A lightning pulse can 
be characterized as a 100,000‐A pulse. The field energy that is discharged and 
radiated is stored within a few hundred meters of the ionization path. The 
time for the initial energy to cross this distance is about 2 µs. The rise‐time 
frequency for this event is about 650 kHz. In both cases, the current level can 
be used to calculate an H field at a distance r. The B field in space is simply 
μ0H. The induced voltage in any nearby loop depends on the changing B field, 
the loop area, and the frequency (see Equations 1.16, 1.18, and 1.19).
4.2  ­Radiation—General Comments
Radiating structures (antennas) can be dipoles, loops, horns, slots, parabolic 
dishes, or arrays. Transmission lines and waveguides are used to carry energy 
from a circuit to these antennas for radiation. These same antennas can couple 
to fields that bring information into a circuit for processing. At 1 MHz, a trans-
mitting antenna that is a quarter wavelength long is 75 m tall. At 300 MHz, a 
quarter wavelength in space is 25 cm. For practical reasons, receiving antennas 
are often much shorter than a quarter wavelength. The coupled voltage is 
roughly proportional to antenna length being optimum at a half wavelength.
A trace over a conducting plane forms a rectangular loop antenna that has a 
length equal to the distance traveled in one rise time. The field present along 
the rest of the trace is unchanging and it is therefore not radiating. The E field 
radiation at a distance of 1 m from a square centimeter of radiating area for a 
1 V‐rms signal on a 50 line at 100 MHz is about 66 dBμV/m. This one example 
of radiation can be used to estimate the radiation from an entire circuit board. 
Radiating efficiency increases with the square of frequency. Field strength 
falls off linearly with distance. On a circuit board, the radiation that can be 
N.B.
Fields can damage circuits. An interference current does not need to flow in the 
circuit to do damage. The coupling of field energy is proportional to loop area. 
Field intensity falls off proportional to distance, not distance squared.

4.4  Field Coupling to Open Parallel Conductors (Sine Waves)
107
controlled comes from traces. Here the loop areas are small but the number of 
active loops can be in the hundreds. Radiation from board edges is usually the 
result of errors in the layout (see Sections 3.10 and 3.11).
Radiation levels from sources having the same spectrum are additive. 
Radiation levels from sources with a different spectrum are summed by taking 
the square root of their squared values. As an example, 30 mV of radiated 
carrier and 40 mV from a logic source will sum as (302 + 402)½ = 50 mV of inter-
ference. The sum can then be given in terms of decibels once a reference level 
is selected (see Appendix B).
4.3  ­The Impedance of Space
In Chapter 2, Equations 2.5 and 2.6 related the permeability and permittivity of 
free space to the ratio of current and voltage. It is easy to show that
	
0
0
1
2
0
Z 	
(4.1)
where Z0 is called the characteristic impedance of free space. Using the values 
given in Section 2.5, this impedance is 377 ohms. This measure is also the ratio 
of the E and H field in an electromagnetic wave at a distance from a radiating 
source. Near the radiator, the wave impedance depends on the conductor 
geometry. For sine wave radiation, the distance λ traveled in one cycle is called 
a wavelength. The distance λ/2π is called the near‐field/far‐field interface 
distance. Beyond this distance, radiated waves are called far‐field waves. At 
1 GHz, a wavelength is 30 cm and the interface distance is 4.7 cm. For a logic 
square‐wave signal, the interface distance is different for each harmonic. 
In the near field, coupling to nearby circuits will vary depending on the wave 
impedance of each harmonic. In the far field there is equal energy in the 
electric and magnetic fields.
4.4  ­Field Coupling to Open Parallel Conductors 
(Sine Waves)
Field coupling to a simple conductor geometry (wires) is shown in Figure 4.1. 
There are two things to note. Field coupling is optimum when the interfer-
ing field moves parallel to the path take by the conductors. The coupling is 
proportional to both path length and conductor spacing. Coupling is therefore 
proportional to loop area. The maximum distance that can be used in a calculation 
is the distance a wave travels in one clock time. For a larger dimension the 
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
108
coupling lessens but it is not a good idea to rely on any cancellation. The 
simplest way to reduce coupling is to reduce the coupling loop area. The inter-
ference fields can be from a nearby circuit board or from a remote source.
In Figure 4.1, there are two field coupling areas. The first is the area between 
the two top conductors and the ground plane. In logic, voltage coupled into 
this area is called even‐mode interference. In circuit terminology, voltages that 
are coupled into this loop area are called common‐mode interference.
There can be field coupling to the area between a pair of conductors carrying a 
signal. In logic, this coupling is called odd‐mode interference. In circuit terminol-
ogy, this is called normal‐mode interference. Depending on the cable type, this 
coupling can be reduced by twisting the conductors in the cable or by shielding.
4.5  ­Cross‐Coupling
There are designs that require long transmission paths where energy can 
cross‐couple causing interference. This section reviews the basic process so 
that a designer knows what to expect. There are many factors that should 
be considered including line lengths, trace proximity, logic direction, logic 
polarity, line terminations, rise time, and the logic family. Cross‐coupling is 
really the transfer of energy but the only coupling mechanisms we have 
discussed involve the E and H fields treated separately. We discuss coupling in 
terms of voltage as this is what we usually measure.
Filter current flows in path
Receptacle
B
Receptacle
A
Power
Power
Ground
at servie
entrance
Isolated equipment
ground
Isolated equipment
ground
117V
117V
Neutral
Neutral
Filter
Filter
1 2 3 4 5 6 and 7 8 3 2 9
Path
is a signal conductor
1
2
9
3
3
4
5
6
7
8
Output
Output
Figure 4.1  Field coupling to parallel conductors (wires).

4.5  Cross‐Coupling
109
The circuit we consider is shown in Figure 4.2. The figure represents two 
transmission lines with mutual inductance L12 and mutual capacitance C12 
per unit length.
The two transmission lines are L1 (the culprit line) and L2 (the victim line). 
These lines are shown in Figure 4.3.
As the culprit wave progresses to the right, the only area where the magnetic 
field couples to the victim is during the rise time. The coupled energy is 
restricted as the forward wave cannot exceed the speed of light. The coupled 
wave that moves to the left reaches a maximum amplitude in the distance 
traveled during the rise time. The rise time of the coupled energy is assumed to 
be twice that of the culprit rise time.
C12
Culprit line 1
Victim line 2
H
E
V
L12
Figure 4.2  The mutual capacitance and mutual inductance between two transmission lines.
INSIGHT
The problem in describing this wave action is that the culprit wave and the 
coupled wave cannot have a relative velocity of 2c as both waves carry energy. 
Any observer will see a velocity of c or less. The important observer is the receiving 
logic.
V
τr
X
R
L1
L2
Victim
Culprit
Figure 4.3  A step‐function wave applied to a culprit line.
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
110
The wave component that results from inductive coupling is given approxi-
mately by
	
A
V
R
M
L
L
4 	
(4.2)
where L is the inductance per unit length in the two transmission lines and 
LM is the mutual inductance. The wave action described above is shown in 
Figure 4.4.
The voltage component that results from capacitive coupling is similar to 
the inductive component. The total reverse‐coupled crosstalk wave amplitude 
is given by Equation 4.3, where C is the self capacitance and CM is the mutual 
capacitance per unit length.
	
A
V
R
M
M
L
L
C
C
4
4
.	
(4.3)
4.6  ­Shielding—General Comments
In Chapter 1, the fundamental idea of shielding was introduced. Potential 
differences between conductors imply electric fields. If fields are fully contained 
by a conductor geometry, then the circuit generating this field is shielded. This 
basic idea leads to shielding methods that include metal enclosures, shielded 
X
V
Z0
Z0
Z0
Victim
Culprit
Constant
amplitude
Culprit wave
in transit
Culprit wave
action over
Increasing
amplitude
Constant
amplitude
Coupling
Coupling
∞
∞
Figure 4.4  Inductive coupling between transmission lines.

4.7  Even‐Mode Rejection
111
cables, gaskets, and passive filters. The intent is to control which fields can 
leave or enter a controlled space. Power line filters on hardware allow utility 
power to enter but block high‐frequency energy. In general, line filters must 
be electrically outside but physically inside a metal enclosure. This requires 
the proper partitioning of space. Energy uses conductor pairs as transmission 
lines and nature pays no attention to labels. The NEC prohibits placing any 
component in the equipment grounding path, so this lead must remain electri-
cally “outside” of any enclosure.
In the real world, circuits do not function in isolation. Even a cell phone 
must receive and radiate energy. Many circuits receive signals and operat-
ing energy using unfiltered conductors. All unfiltered conductors that 
enter a controlled space will bring in external field energy and provide a 
path for internal fields to exit the space. Field energy can enter and leave 
a controlled space through apertures and seams. The game that must be 
played is to limit the flow of interference energy and provide a clear path 
for desired energy. In analog work, the approach that is taken is to shield 
low‐level signals until they can be amplified and the impedance can be 
reduced to a few ohms. Active circuits can be used to reject any interfer-
ence that is common‐mode. Out of band interference can be removed by 
passive filtering.
4.7  ­Even‐Mode Rejection
In logic, a signal often must be sent between boards or different pieces of 
hardware. It is expected that there will be a potential difference between 
circuit commons even if they are ohmically connected. The field in the 
intervening space will couple to all conductors that cross through this 
space. To limit this interference, a balanced signal can be generated in the 
transmitting logic. Both signals will couple to the same interference. The 
receiving circuit can amplify the difference in potential which eliminates 
the ground potential difference. This ground difference of potential is 
called even‐mode interference. The arriving signal is usually biased at the 
receiver so that it is unipolar. The ground difference of potential is called 
even‐mode interference.
In applications where balanced logic is used, the transmission distance 
requires terminations to avoid voltage doubling. The cable is usually a 
­balanced 100‐ohm pair that ends on 50‐ohm lines on the receiving board. 
No terminating resistors are used at this point. The two signal lines are sepa-
rated on the receiving board so that the two fields use a different space. At the 
receiving logic, two 50‐ohm terminating resistors are required. This circuitry 
is shown in Figure 4.5.
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
112
4.8  ­Ground—A General Discussion
In circuit board designs, the common or reference conductor at 0 V is often 
called ground. In many cases there is no earth connection. Obvious cases are 
cell phones and circuits in automobiles or aircraft. A ground can be as small as 
a postage stamp or as vast as an ocean.
There is often comfort in a concept that has no real basis: the idea that there 
is a “ground” that is quiet and that if we can connect to it, all noise problems 
will be conquered. The feeling is that the earth is a sump for noise. It can 
“absorb” the noise so that it will not reappear in a circuit. The circuit theory 
idea that current must flow in a loop is ignored. It is easy to find the entry point 
but the exit point(s) are a mystery. This feeling is so strong that significant 
attempts are often made to “ground” circuits to earth using tons of copper 
rods. The term quiet implies that the buildings will be noise free and will not 
allow radiation. Of course there is no physics to support this contention. Earth 
connections are important in power safety and in lightning protection. There 
are codes for the transport and grounding of utility power. The fact that these 
same conductors can function as transmission lines for rf energy is not considered. 
My trite remark is that nature does not read labels or color codes.
Logic
100-Ω balanced line
Cable
50
50
50-Ω trace over
ground plane
50-Ω trace over
ground plane
Figure 4.5  The termination of a balanced transmission line.

4.8  Ground—A General Discussion
113
A bit of history will help explain a few common misconceptions. In the early 
days of electrification there were many cases where lightning entered a facility 
on power wiring. There were fires that resulted from a lack of fault protection 
and there were shock hazards. Under pressure from banking, insurance com-
panies, and help from the National Fire Protection Agency, the National 
Electrical Code (NEC) was written and made a requirement in all electrical 
installations. This code is not a government regulation although it is adopted 
as a rule by most municipalities. The code defines the meaning of key words. 
I have, in a few cases, indicated these words in italics. The code is amended 
every 3 years to accommodate new practices and new materials. The latest 
code is dated 2017. The code provides rules and makes no attempt at any 
analysis. The code requires that utility power be connected to earth at the 
service entrance at each facility. The assumption is that lightning that strikes 
utility conductors will flow to earth outside of a facility. This rule applies to 
underground power entrances. It is important that all facilities should obey the 
same rules. Not all countries follow these same grounding rules. On board 
naval ships, power is ungrounded. In some areas on a ship, a distribution trans-
former is added and the secondary is grounded. Floating the power system 
reduces electrolysis problems and allows for faults in combat that could disable 
key equipment. Unfortunately when power is floating, any changes in power 
demand produces interference that propagates over the entire power system 
even if it is in conduit.
Many facilities on the same utility line make neutral connections to earth. 
In three‐phase distribution, the phase loads are not exactly balanced. This means 
that some neutral current uses the earth as a return conductor. Some of this 
current in turn uses gas, water, and telephone lines as well as building steel. 
As pointed out, this current only flows because there are fields. The utility has 
no legal obligation to reduce this current. Generating this current requires 
capital equipment and balancing loads is in the right direction. The utilities 
cannot completely control this balancing.
Electronics has evolved in the presence of utility power. Early circuits used 
vacuum tubes which meant power transformers and relatively high voltages. 
Any engineer designing hardware learned very quickly that shields were 
needed around signal conductors or that the coupling to electric fields from 
utility power will be a problem. It was noted that if the mounting hardware is 
connected to earth, the coupling is reduced. This in turn led to the idea of 
providing a dedicated ground to be used for signals, shields, and racks contain-
ing electronics. This idea of a single‐point ground for all electronics became 
law in defense installations. The code was changed to allow equipment grounding 
conductors (green wires) to be ungrounded (isolated) at the receptacle and 
grounded at the service entrance. There are many installations where this 
grounding procedure has introduced significant noise problems. The practice 
is no longer allowed in hospitals as there is an added risk rather than an added 
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
114
safety factor. Obviously, there are many wiring methods that are safe. Not all of 
the methods are compatible with noise control. The role of engineering is to 
choose the method that fits the need.
Efforts to provide separate equipment grounds for parts of a facility are unsafe 
as some faults could go undetected.1 The code will permit floating power but 
only when there is a specific need and where there can be close supervision. 
Examples are some assembly lines and electrically heated crucibles. A fault 
detection system must be provided.
The word ground has many meanings to engineers. It has many nontechnical 
meanings as well. It is a word that seems to attract many uses. The National 
Electrical Code provides definitions that are quite clear. This code is law in 
most cities. For example, the grounded conductor is the current‐carrying 
power conductor that is connected to earth at a service entrance. It is colored 
white. Equipment grounding conductors cannot be used for carrying power 
current and they are colored green or it can be a bare copper wire. No other 
power conductor can be colored green. Any conductor that could come in 
touch with a power conductor is called an equipment ground. This includes 
racks, metal cabinets, motors, generators, and power transformers. All equip-
ment grounds are connected together and are earthed at the service entrance. 
Any electrical hardware that uses utility power that could be a source of electri-
cal shock must be grounded per code. The code establishes grounding rules 
that guarantees that any fault current path will be low impedance so that a 
breaker will trip if there is a fault. All equipment used to carry power wiring 
must be listed. This means it has passed tests that guarantee performance 
over time in all types of weather. It is illegal to modify or tamper with listed 
hardware.
Ground becomes an issue in the desert. In the summer, the earth’s surface 
is an insulator. It is impractical to seek a conducting layer by drilling down hun-
dreds of feet. The same thing happens on lava beds or on granite outcroppings. 
An earth connection can be impractical. There can still be lightning strikes and 
fault conditions that can be dangerous. The general rule is that all common 
conductors that a human can touch should be bonded together forming a 
grid. There are thunder storms in the desert and this can damage distribution 
transformers using isolated grounds. Lightning can strike a jet aircraft but as 
long as it is one conducting surface no damage will result. Two comments: 
Lightning currents must not enter an area where fuel vapor can be ignited. 
At the base of towers, the current must be dispersed over the earth’s surface so 
that there are no points of concentration in the structure. Concentration of 
current can melt metal and topple a structure.
1  Earth connections have resistances of around 20 ohms. A 120 V fault between two earth 
grounding points would result in a current of 6 A. This is hardly enough current to trip a breaker. 
A fault might allow voltage between nearby equipment grounds. Coming in contact with these 
two grounds could be lethal.

4.9  Grounds on Circuit Boards
115
The earth as a conductor has conductivity that varies over a wide range. 
Skin effect is dominant when the surface is damp and current will flow on the 
surface. A nearby lightning strike will electrocute cattle standing on wet soil. 
The ocean is a good conductor and the current from a lightning strike will stay 
on the ocean surface. This is skin effect. A strike to a ship will not enter the 
water much below the water line. This has implications in providing current 
paths in lightning protection. For example, on a boat, current will not use the 
keel to enter the water. It may arc through an insulated hull at the water line.
In circuit board designs the common or reference conductor at 0 V is often 
called ground. In many circuits there is no earth connection. Obvious cases are 
cell phones and installations in automobiles or aircraft and of course, satellites.
4.9  ­Grounds on Circuit Boards
The ground plane used in a logic structure is a convenient way to form transmis-
sion lines. A separate return conductor for each transmission line would also 
function but it takes more etching and this reduces mechanical stability. Engineers 
often try to make measurements of voltage drops along a transmission line. The 
voltage at the ends of the transmission line is available on pads but the voltage at 
midpoints on traces requires cutting through any conformal coat or dielectric. 
There are several comments that might be helpful. A voltage measurement is 
really a field measure and the field being measured can originate from nearby 
sources. The presence of a probe can change the amplitude of the field so that the 
measure may be invalid. Here are two precautions to take. Connect the tip of the 
probe to the probe common. Make sure there is no signal when the probe is near 
the board. Connect the shorted probe to the board common to make sure there is 
no signal. If there is signal there may be current flow in the probe shield that is 
coupling field into the input. This would indicate that a better probe is needed.
A question often arises as to how to connect a circuit board to a conducting 
enclosure. If the circuit board receives data over a cable then an added ground 
might allow fields a second transmission line path that uses the ground plane 
of the circuit board. This is an example of where a single‐point ground is pre-
ferred. The board should be grounded so that any field that uses this added 
transmission line does not use the board ground plane as one of its conductors. 
If interfering fields terminate on the ground plane it could add interference. 
Stated another way, the ground connection should not form a current path so 
that interference currents flow on the ground plane.
INSIGHT
The field that causes current flow is inside a conductor. Any loop that is formed 
to make a measurement of ground potential difference will probably couple to 
other nearby fields negating the validity of the measurement.
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
116
4.10  ­Equipment Ground
Hardware that is rack mounted usually makes use of utility power. The National 
Electrical Code requires that the rack and all hardware mounted to it be treated 
as equipment and grounded per code. Power line filters use the equipment 
ground as a return conductor. The current flow can result from activity in the 
hardware or coupled to the power conductors from other hardware. In large 
systems, these line filters can place a significant reactive load on the line. The 
fields associated with this filtering are not totally confined and can contribute 
to the general ambient field in a facility. The ambient noise field intensity will 
be reduced if this current is provided many parallel paths to follow. This is 
the reason that isolated equipment grounds are not effective. An example will 
illustrate the problem. Two computers are coupled together. Each is powered 
using an isolated ground. A nearby elevator motor creates a transient field that 
couples field energy to the equipment ground loop. The logic connection is 
closure for the equipment ground loop and the induced voltage transient blows 
up circuitry at the interface. Rather than reduce interference, the isolated 
grounds created problems. If the computers were coupled using an rf link or 
fiber optics, this would not occur. The less costly solution is to connect all 
equipment grounds together in a grid.
4.11  ­Guard Shields
In analog instrumentation, signals are often in the millivolts. To maintain 
signal integrity, all errors of 0.1% or greater must be considered. There 
are literally dozens of mechanisms that can contribute errors at this level. 
One major problem is the ground difference of potential between the signal 
source common and the instrumentation output common. This potential 
difference can often exceed 10 V. For a 10‐mV signal with a source impedance 
of 1000 ohms, the error voltage is limited to 10 μV. For a 10‐V common‐mode 
signal, the error current level is limited to 10−8 A. This is an input impedance 
of 1000 megohms. At 60 Hz this is a leakage capacitance of 2.7 pF. This is a 
difficult restraint on both the signal cable and on the instrument design. 
These figures are presented to show why it is desirable to avoid this approach 
to analog signal processing.
The potential difference between grounds is a measure of the field intensity 
in the intervening space between a source transducer and any signal processing. 
The ground difference in potential is called common‐mode interference. The 
arriving shield is called a guard shield and it guards the signal conductors up to 
the input integrated circuit pads. This shield is grounded at the transducer and 
not connected to the local common. A simplified schematic of this circuit 
arrangement is shown in Figure 4.6.

4.12  Forward Referencing Amplifiers
117
Filters and clamping circuits protect the input against any overvoltage that 
might occur. The guard shield is not expected to be effective above 100 kHz. 
The guard shield is connected to local common above this frequency. A typical 
connection is a 0.01 μF capacitor in series with 100 ohms. If the input shield 
were to be grounded to the local common there would be a voltage gradient 
along the shield and this would couple interference directly into the signal 
path. Transient common‐mode signals can often exceed 100 V. In practical 
applications, rejection ratios must exceed a million to one at frequencies of 
100 Hz.2 This requires the amplifier input impedance Z1 and Z2 must be 1000 
megohms. This problem is avoided if the signal is amplified, digitized, and 
carried by fields to a remote point for processing and data storage. The field 
can use free space or fiber optics but not a hard wire connection.
4.12  ­Forward Referencing Amplifiers
Analog signals that are preconditioned must often be brought to a logic board 
for processing. The signals are often carried on a single coax cable. The signal 
level can be bipolar and limited to ±5 V. The source impedance is usually under 
1 ohm and the bandwidth can be as high as 100 kHz. The basic problem is that 
the reference conductor is at a different potential than the logic board refer-
ence conductor. Connecting the two reference conductors together invites 
current flow that can result in interference. The interference can impact the 
analog signal and in some instances it can impact the logic.
A simple differential amplifier with unity gain can buffer the signal and limit 
the common current flow to a few milliamperes. The common of the analog 
2  Tests that take place in isolated areas between test structures and buildings often experience 
conditions where ground potential differences exceed hundreds of volts.
Enclosure 1
Enclosure 2
120V
Out
A2
Z2
Z1
VSIG
R1
Figure 4.6  A differential amplifier using a guard shield.
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
118
signal can be connected to either of the differential inputs depending on 
the desired gain polarity. The two commons are not connected together. The 
circuit arrangement is shown in Figure 4.7. This circuit would normally require 
a negative power supply voltage. This circuit is not intended for terminating a 
transmission line. The use of 50‐ohm feedback resistors would require current 
levels of 100 mA. Thousand‐ohm resistors are usually very effective. Typically, 
analog IC amplifiers have limited current capability.
4.13  ­A/D Converters
The interface between an analog signal and an A/D converter on a logic board 
presents a unique problem. The analog signal is referenced to a remote source 
ground. The A/D converter is referenced to logic common. The input to the 
A/D converter is usually a forward reference amplifier similar to the one used 
in Figure 4.5.
An A/D converter might have 12‐bit resolution which means that the inter-
ference level must be below 1 mV. It is important not to couple normal‐mode 
interference to the signal path. If the signal common is grounded, current 
flowing in this conductor can easily add normal‐mode interference that cannot 
be rejected by the forward referencing amplifier. The best practice is to separate 
analog signal space from logic signal space. There can be only one common 
conductor. The analog space must use dedicated pins, traces, and power 
connections. The analog input signal loop must have minimum area. Any 
attempt to use separate grounds will only increase the interference coupling.
4.14  ­Utility Transformers and Interference
Utility power plays an important role in moving both energy and interference 
throughout a facility. In industry, utility power runs computers, lights, elevators, 
assembly lines, and communications systems. There are many opportunities 
+10V
Logic
–10V
R
R
R
R
+
–
Figure 4.7  A forward referencing amplifier.

4.15  Shielding of Distribution Power Transformers
119
for interference in the form of field generation and transmission through the 
utility lines. Transformers in individual devices allow the power source to be 
referenced to many different common points. The transformers in each device 
provide a path for interference to travel in both directions. In many products, 
energy is transferred using dc‐to‐dc converters which can add a pulse‐like 
character to the interference.
The electrical code allows for only one grounding grid in a facility. The code 
allows for separately derived sources of power and for separate distribution 
transformers, but for safety there can be only one grounding system. Power 
supplied from a backup generator or from an added transformer is said to be 
separately derived. The neutral and all equipment grounds are brought back to 
each power source and earthed to the nearest available point. The important 
point is that power from a separately derived transformer allows the use of a 
dedicated neutral. The voltage drops in a shared neutral can often be a source 
of interference. The neutral or grounded power conductor can connect to earth 
and the equipment ground only once and that is at the service entrance. Each 
source of power is treated as a service entrance.
Utility power is usually generated three phase. The coils that rotate in a 
magnetic field that generate the voltage are spaced 120° apart. The reason for 
three‐phase power relates to the torque on the rotor. If the phase loads are 
balanced the torque on the rotor is constant over every revolution. Without 
a fixed torque, vibrations would tear up the shaft bearings in a very short 
period of time.
Distribution transformers for a building are sometimes centrally located to 
reduce cost. The leakage magnetic field near the transformer can be a source of 
interference. This field is proportional to secondary load current that can be 
quite high. In installations of this type the limit of magnetic field strength at full 
load should be specified. Attempts to shield this type of interference are usually 
not successful.
Distribution transformers should not be mounted where leakage fields can 
couple current into the building steel. Nearby conducting loops should be 
broken by using insulators.
4.15  ­Shielding of Distribution Power Transformers
In facilities where power is used for industrial activities, there can be electrical 
interference carried on the power conductors. There are many levels to interference 
including power surges, voltage sags, spikes, and high‐frequency transmissions. 
Power conductors are transmission lines that can carry interference for long 
distances. In critical installations, a shielded distribution transformer can be 
used to service specific hardware. Internal to the distribution transformer there 
can be three shields. These shields consist of three conducting layers of either 
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
120
copper or aluminum that surround the primary coils of the transformer. The 
shields must not form shorted turns around the iron core. The purpose of 
the shields is to control the paths taken by interfering reactive currents. The 
primary coil is usually wound next to the core.
The first or primary shield is placed over the primary coil. It is connected to 
the end coil of the primary winding. The center shield is connected to the 
equipment ground or metal frame around the transformer. The third shield 
is connected to the start of the secondary coil.
The center shield is the common‐mode shield. It blocks the flow of com-
mon‐mode currents on the primary conductors from flowing in the secondary 
circuit through coil‐to‐coil capacitance. The primary and secondary shields 
keep common‐mode currents from flowing in leakage capacitance to the coils 
of the transformer which can then enter the secondary circuits by transformer 
action.
In a three‐phase transformer, each of the three legs are separately shielded. 
All shields are connected inside the transformer. This shielding is shown in 
Figure 4.8.
4.16  ­Electrostatic Discharge
There are many situations that can cause charges to accumulate on an insu-
lated body. The friction of shoes on a rug or on floor tiles can build up a charge 
on a human body. Charges can build up on an insulated chute carrying moving 
grain. The discharge of this energy can start fires or cause explosions. An 
aircraft in flight can build up a charge moving through air. Fueling of aircraft 
requires careful grounding procedures so that arcing does not occur around 
fueling. Charges can build up on an insulated bag when integrated circuits are 
removed. This arcing can damage semiconductors. If a discharge takes place 
on a cell phone or on a keypad, there must not be damage to circuitry. 
Manufacturers must test their hardware to make sure that it can survive ESD 
pulses. In the manufacture of integrated circuits, humidity is controlled and 
there are clothing restrictions. Low‐voltage arcing can produce problems 
that can go undetected. In computer installations, floor tiles are made slightly 
conductive so that any charge buildup is immediately discharged. This means 
that each tile must be correctly grounded. Grounding clips must be replaced if 
removed. Rotating floor polishers are not allowed.
Humidity control in a facility is the best way to limit ESD problems. 
Adding humidifiers is not always effective as there can be areas that do not 
get treated air.
All products that contain electronics should be tested to make sure they are 
not damaged by ESD. Performance in the presence of ESD is usually not 
expected. Any external conductors that provide an electrical path into the 

4.16  Electrostatic Discharge
121
electronics should be tested. This includes power and signal cables. Devices 
that are grounded through a power cord are more vulnerable than devices that 
are battery operated. The issue is: Where will the arcing take place and what is 
the current path? These two factors define where the interference field is 
located and what the field intensity will be at points of difficulty. Energy can 
enter through apertures, seams, or pins on open connectors. Energy can enter 
on shields that are not properly terminated, power leads that are not properly 
Transformer
Common-mode shield
To
passive
ﬁlter
117V
117V
Conduit
Incoming
power
(a)
(b)
(c)
C12
C13
0V
0V
Equipment
ground
Equipment
ground
Ground plane
Figure 4.8  A single‐phase isolation transformer. (a) One shield, (b) two shields, and (c) three 
shields.
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
122
filtered, and through displays. A control that is mounted on a painted or 
anodized surface can provide an ESD entrance.
An ESD current pulse creates a significant magnetic field that can couple 
into any nearby loop area. If the current spreads out over a conductive surface, 
the field intensity is significantly reduced. Providing multiple current paths 
for the current is obviously in the right direction. Single‐point connections 
concentrate current flow and this in turn increases field intensity.
Commercial zappers are available for testing hardware that generate con-
trolled pulses of current. The voltage that initiates the pulse can be varied 
from 1,000 to 15,000 V. The current level is typically 5 A. An ESD pulse can 
be characterized as being a sine wave current at a frequency of 300 MHz. The 
pulses can be single or repeated events. There are two basic modes of testing. 
One mode is where the probe makes ohmic contact and there is no probe tip 
arcing and the second mode is when the probe arcs to the device under test.
An example of coupling provides some insight into the nature of the problem. 
Consider an ESD pulse of 5 A. Using Equation 1.16, the H field at a distance of 
10 cm is I/2πr = 79 A/m. Using Equation 1.18, B = μ0H = 10−4 teslas. Consider a 
loop of 1.0 cm2 coupling to this field. Using Equation 1.19 at a frequency of 
300 MHz, the voltage induced in this loop is 19 V. This voltage will destroy an 
integrated circuit. The current pulse does not need to flow in a component to 
do damage.
A problem exists when the device being tested is not grounded. Repeated 
zapping can build up a stored charge that may eventually cause a breakdown 
that would not normally occur. If this condition exists, a discharge path using 
a 100‐megohm resistor can be added. Devices that use a power adapter can 
be vulnerable when the voltage buildup can arc across the power coils in a 
transformer. The buildup of static charge limits the voltage difference to the 
zapper and this can invalidate the test.
Testing should proceed at selected intermediate voltages. High voltage arcs 
lose a lot of energy to heat. The most critical voltage is often at about 7000 V.
4.17  ­Aliasing Errors
An example of an aliasing error occurs in old Western motion pictures where 
wagon wheels appear to rotate backward. To avoid this error the data must be 
sampled and displayed at a higher rate. The rule is that data should be filtered 
and then sampled more than two and a half times the highest frequency of 
interest. If the data is temperature, it is easy to assume that sampling at a high 
frequency is unnecessary. The problem that exists is that there may be interference 
mixed with the signal and sampling this interference can result in a measure-
ment that looks like temperature. The accepted way to avoid this problem is to 
filter the data before sampling. Filtering should not be done digitally after 

123
Glossary
sampling as there may be aliasing errors. Filtering data in the analog domain is 
expensive but often it is necessary.
If the sampling rate of the wagon wheels is slowed, the reverse wheel rotation 
rate will appear to increase. This apparent shift in spectrum can be used as a 
test to determine if an aliasing error has occurred. With the enormous capacity 
we have for storing and processing data, a simple spectral analysis is very 
practical. The data is analyzed at two noninteger sample rates. If the spectrum 
shifts linearly the data is invalid.
Glossary
Aliasing error  A sampling error that results when data contains frequency 
content close to the sampling rate (Section 4.17).
Cross‐coupling  The unwanted transfer of energy between circuits. This is 
often the energy transferred between transmission lines. Long transmission 
lines are the most vulnerable. The victim wave travels in the opposite 
direction to the culprit wave.
Equipment ground  All conductors that could contact a utility power 
conductor. These conductors include racks, cabinets, housings, junction 
boxes, conduit, raceways, generators, motors, breakers, and so forth. 
Equipment ground conductors are green or solid wires running next to 
current‐carrying conductors to keep the fault paths low impedance. They 
connect to the neutral conductor at one point in the service entrance. 
Equipment grounds can be earthed at multiple points.
Electrostatic discharge (ESD)  The high‐voltage phenomena where friction 
moves charges so that they accumulate on bodies and arc when the 
breakdown potential is reached (Section 4.16).
Even‐mode coupling  Coupling that adds to a logic signal and impacts signal 
integrity (Section 4.7).
Forward referencing amplifier  A unity gain differential amplifier used to 
buffer analog signals. The input common can connect to either input thus 
controlling gain polarity. The amplifier is used to couple signals referenced 
to ground in one electrical environment to ground in a second electrical 
environment. The principle use is to avoid a ground loop. The common‐
mode rejection ratio is usually about 100:1 (Section 4.12).
Grounded conductor  In single‐phase power this is the return current 
conductor.
Guard shield  A shield that surrounds the conductors carrying a single analog 
signal that is connected to signal common at the signal source that is usually 
grounded at the signal source (Section 4.11).
Impedance of space  The ratio between the E and H fields for electromagnetic 
energy traveling in space at a distance from a radiator (Section 4.3).
www.ebook3000.com

4  Interference
124
NEC  National Electrical Code.
Neutral  The return power conductor that is earthed at the service entrance in 
three‐phase power. This conductor can carry power current. In a balanced 
three‐phase circuit the neutral current is zero (Section 4.8).
Rise time  The time it takes for a voltage to rise to its expected level for step or 
square waves. Typically when exponentials are involved, the rise time is 
measured between 10 and 90% points. This is not a standard. Rise time is a 
guide to determine the bandwidth of a system.
Zapper  An instrument for generating pulses that simulate the effects of ESD 
(Section 4.16).

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
125
5
5.1  ­Introduction
The number of circuit board applications that involve transmitting or radiating 
signals is growing steadily. Radio, television, and garage door openers held 
center stage for a long while. Today, global positioning, cordless phones, cell 
phones, remote monitors, automobile keys, and communications links of all 
types are taking over. Most devices require a circuit board that receives and/or 
transmits data. Many devices are battery operated, so efficiency is often an 
issue. It is interesting that the same technology that allows the rapid processing 
of digital data can also transmit and receive data in the form of modulated 
carriers.
The general radiation problem involves sine wave signals, active circuits, 
transmission lines, multiple ports, and antennas. A practical approach to 
handling rf design is to measure the reflection and transmission coefficients 
at each port. These coefficients are known as scattering or S parameters. This 
approach is practical because these parameters can be acquired without 
using short and open circuits. Just as a reminder, we are leaving the world 
of step functions and entering the world of sine waves. In most cases, we deal 
with single‐frequency phenomena where the language of circuit theory is 
appropriate.
On a circuit board, an antenna must couple energy into free space which has 
a characteristic impedance 377 ohms. A driver usually connects to a trans-
mission line with a characteristic impedance of 50 ohms. At the antenna, the 
impedance might be complex and near 100 ohms. To optimize the flow of 
energy there needs to be a matching network placed between the transmission 
line supplying energy and the antenna. This network plus the antenna must 
look like a 50‐ohm termination so that there is no reflection at this junction. 
In applications where the radiated frequency is varied, this matching problem 
becomes a compromise.
Radiation
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
126
5.2  ­Standing Wave Ratio
On terminated transmission lines, when there are reflected sine waves, they 
combine with the incident waves to form a standing voltage pattern. There are 
fixed points along a transmission line where the voltage peaks and other fixed 
points where the voltage never exceeds a minimum value. This pattern is 
static and depends on frequency and line length. For long lines, there are mul-
tiple peaks and valleys. The ratio of maximum to minimum voltage along the 
line is called the standing wave ratio (SWR). This ratio is used as a guide as to 
just how closely a transmission line is matched to its termination. When large 
amounts of power are involved or where there is limited power available, this 
ratio is important. In an ideal case, the ratio is unity. Where the voltages peak, 
the currents are a minimum. This means that where the electric field energy 
peaks, the magnetic field energy is minimum. A pattern of superposed waves 
is shown in Figure 5.1.
INSIGHT
In Chapters 1 and 2, it was pointed out that energy is not reflected at a trans-
mission line transition. Wave action is the process of storing, converting, or 
moving magnetic and electric field energy. The common waveforms are 
step functions or sinusoids. For step functions, it was easy to identify when 
there was static energy and moving energy. For sine waves these transitions 
still take place but on a continuous basis which makes it very difficult to 
present graphically on a printed page. There are presentations on the inter-
net that display moving sine waves, but they do not display both electric 
and magnetic field intensities.
For sine waves, all parts of the wave are acting as a leading edge. Standing 
waves are an indication of where along the line the electric and magnetic 
field energy storage tends to concentrate. When there are no standing 
waves, energy passing every point is sinusoidal at one amplitude and moving 
forward.
V
Figure 5.1  A standing wave pattern.

5.4  The Smith Chart
127
5.3  ­The Transmission Coefficient τ
In Section 2.10, the transmission coefficient τ was introduced. In this discus-
sion all impedances were resistances or real numbers, so τ was a real number.
	
2
0
Z
Z
Z
L
L
.	
(5.1)
This equation is valid for real and complex terminating impedances. As an 
example, if a capacitor terminates a transmission line, the impedance ZL is a 
reactance of −j/ωC. If C = 2 and ω = 1, then ZL = −0.5j ohms. If Z0 = 1 then using 
Equation 5.1
	
1 0
1
0 5
0 4
0 8
.
.
.
.
.
j
j
j 	
(5.2)
If the forward wave is a 5‐V sine wave at ω = 1, the transmitted wave is 
5τ = (2 − 4 j) V.
For a review of circuit theory and complex numbers see Appendix A.
5.4  ­The Smith Chart
The Smith chart can be used as a work sheet for designing matching networks 
to terminate a transmission line in its matching impedance. The chart deals 
with sine waves at one frequency. The chart treats the S parameter problem of 
one port and one reflection coefficient. Working charts are available on the 
internet. A Smith chart with limited resolution is shown in Figure 5.2.
A Smith chart1 is a plot of the complex transmission coefficient τ for a 
transmission line with a characteristic impedance of 1 ohm terminated in any 
impedance ZL. Assume ZL = r + jx. The point ZL on the chart is at the intersec-
tion of circle r and circle x. The value of τ is the distance from the point (0,0) to 
the intersection of circles r and x. The Smith chart works for any transmission 
line length at any frequency. An examination of the chart shows that x and r 
can be any value from 0 to ∞. Note that x can be of either polarity. The value of 
τ is not shown on the graph as it is not needed for most applications.
The center or origin of the Smith chart is where τ = 1 and there is no reflec-
tion. The distance from the point (1,0) to ZL. is (τ − 1). Since
	
2
0
Z
Z
Z
L
L
,	
(5.3)
1  A paper authored by P.H. Smith titled “Transmission Line Calculator” described this chart in 
Electronics—January 1939.
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
128
then
	
1
0
0
Z
Z
Z
Z
L
L
.	
(5.4)
Thus, the distance from the point (1,0) to the terminating impedance ZL is 
the complex reflection coefficient ρ. This equation was introduced in 
Section 2.10.
The circles on the Smith chart are marked r and x where r stands for real 
value and x stands for imaginary value. This makes it possible to interpret the 
curves to mean a value of impedance or admittance. For impedances, x stands 
for reactance and r stands for resistance. For admittances, x stands for sus-
ceptance and r stands for conductance. The user must decide when the chart 
represents impedance and when it represents admittance. For an impedance 
chart, the point ZL = 0 is where x and r are equal to 0. This is where the termi-
nating impedance is a short circuit. The point at the far right, where x and r 
are infinite, is an open circuit. If the chart represents admittance, then the 
point where x and r are 0 represents an open circuit and the point where x 
and r are infinite represents a short circuit. To use the chart for admittance 
Toward
source
Toward
termination
τ
ρ
x= 0
A
r= ½
r=1
r= 2
r=0 (unit circle)
x = ½
x = 1
x = 2
(2,0)
(0,–1)
(1,0)
(0,0)
(0,1)
x= – ½
x = –1
x = –2
Figure 5.2  An impedance Smith chart showing the relation between the reflection 
coefficients and terminations on a 1‐ohm transmission line.

5.4  The Smith Chart
129
the value of ZL can be reflected about the origin. A resistor of 5 ohms is on the 
circle r = 5. A conductance of 0.2 S is on the circle r = 0.2. A reactance of 2 j is on 
a circle of x = 2. A susceptance of −0.5 j siemens is on a circle of x = −0.5.
In a typical design, it is desirable to carry energy on a 50‐ohm line to an 
antenna structure and match its driving point impedance. To work with a 
Smith chart, the antenna impedance needs to be scaled down by a factor of 50. 
The Smith chart can then be used to change the terminating impedance to 
1 ohm. This is done by adding impedances and admittances to the antenna at 
the interface. The added elements are then scaled up in impedance by a factor 
of 50. This matching of impedance only works at one frequency.
If the Smith chart represents impedances, then moving along a circle of 
constant resistance adds or subtracts reactance. Adding reactance means 
adding a series inductor or reducing an existing capacitor. Subtracting reactance 
means adding a series capacitor or reducing an existing inductor. Moving along 
a circle of constant reactance adds or subtracts resistance. A negative resistance 
is not allowed. If there is a resistor present it can be reduced.
If the Smith chart represents admittances then moving along a circle of 
constant conductance adds or subtracts susceptance. Adding susceptance 
means adding more shunt capacitance. Subtracting susceptance means adding 
a shunt inductance or reducing an existing capacitor. Moving along a circle of 
constant susceptance adds or subtracts conductance. Adding conductance 
means reducing the value of a shunt resistor.
The technique used to match impedances usually does not add resistance or 
conductance as these components dissipate energy. This means that the 
correcting impedance is usually built up of inductors and capacitors. The idea 
in construction is to add or subtract impedances or admittances until the 
transmission line has an input impedance (admittance) of one real ohm (one real 
siemen). The only orthogonal circle that crosses the (1,0) coordinate is r = 1. 
This real circle is thus key to designing a terminating network. The usual 
procedure is to add reactances or susceptances to reach this circle. This makes 
it easy to reach the point (1,0) by adding the last reactance or susceptance.
To illustrate the use of the Smith chart, consider a termination of 100 ohms 
on a 50‐ohm line. On a Smith chart this is a termination of 2 ohms. This imped-
ance must be modified to where the input impedance is 1 ohm. We rule out 
paralleling the 2 ohms with a resistor of 2 ohms as half of the energy will be 
lost. Since parallel elements must be used to reduce the impedance, the admit-
tance form of the chart is used first. The reciprocal of 2 ohms is 0.5 S. This 
point is located diametrically opposite the midpoint of the chart. This move is 
shown as step A on Figure 5.2. The chart is now in admittance mode. We need 
to place a shunt capacitor across this conductance that will add to the suscep-
tance to reach the dotted admittance circle. The path B is a distance of 0.5 j 
siemens along the r = 0.5 circle. This move represents a shunt capacitor with a 
reactance of −2 j ohms.
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
130
We now convert back to an impedance Smith chart. The reciprocal of the 
point 0.5 + 0.5 j is the point 1.0 and −1.0 j on the path C. If an inductor of 1.0j is 
added, the resulting impedance will be 1 + 0 j which is our objective. In review, 
we now have an impedance of 2 ohms in parallel with a reactance of −2.0 j 
ohms in series with a reactance of 1.0 j. The transmission line is now termi-
nated so that the input impedance is 1 ohm.
These reactances can be related to capacitors and inductors once a frequency 
is selected. At 500 MHz for a 50‐ohm line the inductance is 159 nH and the 
capacitor is 6.7 pF.
This problem can be solved using circuit analysis. The impedance of an 
inductor in series with an admittance consisting of 2 ohms in parallel with a 
capacitor C is
	
Z
j L
j C
1
2
1 0. 	
(5.5)
The real and imaginary terms must balance separately. It is easy to show that 
ωC = ½ and ωL = 1 which agrees with the Smith chart procedure.
A second solution is practical where the capacitor and inductor are inter-
changed but with different values. This solution is shown in Figure 5.3b. Step 
A is the same as before where the chart is in the admittance form. Step B 
shunts the line with an inductor to reach the mirror image of the r = 1 circle 
at x = −1/2 j. Step C returns the chart to the impedance form. Step D adds a 
series capacitor to reach the (1 + 0 j) point. Again, the input impedance to the 
transmission line is 1 ohm.
When parasitics are included in the problem, the mathematics can become 
complex and a graphical solution can be very useful. In general, accuracy is not 
an issue in designs as there are many parasitics that are not considered. The 
Smith chart provides a visual tool that directs finding the path to a solution.
5.5  ­Smith Chart and Wave Impedances (Sine Waves)
A transmission line terminated in its characteristic impedance has an input 
impedance that is the characteristic impedance of the line. This impedance 
is independent of line length. If a transmission line is terminated in any 
other impedance, the input impedance varies with line length and frequency. 
The input impedance varies because the reflected wave modifies how much 
current the source must supply. The line length determines the phase of the 
reflected voltage at the source and this affects the input impedance.
On a Smith chart the reflection coefficient vector ρ is drawn from the center 
of the graph to the terminating impedance. The terminating impedance is 
the wave impedance of the line at the termination point. To determine the 

Figure 5.3  (a) The paths taken on a Smith chart to reach the point τ = 1 where x = 0 and r = 1. 
(We first added a shunt capacitor.) and (b) The paths taken on a Smith chart to reach the 
point τ = 1 where x = 0 and r = 1. (We first added a shunt inductor.)
Toward
source
Toward
termination
The real
circle
r = 1
Mirror image
of the r= 1
circle
D
C
A
B
r= 2
x = – ½
x = –1
x = –2
x= 0
x = ½
x = 1
x =2
r= ½
r=1
r=0 (unit circle)
(a)
Toward
source
Toward
termination
r = 2
x =–½
x=–1
x = –2
x=½
x = 1
x = 2
r =½
D
(b)
C
A
B
x= 0
The real
circle
r = 1
Mirror image
of the r= 1
circle
r =0 (unit circle)
r = 1
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
132
impedance at the driving point, the reflection vector can be rotated back 
(clockwise) toward the source. The angle of rotation is a measure of length on 
the transmission line. One half wavelength corresponds to 360° on the Smith 
chart. The reflection coefficient vector points to an impedance that is the 
input impedance of the transmission line for that line length and for that 
termination.
To determine the SWR along a line, the reflection coefficient vector is rotated 
to where it crosses the real positive axis of the chart. The crossing point is the 
SWR. The proof is as follows.
The SWR is the maximum voltage on a transmission line divided by the 
minimum voltage. The maximum voltage occurs where the forward and 
reflected waves add together. The minimum occurs when they subtract. The 
SWR at an arbitrary point on the line is
	
SWR
V
V
V
V
F
R
F
R
	
(5.6)
where VF is the amplitude of the forward wave and VR is the amplitude of the 
reflected wave. The reflection coefficient ρ relates the forward wave to the 
reflected wave or
	
V
V
R
F.	
(5.7)
Substituting Equation 5.7 into Equation 5.6 yields
	
SWR
1
1
.	
(5.8)
On the Smith chart the reflection coefficient ρ is the vector distance from the 
point Z = 1 real ohm to the terminating impedance ZL.
The reflection coefficient is given by
	
Z
Z
Z
Z
L
L
0
0
.	
(5.9)
Solving for ZL where Z0 = 1 we get
	
ZL
1
1
.	
(5.10)
Thus, on the Smith chart, the value of the terminating impedance is the value 
of the SWR at that point. At a general point on the chart, the ratio of voltages 
is complex. The ratio of voltages we are interested in is a real number. This real 
number is obtained by rotating the vector ρ to where it crosses the positive real 
axis of the Smith chart. The angle that is rotated defines the location on the 

5.6  Stubs and Impedance Matching
133
transmission line where the largest voltage ratio occurs. This real value of ρ 
is the SWR.
The peaks of sine wave voltage along a transmission line repeat every half 
wavelength. The Smith chart provides information for each one‐half wave-
length section. If the line length is not a multiple of a half wavelength, the 
Smith chart applies to the partial section up to the generator (voltage 
source). The reflection vector ρ points to the load impedance ZL at the end 
of the line. If the vector ρ is rotated clockwise the number of electrical 
degrees on the transmission line, it will point to the input impedance of the 
transmission line when the line is terminated in ZL. Remember that each 
360° rotation of ρ represents a half wavelength along the line.
5.6  ­Stubs and Impedance Matching
Stubs can often be used as a reactance to match a transmission line to a load. 
The reactance of a stub depends on the length of the stub and whether the stub 
is terminated in a short circuit or left open (unterminated). Since there are no 
resistors involved in the termination, the stub can only be reactive which means 
it looks like a single capacitor or inductor. The matching process simply adds a 
stub to the transmission line at a calculated point on the transmission line. The 
characteristic impedance and the length of the stub determines the reactance 
that is added.
The reactance of a stub can be determined by using a second Smith chart. 
In the impedance form of the chart, the point where the termination is a short 
circuit is at the far left. The reflection coefficient is a vector from the origin 
to this point. When this vector is rotated counterclockwise, it points to the 
reactance of a shorted line where the angle is proportional to stub length. One 
revolution of the vector corresponds to one‐half wavelength at the frequency 
of interest. The vector first points to a negative reactance and zero resistance. 
As the angle increases the point on the stub length increases and the negative 
reactance increases. At 180° the line looks like an infinite capacitance or a short 
circuit. In the next 180° the reactance is positive which means the stub looks 
like a decreasing inductive reactance. Thus, a shorted stub can take on any 
value of reactance depending on stub length.
A Smith chart can be used to determine the stub length required to provide 
a required reactance when the stub is open circuited. The reflection coefficient 
vector points from the origin to the far right. As the vector rotates counter-
clockwise the positive reactance decreases which means the inductance is 
decreasing. At an angle of 180° the inductance is 0. As the angle increases the 
reactance goes negative which means the stub looks capacitive. The stub can 
take on any reactive value depending on stub length. In general, a shorted stub 
is preferred over an open stub as it is less apt to radiate.
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
134
To match a transmission line to a termination, a stub is added to the line at a 
point that has a real normalized resistance of 1 ohm. The reflection coefficient 
is rotated from the terminating impedance point until it crosses the r = 1 circle. 
The angle of rotation defines the point on the line where the stub must be 
attached. In general, it can be located at one of two points. If the reflection 
coefficient crosses the 1‐ohm circle at 2 j, the stub must have an input imped-
ance of −2 j. With this correction, the input impedance to the transmission 
line is 1 ohm.
Electrical degrees around a Smith chart and distance along a transmission 
line are proportional. At 100 MHz in a vacuum, one wavelength is 30 cm. 
If  the dielectric constant is 4 the distance is 15 cm. A half wavelength is 
7.5 cm. This is 360° on the Smith chart. Thus, 45° represents 0.93 cm along 
the transmission line.
5.7  ­Radiation—General Comments
Transmission lines by their very nature confine electromagnetic fields. We 
have discussed cases where reflections take place where there are transitions in 
conductor geometry. When sine waves are used on transmission lines, the 
same rules apply. In logic, reflections at open circuits are desired. For sine wave 
transmissions, reflections are undesirable as they imply an SWR and this limits 
the antenna radiation.
There are two basic radiator geometries on circuit boards. These are loops 
and isolated conductors that should be correctly called antennas. Loops are 
generally considered low‐impedance radiators while isolated conductors are 
considered high‐impedance radiators. Near a loop, the magnetic field domi-
nates and the ratio between E and H fields is low. Near a conductor where the 
return current is the D field in space, the electric field dominates and the ratio 
between E and H fields is high. At a distance from a radiating structure, the 
ratio E/H approaches 377 ohms, the characteristic impedance of free space. 
This distance is λ/2π where λ is the wavelength. This transition point is referred 
to as the near‐field/far‐field interface distance.
5.8  ­Radiation from Dipoles
The simplest radiator is the half‐dipole antenna. On the earth, the antenna is 
usually mounted vertically and driven from a sinusoidal voltage source at the 
base. The current supplied to the antenna flows in space and returns near the 
transmission line on the surface of the earth at the base of the antenna. In 
space, this current is correctly called a displacement current. In almost all 
cases the driving voltage is a sinusoid. The information being transmitted can 

5.8  Radiation from Dipoles
135
modulate the amplitude, frequency, or phase of transmission. In many schemes, 
the modulation is a combination of phase and amplitude. If there are four 
amplitude levels and eight phase possibilities, a length of carrier can represent 
a 32‐bit word.
In a typical circuit carrying sinusoids, the energy stored in an inductance 
or capacitor is returned to the circuit in each half cycle. Most of the energy is 
stored in the component or in the nearby space. When a radiator is built, the 
field energy is allowed to extend out into space. There is a delay associated 
with returning this energy to the circuit. The returning energy can be divided 
into two components. The component that is 90° out of phase cannot re‐enter 
the circuit and is radiated. The higher the frequency, the more efficient the 
radiator can be.
The electric field dominates near a dipole. This higher field impedance 
makes it easier to shield. The relative field intensities at a distance from the 
radiator are shown in Figure 5.4. Beyond the near‐field/far‐field interface, the 
E and H field intensities fall off proportional to distance, not distance squared. 
The energy density falls off as the square of the distance.
The field intensity around a dipole is independent of direction and falls to 
zero in the vertical direction. In many applications, omnidirectional radiation 
is preferred. The antenna geometry is not limited to simple dipoles or loops. 
Right‐angle structures that are asymmetrical and use conducting plates are 
often effective in radiating in all directions. Some antennas are in the form of 
paddles. The presence of nearby circuitry makes it difficult to predict the actual 
radiation pattern.
Vias often extend through a board where the path for current flow uses only 
a part of the via. This unused part of the via forms a short segment of antenna 
that can radiate in the GHz range. To avoid this radiation, the extra via segment 
can be removed by drilling. A second solution is to provide a return current 
path next to the via so that a radiating structure is not formed. This points out 
the fact that field control gets more difficult as the frequency content rises.
I
E
E
E
E
E
E
E
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 5.4  The E and H field intensities near a half‐dipole antenna.
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
136
5.9  ­Radiation from Loops
Loops are characterized by currents that follow a closed path on conductors. 
The radiation from logic traces is considered a loop in character and the wave 
impedance is 50 ohms. Radiation is limited to that part of trace where the 
voltage is in transition. At a distance equal to the near‐field/far‐field interface, 
the ratio of field intensity will be 377 ohms. Inside this distance, the H field 
dominates. Outside of the interface distance the E and H field intensities fall 
off linearly with distance, not distance squared. The field intensities are shown 
in Figure 5.5.
The current levels on a typical circuit board are limited by the characteristic 
impedance of traces. The characteristic impedance of free space is 377 ohms. 
Dipoles are, in general, a better way to bridge this impedance mismatch if 
radiation is to be efficient.
H
H
E
E
A
I
R
Radiating
loop
Near-ﬁeld/
far-ﬁeld
interface
distance
2πr
λ
Figure 5.5  The E and H field intensities near a radiating loop.
INSIGHT
The concept of ground or zero potential loses its meaning in space. It is very 
handy to have reference conductors to describe circuit behavior. Fields are 
shaped and reflected by conductors, but this is not the domain of circuit 
theory.

5.11  Apertures
137
5.10  ­Effective Radiated Power for Sinusoids
The power W crossing a small area A at a distance from a transmitting antenna is
	
W
A
E H
	
(5.11)
where E and H are the electric and magnetic field vectors.
At a far distance r from a radiator, the field is spherical in shape and the total 
radiated power crossing a spherical surface would be
	
W
r
EH4
2.	
(5.12)
In the far field the ratio of E/H is 377 ohms. Solving for H, Equation 5.12 can 
be written as
	
W
r
E2
2
377 4
.	
(5.13)
Using Equation 5.8, the electric field E at a distance r can be written as
	
E
30
1 2
W
r
/
.	
(5.14)
As an example, assume a cell phone transmits ½ W uniformly in all directions. 
At a distance of 100 m the E field strength is 40 mV/m.
A radar pulse of 10 kW in a solid angle of 1° has an effective radiated power 
of 360 times 10 kW or 3.6 MW.
5.11  ­Apertures
Every electrical device that is housed in a metal enclosure requires seams and 
holes for construction, ventilation, power, and signal transport. These 
apertures are a path for fields to move in or out of a structure. A single conductor 
allows the penetration of fields at all frequencies while a hole or seam attenu-
ates a field depending on maximum dimension. In general, the orientation of 
the field is unknown and the assumption that must be made is to treat the 
worst case scenario. If the field has a half wavelength equal to the diameter 
of the hole or the length of the seam, we assume the field enters or leaves 
unattenuated. It seems counterintuitive to consider a narrow seam as being an 
opening but it is the only safe interpretation. In fact, a seam is defined as an 
opening in a conductor where surface currents cannot freely cross the seam. 
The author has seen radiation from a vacuum chamber formed from two 
machined metal surfaces over 1 inch wide. This seam had to be closed by using 
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
138
a gasket that made a continuous connection across the gap. In this case, the 
field strength was very high and there was attenuation but not enough.
Seams formed by overlapping metal surfaces can be reduced in length by 
adding point contacts such as screws. The initial aperture is now a group of 
shorter apertures. Apertures closed in this manner are said to be dependent. 
The dependence arises because surface currents cannot circulate freely around 
each opening. The result is a group of apertures that behave as a single open-
ing. If the attenuation factor must be 100, then 100 screws would be required 
to close the seam. A large screw count is not a viable solution. This is the rea-
son why a gasket is needed as it makes hundreds of connections. Conductive 
surfaces such as steel or aluminum will oxidize and the metal must be plated 
where a gasket makes electrical contact.
Seams that form a flange can be considered a waveguide. In most situations 
the depth of the flange is much shorter than the length of the seam and there is 
very little attenuation.
Consider a hole that attenuates a field by 20 dB which is a factor of 10. A similar 
hole at a distance from the first hole will allow equal field penetration. This second 
aperture is said to be independent because currents can circulate freely around the 
opening. To calculate the total field penetration from independent apertures, 
the field intensities add directly. If the external field is 60 dBμV/m, the field inside 
the structure is 40 dBμV/m from each aperture. This is 100 μV for each aperture or 
a total field strength of 200 μV. Expressed in dB notation, the resulting intensity is 
46 dBμV. Notice that we cannot add intensities using the dB notation. Obviously, 
this is a worst case approximation. When there are many openings, the field inten-
sity inside an enclosure cannot be greater than the external field intensity.
An array of ventilation holes behaves as a single hole if the holes are closely 
spaced. A screen mesh behaves as a single opening provided the mesh is 
bonded at each wire crossing and the edges of the mesh are bonded to the 
conducting surface. Aluminum mesh is unsatisfactory because of oxidation.
Connectors, displays, and line filters form apertures that must often be sealed. 
Conducting gaskets are needed to close these apertures. It is necessary to close 
all apertures to solve an interference problem. One unfiltered conductor enter-
ing or leaving a controlled space can carry interference and negate all other 
attempts at control. In trouble shooting, it is advised that all fixes remain in 
place until a solution is found. Then the fixes are removed one at a time. This 
is the only way to find a solution when two or more changes are required.
5.12  ­Honeycomb Filters
A honeycomb filter is formed by soldering together a group of hexagonal con-
ducting channels. The channel diameter must be less than a half wavelength at 
the highest frequency that is to be attenuated. At 15 GHz a half wavelength is 

5.14  Screened Rooms
139
1.0 cm, so a honeycomb channel width of 1 cm would work. A honeycomb 
made of a hundred channels would form a unit that is about 10 cm in diameter. 
These channels are independent apertures as current can circulate freely 
around each opening. In this example, the attenuation factor is given by 
Equation 3.7 or A = 30 h/d dB where h is the depth and d is the diameter of the 
opening. If the ratio h/d is 3 then the attenuation factor is 90 dB. Since there are 
100 apertures the resulting attenuation factor is 50 dB. This is a large attenuation 
factor and it tells us that very little field will enter through the honeycomb. 
If the interfering field is at 150 MHz there is an additional attenuation factor of 
40 dB. This is the ratio of half the wavelength to the aperture opening.
The biggest problem involving honeycomb filters is the aperture that mounts 
the honeycomb. This aperture must be sealed with a conducting gasket that is 
near perfect if the waveguide is to be effective. If the mounting seal in the 
example above has a 1 cm long gap, the honeycomb can be totally ineffective. 
This means the mounting gasket must be correctly installed using a plated 
surface.
5.13  ­Shielded Enclosures
The testing of electronics for radiation requires controlled spaces. In some 
cases this testing can be done in a remote open area, a distance from known 
radiators. In other cases it is necessary to use a conductive enclosure that can 
limit the presence of unwanted electromagnetic activity. Scientific experimen-
tation often requires a controlled electromagnetic environment. Supplying 
power to operate the hardware and test equipment becomes a part of the 
problem. Vents that supply air can allow the entry of unwanted fields. Lighting, 
physical access, and communication can also provide entry for unwanted 
fields. The level of interference that can be tolerated obviously determines just 
how difficult it is to construct the controlled space. Shielding against power‐
related magnetic fields is the most difficult part of the general problem. For 
logic hardware, interference in the power part of the spectrum is usually not a 
problem. We discuss the general problem as this sheds light on all the issues.
5.14  ­Screened Rooms
A screened room that limits magnetic field penetration at power frequencies is 
made from panels of silicon steel. The permeability of the steel is very nonlinear 
and does not provide very much attenuation for weak magnetic fields at 60 Hz 
and its harmonics. Since power must be used to operate test hardware and lights, 
some magnetic field must be brought into the room. For logic circuit boards, 
the emphasis is on measuring radiation above 1 MHz and low‐frequency 
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
140
magnetic fields are usually not an issue. There are some best practices that should 
be followed in providing power to a screened room that adds very little cost.
Power should not be routed along the external walls of the room. The chang-
ing magnetic field from power conductors will cause current flow on the exte-
rior walls. This occurs even if the wiring is in conduit. Some of this current 
crosses into the inner surfaces. Ideally, the conduit carrying power should 
arrive perpendicular to an exterior wall. The room should not be located near 
existing power panels. Multiple grounding of the screen room will provide cur-
rent paths that can allow some current to cross to the inner surfaces. This 
means that there is field penetration. It is preferred that all electrical connec-
tions to the room be located in one area. This includes power line filters and 
communication links. Fiber optics is a good way to communicate to outside 
hardware. Any steel supporting the optics cable should be bonded to the room 
wall. Any hole in the wall should be extended into a metal tube so that it is a 
waveguide beyond cutoff. The tube can run parallel to the wall surface.
The one ground for a screened room is equipment ground. There is capaci-
tance from the screened room to any building steel under the room. This reac-
tive grounding path can be limited by placing the room on blocks.
Air should be provided through a honeycomb filter. The duct carrying the air 
should have a plastic section, so the room is not regrounded. Air filters should 
not require removal of the honeycomb section. Florescent lighting is electri-
cally noisy and should not be used. A weak spot is usually the finger stock used 
to seal the door. If the stock is protected by a metal channel it will not catch on 
clothing.
5.15  ­Line Filters
Power line filters usually consist of series inductors and shunt capacitors. The 
ungrounded (hot) lead is often filtered with respect to the neutral or grounded 
lead. The code prohibits grounding the neutral conductor, so it must be filtered 
separately. All leads carried in a power connection should be filtered to the 
common outer surface of the conducting enclosure. In a screened room this 
common conductor is the outer wall. The electrical code does not allow any 
components to be placed in the equipment grounding conductor path. This 
means that equipment ground (green wire) must be connected directly to the 
local housing. If the equipment ground conductor enters the hardware, it will 
bring in interference. Electrically any filter associated with the hardware must 
be located external to the hardware but physically the connection can be hid-
den from view. This means that line filters should be supplied in a metal hous-
ing so the unit can be mounted inside of the hardware without allowing fields 
to enter. This mounting cannot be on a painted or anodized surface. Filters in 
plastic housings are very suspect.

141
Glossary 
Filtering must often cover a very wide frequency spectrum which means that 
several filter sections may be required. For a screened room, the line filter can 
be an expensive component as conductors must carry many amperes, both 
power leads must be filtered, and filtering must cover a wide spectrum. 
In designing the power entrance, the path for interference should be treated 
in terms of fields and the process a reflection of field energy. Power lines are 
not broadband transmission lines and obviously the process of reflection will 
not be perfect. It is wise to review the path taken by interference currents so 
that interference fields can be traced. If fields can enter the hardware the filter 
is ineffective.
The inductances used in a power filter must carry the line current. Ampere‐
turns can easily saturate any magnetic materials. The permeability of magnetic 
materials above 1 MHz is also an issue. This means that inductors used in line 
filters will usually be built as a solenoid in air. The parasitic capacitance of the 
inductors limits the high frequency filter performance. This is the reason that line 
filters must be built in sections. To further complicate the issue, the filter sections 
must be shielded from each other. All of these factors make line filters for screened 
rooms large and expensive. It also brings into focus the fact that many line filters 
are ineffective and can be omitted with little performance impact.
Glossary
Active circuit  Any semiconductor component or product that uses transistors 
or FETs.
Admittance  The reciprocal of impedance. It has a real part called a conductance 
and an imaginary part called a susceptance. The units of admittance are the 
siemens.
Admittance Smith chart  The impedance Smith chart rotated 180°.
Complex notation  The use of complex numbers to represent the 90° phase 
relationship between sine wave measures of current and voltage in inductors 
and capacitors. This notation extends to reflection  and transmission 
coefficients. This notation is explained in Appendix A.
Conductance  The reciprocal of resistance. The units are real siemens.
Dipole  An antenna configuration. A full dipole is a length of the conductor 
fed from a center point. A half dipole is a conductor perpendicular to a 
conducting surface such as the earth.
Effective radiated power  The power required to establish a field of uniform 
intensity in all directions.
Full dipole  An antenna consisting of two in‐line conductors driven by a 
balanced signal.
Half dipole  An antenna consisting of a single conductor usually mounted 
perpendicular to a conducting surface.
www.ebook3000.com

5  Radiation
142
Impedance  The opposition to current flow in any network. It generally applies 
to sine waves. It is used as the ratio of electric to magnetic field intensities in 
space and along transmission lines. For a transmission line, it is usually a real 
number. In a network, it is usually a complex number. Impedance has a real 
component called resistance and a complex component called a reactance.
Impedance of free space  377 ohms. The ratio of the electric field intensity to 
the magnetic field intensity in space at a distance from the radiator 
(Section 5.1).
Interface distance  The distance from the radiator where the wave impedance 
is approximately 377 ohms. This distance is λ/2π.
Near‐field/far‐field interface distance  The distance from a radiator where 
the wave impedance E/H is equal to 377 ohms.
Radiation  The release of electromagnetic energy that does not return to the 
generating source.
Reactance  The opposition to current flow in capacitors and inductors. An 
inductor has a positive reactance and a capacitor a negative reactance. The 
unit of reactance is the ohm.
Siemens  The unit of admittance. Admittance has a real part called conductance 
and an imaginary part called susceptance.
Smith chart  A plot of the complex transmission coefficients τ for a terminated 
transmission line with a characteristic impedance of 1 ohm terminated in 
any impedance. The terminating impedances are found on orthogonal 
circles located inside a unit circle. The center of this circle is where there is 
full transmission and τ = 1 (Section 5.4).
Solid angle  Consider a circular cone with its tip at the center of a unit sphere. 
The surface area intersected by the cone is a measure of solid angle. The total 
surface area of a sphere is 4πr2. The full solid angle is 4π steradians.
Standing wave ratio  The ratio of peak voltage to minimum voltage along a 
transmission line carrying a steady sine wave signal. Abbreviated SWR. This 
pattern is stationary along the transmission line. For an ideal transmission 
the SWR is unity (Section 5.2).
Stub  A short section of transmission line. It can be shorted or open circuited 
at the far end.
Susceptance  For sine waves. The reciprocal of reactance. The ratio of current 
to voltage for a capacitor or inductor when a voltage is applied. In circuit 
theory, the susceptance of a capacitor is a positive imaginary number of 
siemens. The susceptance of an inductor is a negative imaginary number of 
siemens.
SWR  See standing wave ratio.
Wavelength  The distance between positive peaks for a sine wave pattern.

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
143
Appendix A
A.1  Introduction
The material in this appendix is a fast review of linear circuit theory. This 
material is needed when applying the Smith chart to matching impedances. 
This theory describes the voltages and currents that result when sine waves at 
a fixed frequency are used to excite a network of linear components. Complex 
notation is used so that the phase relations in RLC networks can be analyzed 
as a function of frequency. The concepts of impedance, admittance, resistance, 
conductance, reactance, and susceptance are introduced. If the reader needs 
a slower pace, there are many texts available with problem sets. Working 
problems is an important part of learning this material and keeping it fresh.
A.2  Unit Circle and Sine Waves
On a simple grid of vertical and horizontal lines, label the center point as zero. 
This point is called the origin. Draw a circle with the center in mid page. This 
is called the unit circle. The horizontal line that goes through the origin is the 
x axis, the vertical line that goes through the origin is the y axis. The top of the 
circle is a y value of 1. The bottom is −1. The far left point has a y value of 0 and 
an x value of −1. Number the grid of lines so that every point on the circle can 
be given an x and y value from 0 to ±1.
Now draw a radial line from the origin to the circle at the point where y = 0.5. 
The radius is the hypotenuse of a triangle formed by the x and y distances. 
Note that any point on the circle must satisfy the relationship x2 + y2 = 1. This 
means that the x value here is 0.866 when the y value is 0.5. This point is often 
labeled (x, y) = (0.5, 0.866) (see Figure A.1).
Label the angle between the radius and the x axis β. When the angle is 
increased to 45°, the value of x and y are both 0.707. When the radius is vertical 
Sine Waves in Circuits
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
144
the value of x is 0 and the y value is 1.0. This point on the diagram is called (0, 1). 
The angle β = 90°.
Continue to increase the angle until the tip of the radius makes a full circle. 
In one revolution this angle is 360°. Two full cycles would result in an angle of 
720°. When the angle is 150°, the y value returns to 0.5. When the angle is 270°, 
the y value is −1. This point is identified as (0, −1).
This vertical or y value in this diagram is called the sine of the angle. If the 
line is above the x axis the sine value is positive. If the line is below the x axis 
the sine value is negative. If the angle is labeled β, the equation that relates the 
y value to the angle β is
	
y
sin
	
(A1)
where sin is the abbreviation for sine. This equation is read “y equals sine of β.” 
The value of y is always between +1 and −1. When β is 0° or 180°, the value of y 
is 0. This means that sin (180°) = 0. When β = 90°, sin (90°) = 1.
The sine function is a ratio of line lengths using the unit circle. It is one of six 
trigonometric functions. The x value in the unit circle example above is called 
the cosine function. It is abbreviated as cos β. In equation form we can write
	
x
cos .	
(A2)
The value of the cosine function when β = 0° is 1: when β = 90° the value of 
cos β is 0. When β = 180° the value of cos β is −1.
Now rotate the radial counterclockwise at a constant rate starting with the 
tip at the point (1, 0). On a second graph, plot the vertical position of the tip 
against time. The curve that results (shown in Figure A.2) is called a sine wave. 
If the radial starts at (0, 1) and rotates at a steady rate, a cosine wave is formed. 
Sine waves and cosine waves have the same shape but the peak values occur at 
a different time. The cosine wave is said to lead the sine wave in phase by 90°. 
By convention any wave with this shape is called a sine wave.
(0.5,0.866)
(1,0)
(0,1)
x
I
y
β
Figure A.1  The unit circle and the point 
(0.5, 0.866).

Appendix A
145
Problem Set A.2
1	 Simplify sin 90° + cos 180° − sin 270°.
2	 A unit radial has an x value of 0.707. What is the y value?
3	 At what two angles does sin β = 0.707?
4	 If sin β = 0.4 what is cos β?
5	 What are the maximum and minimum values of the sine function?
A.3  ­Angles, Frequency, and rms
The measurement of angles dates well before man invented the calculus. 
Dividing the circle into 360 parts is a part of history. Some feel it would have 
made more sense to divide the circle into 100 parts rather than 360. In math-
ematics, the most useful way to measure angles involves the radius. Take a 
circle and wrap the radius along the circumference. The angle that is sub-
tended by the radius is called a radian. Since 2π radians = 360°, we know that 
1 radian is equal to 57.29°. This is not a nice even number. To get around the 
problem, electrical engineers measure angles in multiples of 2π. In other 
words, 2π radians equals 360°. An angle of π/2 radians is thus read as 90 
electrical degrees. Most engineers refer to the angle as π/2 and omit the term 
radian. In the calculus the derivative of sin x is cos x, but only if the angles 
are in radian units.
The sine of 90° is equal to 1. The convention that is in constant use in engi-
neering is sin(90°) = 1, which is written as sin(π/2) = 1.
It is very important to realize that the sine function only applies to angles. 
In one cycle the angle changes 360° or 2π radians. To generate sine waves at a 
y = sin β
+1
–1
y
Time
y= cos β
β
Figure A.2  A sine and cosine wave.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
146
given frequency, say at 60 Hz which is really 60 cycles/s, the number of degrees 
that must pass in 1 second is 60 times 360° or 60 times 2π radians. By convention 
the angle in radians at a time t is simply
	
ft	
(A3)
where f is the conventional frequency in hertz and t is time in seconds. Since 
the term 2πf occurs often in electronics it is, by convention, labeled the Greek 
letter ω. The term ω is called the radian frequency.
	
2 f 	
(A4)
where f is frequency in hertz. The angle β in radians as a function of time is
	
t.	
(A5)
It is necessary to interpret all literature that describes sinusoidal responses as 
being in terms of radian frequency, not degrees frequency. A sine wave voltage 
would be described by
	
v
V
V
sin
sin
t
ft
2
	
(A6)
where V is the peak voltage value, v is the value of voltage at time t, and ω is 
the radian frequency. Often, just the lower case letter v is used and the reader 
understands it is a sine wave. It is time consuming to write sin ωt over and 
over. This understanding takes time to get used to. The sine waves in Figure A.2 
are phase shifted by 90 electrical degrees. The cosine wave could have been 
written
	
v
Vsin
t
	
(A7)
where β = π/2.
The value V is called the peak value. The value v (in lower case) changes with 
time in a sinusoidal manner. This is also by convention. For current, the expres-
sion might be
	
i
I
t
sin
.	
(A8)
The voltage V or the current I are peak values. The value measured by a 
voltmeter is often the heating value. This is the peak sine value divided by 
the square root of 2 or 0.707 V. In most electronics the peak value is used, 
not the rms value. This is also by convention. In power engineering V would 
mean the rms or heating value, not the peak value. The utility power in a 
home is 120 V rms. This voltage has a peak value of 169.7 V and a peak‐to‐
peak value of 339 V.

Appendix A
147
The current that flows when a voltage is applied to a resistor R is by Ohm’s 
law V/R. The current can also be described by rotating a radial line. The rotating 
radius for the current points in the same direction as the voltage. The voltage 
and current are in phase. This means that when the voltage peaks the current 
also peaks. This rotating line is a vector as it has direction and intensity indi-
cated by length.
Problem Set A.3
1	 What is the value of sin(3π/2)?
2	 What is the value of cos(−π/2)?
3	 What is the radian frequency if the voltage vector rotates at twice per 
second?
4	 At 100 Hz, how many degrees does the radial cover in 1 millisecond?
5	 At 100 Hz, how many radians does the radial cover in 1 millisecond?
6	 The voltage vector rotates once per microsecond. What is the frequency? 
What is the radian frequency?
7	 A voltage has a peak value of 100 V. What is its rms value?
8	 Write the equation for a sine wave at 1 kHz that leads another 1 kHz signal 
of equal amplitude by 30°.
9	 A voltage 3 sin ωt is added to a voltage 4 cos ωt. What is the sum?
10	 A voltage 3 sin ωt is added to a voltage 4 cos(ωt + π/6). What is the sum?
A.4­  The Reactance of an Inductor
In the circuit in Figure A.3, a sinusoidal voltage is connected to an inductor 
at the moment of maximum voltage. This timing avoids generating any transients. 
The current starts at zero and increases as long as the voltage is positive. When 
V
X
V
L
t
I
I
Figure A.3  Sine wave voltage and current for an inductor. The current lags the voltage by 90°.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
148
the voltage is zero the current peaks. The current begins to decrease as the 
voltage goes negative. The current is zero when the voltage is at its nega-
tive peak. The current and voltage waveform are shown in Figure A.3.
The current lags the voltage by 90 electrical degrees. If v = V sin ωt then the 
current I is equal to
	
I
t
L
Vcos
	
(A9)
where ω is the radian frequency, L is the inductance in henries, and V is the 
peak voltage.
This 90° relation between current and voltage occurs for every inductor 
handling sine wave signals. The ratio of peak voltage to peak current flow is 
called a reactance XL measured in ohms. The peaks do not occur at the same 
time.
	
V
L
I
X
L
fL
2
.	
(A10)
If a steady current flows in an inductor that uses magnetic material, the 
material will saturate. This results in nonlinear behavior. Inductors that carry 
low‐frequency currents should not use magnetic materials without an ade-
quate air gap.
When inductors are paralleled the total current that flows is given by
	
I
L
L
L
V
V
V
T
1
2
.	
(A11)
Eliminating V, it is easy to see that parallel inductors add using reciprocals.
	
1
1
1
1
2
L
L
L
T
.	
(A12)
Problem Set A.4
1	 What is the reactance of a 1 mH inductor at 10 kHz?
2	 What is the current flow in a 1 μH inductor at 2 MHz if the voltage is 1 V peak?
3	 What is the inductance of a 10 μH inductor in parallel with an 8 μH inductor?
A.5­  The Reactance of a Capacitor
In the circuit of Figure A.4, a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a capacitor at 
the moment the voltage starts going positive. This timing avoids generating 
any transients.

Appendix A
149
The current that flows depends on the rate of change of voltage which is 
maximum at the moment of contact. The current leads the voltage by 90 
electrical degrees and is equal to
	
i
C
t
Vcos
	
(A13)
where ω is the radian frequency, C is the capacitance in farads, and V is the peak 
voltage. This 90° relationship between current and voltage occurs for every 
capacitor when there are sine waves. The ratio of peak voltage to peak current 
is called a reactance XC measured in ohms. The reactance is
	
X
I
C
fC
C
V
1
1
2
.	
(A14)
When capacitors are placed in parallel their capacitances add directly.
When capacitors are put in series their reactances add directly. Using 
Equation A12 the reactance of series capacitors is
	
X
C
C
C
1
1
1
1
2
T
.	
(A15)
Eliminating ω it is easy to see that series capacitances add by using 
reciprocals.
	
1
1
1
1
2
C
C
C
T
.	
(A16)
Problem Set A.5
1	 What is the reactance of a 0.001 μF capacitor at 100 MHz?
2	 What is the parallel capacitance of 1 nF and 200 pF?
3	 What is the capacitance of 0.001 μF and 0.002 μF in series?
4	 What capacitance has a reactance of 50 ohms at 400 MHz?
X
V
C
V
t
I
Figure A.4  Sine wave voltage and current for a capacitor. The voltage leads the current by 90°.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
150
A.6  An Inductor and a Resistor in Series
Assume a current is flowing in a series resistor and inductor. The voltage across 
the inductor peaks 90 electrical degrees before the voltage across the resistor. 
If the voltage across the resistor is IR sin ωt, then the voltage across the inductor 
is IωL cos ωt. The sum of these voltages is
	
IR
t
I L
t
t
sin
cos
sin
.
V
	
(A17)
Expand the right term, then equate the coefficients of sin ωt and cos ωt.
It is not difficult to show that
	
(
)
ω
=
+
½
2
2 2
V
I R
L
	
(A18)
and
	
tan
.
1
L
R
	
(A19)
The ratio of V/I is called an impedance and is usually assigned the letter Z. 
In this case, the magnitude of the impedance in ohms of a resistor in series with 
an inductor is
	
(
)
ω
=
+
½
2
2 2
.
Z
R
L
	
(A20)
Equations A19 and A20 are exactly the same as assigning a real value to a 
horizontal vector representing the voltage across the resistor and assigning an 
imaginary value to a vertical vector representing the voltage across the inductor. 
Using complex notation, the series RL circuit has an opposition to current flow 
equal to Z = R + jωL. The factor j is equal to the square root of −1. These vectors 
are shown in Figure A.5.
The impedance Z in ohms using complex notations is
	
Z
R
j L.	
(A21)
Total
voltage
VR
VR
I
I
L
R
10 V
6.28V
VL
VL
Figure A.5  The vectors representing the voltages in a series RL circuit.

Appendix A
151
The reactance XL in ohms of the inductor is
	
X
j L
L
.	
(A22)
A 10‐ohm resistor in series with a 1‐H inductor at 1 Hz has an impedance of 
(10 + 6.28 j) ohms. This means that if a sine wave current of 1 A were to flow in 
this impedance, the voltage across the resistor would be a 10‐V sine wave 
and the voltage across the inductor would be a 6.28‐V cosine wave. The total 
voltage is (102 + 6.282)½ V = 11.8 V. This is a sine wave voltage leading the 
voltage across the resistor by 32.3°.
Problem Set A.6
1	 An inductor of 10 μH is in series with 50 ohms. What is the total impedance 
at 20 MHz?
2	 An inductance has a reactance of 40 ohms at 50 MHz. What is the 
inductance?
3	 An inductor of 3 μH is in series with 100 ohms. What is the phase angle 
between the current and voltage at 10 MHz?
4	 At what frequency will an inductor of 20 nH have a reactance of 100 ohms?
A.7  A Capacitor and a Resistor in Series
When a resistor and a capacitor are placed in series, a current generates 
a voltage across the capacitor that peaks 90 electrical degrees after the 
voltage peaks across the resistor. If the voltage across the resistor is 
IR sin ωt, then the voltage across the capacitor is − IωL cos ωt. The sum of 
these voltages is
	
Vsin
sin
cos
.
t
IR
t
I
C
t 	
(A23)
Expand the left term and equate coefficients of sin ωt and cos ωt. The voltage 
V is
	
V
I R
C
IZ
2
2
2
1 2
1
/
	
(A24)
and
	
tan
.
1 CR 	
(A25)
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
152
In complex notation, the opposition to current flow for a resistor and capacitor 
in series is an impedance Z where
	
Z
R
j
C .	
(A26)
The magnitude of the impedance in ohms is
	
(
)
½
2
2
C
Z
R
X
=
+
	
(A27)
and the reactance of the capacitor is equal to
	
X
j
C
C
.	
(A28)
These vectors are shown in Figure A.6.
A 3‐ohm resistor in series with a ½ farad capacitor at 2 Hz has an impedance of 
3–0.159 j ohms. What this means is that if the voltage across the resistor is a 3‐V 
sine wave, the voltage across the capacitor is a delayed cosine wave of 0.159 V.
Problem Set A.7
1	 At what frequency will a capacitor of 100 pF and a series resistor of 100 ohms 
have an impedance of 200 ohms?
2	 In problem 1, at what frequency will the reactance double?
3	 The series impedance in problem 1 is 300 ohms. What is the phase angle in 
degrees between the voltage and the current flow?
A.8  The Arithmetic of Complex Numbers
It is very convenient to use complex numbers to represent voltages, currents, 
impedances, and admittances. In a series circuit the voltages across compo-
nents do not add directly as the peaks of voltages do not occur at the same 
time. In a parallel circuit the peaks of current do not occur at the same time. 
Complex numbers are the simplest way to solve these circuit problems. Here 
are the rules for addition, multiplication, and division of complex numbers.
Total voltage
VR
VR
VC
VC
R
C
I
I
Figure A.6  The vectors representing the voltages in a series RC circuit.

Appendix A
153
Addition. Add the real and imaginary terms separately.
	
2
3
3
4
1
7
j
j
j 	
Multiplication. Use standard rules for multiplication where j2 = −1, j3 = −j 
and j4 = 1.
	
2
3
3
4
18
j
j
j 	
Division requires the use of conjugates. The conjugate of (2 + 3 j) is (2 − 3 j).
To divide by a complex number, multiply the numerator and denominator by 
the conjugate of the denominator. Here are two examples:
	
1
2
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
13
2 13
3
13
j
j
j
j
j
j
/
/
	
	
1
2
2
3
1
2
2
3
2
3
2
3
8
13
8 13
13
j
j
j
j
j
j
j
j
/
/
	
A.9  Resistance, Conductance, Susceptance, 
Reactance, Admittance, and Impedance
Resistor inductors and capacitors have the ability to oppose current flow. 
The unit that is used for resistance is the ohm abbreviated as Ω. The opposition 
to current flow by capacitors and inductors is called reactance and uses the 
symbol X. An impedance Z is a combination of resistance and reactance. 
These same components have the ability to accept current flow. The terms 
that are used are conductivity for a resistor and susceptance for a capacitor or 
inductor. The unit is the siemen, abbreviated as S.1 A combination of a con-
ductance and a suseptance is called an admittance and uses the letter Y. In each 
case the measure of current acceptance is the reciprocal of current opposition. 
For example, a resistor of 10 Ω has a conductance of 0.1 siemens (S). It is the 
same resistor with two different measures. A capacitor has a reactance of −2 j 
Ω and a susceptance of 0.5 j S. It is the same capacitor. An inductor has a 
reactance of 5 j Ω and a susceptance of −0.2 j S. It is the same inductor. Any 
impedance can be described as a susceptance and visa versa. The ratio of 
1  The siemen (S) has replaced the mho as the unit of admittance. Ernst Werner Siemens was a 
German born inventer.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
154
voltage to current is fixed at any one frequency for a given network. It takes 
practice to get used to the language that is used.
When resistors are paralleled their conductances add. A 5‐Ω resistor in par-
allel with a 2‐Ω resistor is the sum of two conductances namely 1/5 + 1/2 = 7/10 S. 
To convert this conductance back to a resistance take the reciprocal which is 
10/7 Ω.
When inductors are paralleled the same principle is used. Each inductor 
is described as a susceptance and these susceptances are added together. 
The result can be converted to a reactance by taking the reciprocal. To par-
allel an inductor of 2 j Ω with an inductor of 4 j Ω their susceptances are 
−0.5 j and −0.25 j S. Their sum is −0.75 j S. The reciprocal is a reactance of 
+1.33 j Ω.
When capacitors are paralleled each capacitor is described as a susceptance 
and the susceptances are added together. The result can be converted to a reac-
tance by taking the reciprocal. To parallel a capacitor of −4 j ohms with a 
capacitor of −5 j ohms, their susceptances are +0.25 j and +0.2 j S. Their sum is 
+0.45 j S. To convert to a reactance the reciprocal is −2.22 j ohms.
The admittance Y of a resistor of 5 Ω in parallel with an inductor of 4 j Ω 
is  found by converting the resistance to a conductance of 0.20 S and 
the  inductor to a susceptance of −0.25 j S. The admittance is the sum 
Y = (0.20 − 0.25 j) S. To covert this to an impedance, take the reciprocal which 
is Z = (1.957 + 2.439 j) Ω.
The admittance Y of a resistor of 5 Ω in parallel with a capacitor of −2 j Ω 
is found by converting the resistance to a conductance of 0.2 S and the 
capacitor to a susceptance of +0.5 j S. The admittance is the sum Y = (0.2 + 0.5 j) S. 
The impedance of this parallel circuit is the reciprocal of Y which is 
Z = (0.69 − 1.76 j) Ω.
Problem Set A.9 
In these problems use complex notation.
1	 Two capacitors have a reactance of −2 j and −3 j ohms. What is the series 
reactance?
2	 Two inductors have a reactance 0.5 j and 0.6 j ohms. What is the parallel 
reactance?
3	 A resistor of 2 ohms is in series with an inductance of 3 j‐ohm reactance. 
What is the admittance in siemens?
4	 A resistor of 3 ohms is in parallel with a capacitor with a reactance of −4 j 
ohms. What is the impedance in ohms?
5	 In problem 4, what is the admittance in siemens?
6	 A capacitor with a reactance of 2 j is in parallel with an inductance having a 
susceptance of −2 j. What is the impedance?

Appendix A
155
7	 An impedance of 2 + 3 j is in series with an admission of 1 − 2 j. What is the 
impedance?
8	 A susceptance of 3 + 2 j S is in series with an impedance of 2 − 3 j ohms. 
What is the total impedance?
­A.10  ­Resonance
The reactance of an inductor is given in Equation A18. The reactance of a capacitor 
is give in Equation A22. The impedance of the two elements in series is
	
Z
j L
j
C .	
(A29)
The frequency ω where Z = 0 is called the series resonant frequency. The 
frequency is
	
1
1 2
LC
/ .	
(A30)
If there is a series resistance the impedance at the resonant frequency is this 
resistance.
The susceptance of an inductor is −j/ωL. The susceptance of a capacitor is 
jωC.
The frequency where the susceptances adds to zero is given by Equation 
A26. This frequency is called the parallel resonant frequency. This circuit is 
sometimes called a tank circuit. Ideally the impedance of a parallel resonant 
circuit is infinite at the resonant frequency.
N.B.
Every network of RLC components can be represented as either an impedance 
or an admittance. Impedances can only be added or subtracted from imped-
ances. Admittances can only be added or subtracted from admittances.
Admittances are reciprocals of impedances.
Susceptances are reciprocals of reactances.
Conductances are reciprocals of resistances.
In an impedance, the real part is a resistance and the imaginary part is a 
reactance. A positive reactance is an inductor and a negative reactance is a 
capacitor.
In an admittance the real part is a conductance and the imaginary part is a 
susceptance. A positive susceptance is a capacitor and a negative susceptance 
is an inductor.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
156
A.11  ­Answers to Problems
Problem Set A.2
1	 Sin 90° = 1, cos 180° = −1, sin 270° − 1. The sum is 1.
2	 0.707.
3	 45° and 135°.
4	 Cos β = 0.917.
5	 The limits are +1 and −1.
Problem Set A.3
1	 Sin 3π/2 = −1
2	 Cos − π/2 = 0.
3	 4π.
4	 36°.
5	 π/5.
6	 f = 1 MHz, 2π × 106 radians per second.
7	 70.7 V
8	 Sin(2000πt + π/6).
9	 5 sin (ωt + 53°).
10	 Sin ωt + 3.46 cos ωt.
Problem Set A.4
1	 20π.
2	 1/4π peak.
3	 4.44 μH
Problem Set A.5
1	 1.59 ohms.
2	 1.2 nF.
3	 0.666 nF.
4	 398 pF.
Problem Set A.6
1	 1.25 kΩ.
2	 0.127 μH.
3	 62°.
4	 796 MHz.

Appendix A
157
Problem Set A.7
1	 9.19 MHz.
2	 18.38 MHz.
3	 20.7°.
Problem Set A.8
1	 −5 j.
2	 1.1 j.
3	 (2 − 3 j)/13.
4	 12(4 − 3 j)/25.
5	 1/3 + j/4.
6	 12(4 − 3 j)/25.
7	 2.2 + 3.4 j.
8	 29/13 − 41 j/13.
www.ebook3000.com

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
159
Appendix B
B.1  Introduction
One of the most powerful tools in circuit analysis is the Fourier analysis. Signals 
that enter a circuit are often repetitive but not sinusoidal. Typical repetitive 
signals are square waves, triangle waves, trapezoids, or pulses. Square waves 
can have different leading and falling edges. A Fourier analysis provides an 
infinite series of sine waves with different amplitudes that when added together 
create the original waveform. The response to a repetitive waveform is found 
by summing the responses to all the individual sine waves (harmonics). In most 
practical applications, the response to the first three harmonics is sufficient 
to characterize the amplitude of the waveform. The assumption that must be 
made is that the circuit being analyzed is linear. This means that the system 
does not generate new harmonics.
B.2  Ideal Square Waves
Figure B.1 shows how an ideal square wave voltage is built up from sinusoids. 
If the square wave were shifted in time by 90 electrical degrees, the harmonics 
would all be cosines.
The graphs that follow show the nature of the spectrum for square waves. 
Practical logic signals are not fully repetitive, so the harmonic content shown 
in the figures is approximate. Note that the amplitude A is one‐half the 
peak‐to‐peak value. For 5‐V logic, A is 2.5 V. The envelope of amplitudes is 
presented only as a guide. There is no energy content except at the harmonic 
frequencies.
The amplitudes of the harmonics of an ideal square wave on both a linear 
and a logarithmic scale are shown in Figure B.2. The harmonics that make 
up an ideal square wave have amplitudes that are inversely proportional to 
Square‐Wave Frequency Spectrum

Appendix B
160
frequency. On a logarithmic scale the amplitudes lie along a straight line with 
a negative slope of one. The fundamental frequency is simply 1/t, where t is the 
time of one full cycle. The amplitude of the fundamental or first harmonic sine 
wave voltage is
Sum of three harmonics
Sum of all harmonics
sin x
sin 3x
1
3
sin 5x
1
5
sin 7x
1
7
Figure B.1  The harmonics that make up a square wave.
Frequency= 
ω=
log A
log f
T
A
t
f
3f
5f
7f
f
3f
5f
7f
T
1
f
π
2A
T
2π
Figure B.2  The harmonics that make up a square wave plotted linearly and on a 
logarithmic scale.
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix B
161
	
V
A
2
sin t	
(B1)
where
	
2
t .	
(a2)
The amplitude of the nth harmonic is
	
V
A
n
n
n
t
2
sin
.	
(B3)
B.3  Square Waves with a Rise Time
A repetitive square wave with a symmetric rise and fall time can be represented 
by a series of sine waves. The amplitudes of the harmonics determined in a 
Fourier analysis vary in a complex way. Figure B.3 shows that the harmonics 
have amplitudes that are contained under a logarithmic envelope with two 
slopes. These slopes intersect at frequencies that are called corner frequencies. 
The first or lower corner frequency is at f
1/
 where τ is the time between 
zero crossings. The amplitude of the harmonics above this frequency falls off 
Lower than fundamental
log A
2Aδ
A
T
T
t
log f
Worst-case envelope
Between f1 and f2 the slope is
20 db per decade. After f2 the
slope is 40 db per decade.
1
πτr
f2=
1
πτ
τr
τ
τ
f1=
δ=
Figure B.3  The harmonics of a square wave with a finite rise time.

Appendix B
162
proportional to frequency or 20 dB per decade. The second or upper corner 
frequency is at f
1/
R where τR is the rise time. Above this upper corner 
frequency the harmonic amplitudes fall off at the square of frequency or 40 dB 
per decade.
The two corner frequencies have significance when considered in terms of 
interference coupling. In general, coupling processes increase proportional to 
frequency. This would cancel the attenuation of harmonics in the frequency 
range 1/πτ to 1/πτR. This would imply that the interfering signal is effective 
out to the second corner frequency. Above 1/πτR, coupling falls off propor-
tional to frequency. The impact of interference is thus related to its upper 
corner frequency.
www.ebook3000.com

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
163
Appendix C
There are many parameters in engineering that extend in value over many 
decades. As an example, useful voltages extend from well below a microvolt 
to megavolts. That is over 12 orders of magnitude. Often it is convenient 
to consider a logarithmic scale rather than a linear scale to discuss parameters. 
In the early days of telephony, engineers needed a logarithmic scale for discussing 
sound levels. Noise levels, for example, were millivolts while signal levels 
were volts. The power ratio here is a million to one. It was convenient to use 
a logarithmic scale, where a just discernable change in loudness was 1 unit.1 
This unit had to work for noise as well as voice signals. It turned out that the 
logarithm of the ratio of power from two signals when multiplied by 10 was just 
such a scale. It worked at all signal levels. The unit was called the decibel to 
honor Mr. Bell, the telephone inventor. The definition of the decibel is
	
dB
10
10
1
2
log
P
P
	
(C1)
where P1 and P2 are power levels. If the signal levels are measured as voltage on 
one resistor, then the ratio can be written as
	
dB
V
V
V
V
10
20
10
1
2
2
2
10
1
2
log
log
.
R
R
	
(C2)
The decibel is abbreviated as dB and in conversation it is pronounced “deebee.” 
For those that use this measure on a regular basis, they know that 6 dB is a factor 
of 2, 20 dB is a factor of 10, and that negative decibel figures imply division. 
For example, −6 dB means a factor of 0.5 or divide by 2, and −20 dB means a 
factor of 0.1 or divide by 10. The factor 50 is 100/2 and in decibel language this 
is 40 dB − 6 dB or 34 dB. It takes usage to recognize this language.
The Decibel
1  The logarithm of a number to the base 10 is the exponent of 10 that equals that number. 
For example, the logarithm of 100 is 2 because 102 = 100. The logarithm of 2 is 0.30103 because 
100.30103 = 2. Note that 20log10 2 is usually rounded off to 6 dB.

Appendix C
164
In field measurement, the units can be volts, current, the H or E field, and 
watts. In fact, the decibel scale can be applied to nonelectrical parameters such 
as meters. This means that units must usually be associated with a decibel 
statement. It is a standard practice to refer to 20 dBV, which means 10 V. A total 
of 6 dBV means 2 V. It is important to know that 0 dB means a factor of 1. There 
is no decibel representation of 0 V as the logarithm of 0 is −∞.
The parameters P2 or V2 are called reference parameters. They might be 
units of watts or volts, milliwatts, or millivolts as well as megawatts or 
megavolts. If the reference parameter is a millivolt, then 20 dBmV means 
10 mV. The reference parameter must be stated or the decibel statement has no 
meaning. There are a group of abbreviations that have become standard. Again 
it takes usage to become familiar with this language. Here are a few standard 
abbreviations.
dBV
dB volts
The reference is 1 V
dBmV
dB millivolts
The reference is 1 mV
dBmW
dB milliwatts
The reference is 1 mW
dBμV
dB microvolts
The reference is 1 μV
dBV/MHz
dB volts per megahertz
The reference is 1 V/MHz
dBrn
dB reference noise
Used in telephony. The noise reference level is −90 dBW
The term decibel usually implies a power ratio. When the units are volts or 
amperes, Equation C2 is used. When the units are power, Equation C1 is used. 
When the units are a parameter such as ohms or meters, it is obvious that 
power does not apply. In these cases, the term decibel represents a logarithmic 
scale of 20 log 10 A/B. Many other disciplines that need logarithmic scales have 
adapted the decibel for their use. An example is a specification for street 
paving. Roughness is described in terms of decibel inches. The reference 
parameter is 1 inch and this has little to do with power. Equation C2 is used.
www.ebook3000.com

Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
165
Appendix D
New acronyms appear in the literature each year. As time goes by, many of 
these acronyms fall into disuse. In a few cases, meanings may differ depending 
on the industry where they originate. It is possible for one abbreviation to have 
several meanings. When this happens, the reader must rely on the intent of the 
author. As an example, pH can mean hydrogen ion concentration or picohenry. 
The correct meaning should be obvious in context.
Authors often coin an acronym in an article when a word group is repeated 
many times. Sometimes, an acronym is used in one company, but it is not used 
by the industry. These acronyms will not appear in this list.
The following list includes the common abbreviations used in circuit board 
design, mathematics, electrical engineering, and physics. Fortunately, acronyms 
that survive rarely conflict with scientific or engineering abbreviations.
Abbreviations that do not conform to present day usage or good practice 
are not listed. Here are a few of the problem areas. The first letter in many 
engineering measurement terms is an “m.” In an abbreviation, “m” could stand 
for milli, micro, or mega. It is good practice to use capital M for mega, small 
m for milli, and the Greek μ for micro. The letter m can also stand for meter, 
milliwatt, and mile. In the abbreviation dBm, the m means milliwatt. If m 
means meter, it can usually be inferred by context.
In an old copy of The Radio Engineers Handbook by Terman, the term mc is 
used as the abbreviation for megacycle. Today, the accepted abbreviation is 
MHz and it is read megahertz. We have come a long way in standardizing 
abbreviations.
Proper names used in engineering abbreviations require a capital letter. 
As an example, the A in mA stands for Andre Marie Ampere, the French physicist. 
When the word ampere is used in a sentence, it is not capitalized. “ma” is not 
found in this list.
This list contains most of the common abbreviations used in this book and 
in circuit board design. It is not a complete list. It shows how extensively we use 
abbreviations and acronyms. It is hard to remember them all. If you do not find 
an abbreviation, the internet will usually provide some help.
Abbreviations and Acronyms

Appendix D
166
A	
Ampere, the unit of current
ac	
Alternating current. Usually a sine wave of voltage or current
A/D	
Analog‐to‐digital
am	
Amplitude modulation
amp	
Ampere (not recommended)
ANSI	
American National Standards Institute
ASCII	
American standard code for information interchange
ASIC	
Applications specific integrated circuit
ASSP	
Application‐specific standard product
ASTTL	
Advanced Schottky transistor—transistor logic
ATE	
Automatic test equipment
B	
Magnetic induction field, measured in teslas
BGA	
Ball grid array
BH	
B and H fields in a magnetic material. Hysteresis curves
BOM	
Bill of materials
b/s	
Bits per second
BST	
Barium–strontium–titanate (ceramic)
BTL	
Bipolar transistor logic
BTU	
British thermal unit
BW	
Bandwidth
c	
Velocity of light
C	
Capacitor, capacitance
C	
Coulomb. The unit of charge
C12	
A mutual capacitance
CAD	
Computer‐aided design
CAM	
Computer‐aided manufacturing
cc	
Cubic centimeter
CFFT	
Complex fast Fourier transform
CISPER A and B	 EMI standards that are set by the EU
cm	
centimeter
CMOS	
Complimentary metal oxide semiconductor
CMR	
Common‐mode rejection
CMRR	
Common‐mode rejection ratio (analog)
cos	
Cosine
cot	
Cotangent
CPC	
Computer power center
cps	
Cycles per second. Not in common use
CRT	
Cathode ray tube
CSA	
Canadian Standards Association
csc	
Cosecant
Cu	
Copper
D	
Displacement field
D/A	
Digital to analog
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix D
167
dB	
Decibel. 10 log P1/P2 or 20 log V1/V2. P2 or V2 are reference levels
dBA	
Decibel‐amperes
dBm	
Decibel‐milliwatts
dBV	
Decibel‐volts
dBμV	
Decibel‐microvolts
dc	
Direct current. A steady value describing volts, current, or field strength
Df	
Dissipation factor
DFF	
D flip flop
DFM	
Design for manufacturability
DFT	
1. Design for test
	
2. Discrete Fourier transform
DIP	
Dual inline package
Dk	
Dielectric constant
DRAM	
Dynamic random access memory
DTL	
Decoupling transmission line
e	
2.71828. Base of natural logarithms
E	
Electric field strength. Basic unit is volts per meter
E	
Energy in joules
ECAD	
Electronic computer‐aided design
ECL	
Emitter‐coupled logic
EDA	
Electronic design automation
EE	
Electrical engineer
EIA	
Electronics Industry Association
EM	
Electromagnetic
EMC	
Electromagnetic compatibility
emf	
Electromotive force, voltage
emi	
Electromagnetic interference
ENIG	
Electroless nickel/immersion gold
EPROM	
Electrically programmable read only memory
ESD	
Electrostatic discharge
ESL	
Equivalent series inductance
ESR	
Equivalent series resistance
EU	
European Union
f	
Frequency
F	
Farad, the unit of capacitance
FB	
Feedback
FCC	
Federal Communications Commission
FET	
Field effect transistor
FFT	
Fast Fourier transforms
FIFO	
First in first out
FILO	
First in last out
fm	
Frequency modulation
FP	
Field programmable

Appendix D
168
FPGA	
Field programmable gate array
FR‐4	
Flame resistant class 4 circuit board laminate. Glass epoxy
FTTL	
Fast TTL
g	
Gram
G	
Gauss, 10−4 teslas
GaAs	
Gallium arsenide
Gb/s	
Gigabits per second
GHz	
Gigahertz, 109 Hz
GND	
Ground
GTL	
Gunning transistor logic
H	
Magnetic field strength, basic unit is amperes per meter
H	
Henry, unit of inductance
HASL	
Hot air solder leveling
HDI	
High density interconnect
HF	
High frequency
HSTL	
High speed transceiver logic
Hz	
Hertz (frequency). 1 Hz = 1 cycle per second
i	
1. Varying current
	
2. Square root of −1, used in most mathematics texts
IBIS	
I/O buffer information specification
IC	
Integrated circuit
id	
Inside diameter
IEEE	
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
I/O	
Input/output
IP	
Intellectual property
IPC	
Institute of Printed Circuits
IR	
Infrared
ISDN	
Integrated Services Digital Network
J	
Joule
j	
Square root of −1
JEDEC	
Joint Electronics Device Engineering Council
JFET	
Junction FET
k	
Kilo, 103
KB	
Keyboard
kb/s	
Kilobytes per second
kg	
Kilogram
kHz	
Kilohertz, 103 Hz
km	
Kilometer, 103 m
kV	
Kilovolt, 103 V
kW	
Kilowatt, 103 W
kΩ	
Kiloohms, 103 ohm
L	
Inductor, inductance
L12	
Mutual inductance
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix D
169
LAN	
Local area network
LCC	
Leaded chip carrier
LED	
Light emitting diode
LICA	
Low‐inductance capacitor array
ln	
Natural logarithm (base e)
log	
Logarithm (base 10)
LRC	
Inductor/resistor/capacitor
LVCMOS	
Low‐voltage CMOS
LVDS	
Low‐voltage differential signaling
m	
1. Meter
	
2. Milli
M	
Mega, 106 (M mean 1000 in Roman numerals but not in 
engineering)
mA	
Milliampere, 10−3 A
Mb/s	
Mega bits per second
MCAD	
Mechanical computer‐aided design
MCM	
Multichip module
mH	
Millihenry
MHz	
Megahertz, 106 Hz
mil	
0.001 inches
Mil	
Military
Mil Std	
Military standard
mJ	
Millijoule
mm	
Millimeter
mmf	
Magneto motive force
MOS	
Metal oxide semiconductor
MOSFET	
Metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor
ms or msec	
Millisecond, 10−3 s
mV	
Millivolt, 10−3 V
mW	
Milliwatt, 10−3 W
mΩ	
Milliohm, 10−3 ohm
MΩ	
Megaohm, 106 ohm
N	
Newton
n	
Nano, 10−9
nA	
Nanoampere, 10−9 A
NEC	
National Electrical Code
NEMA	
National Electrical Manufacturing Association
nF	
Nanofarad, 1000 pF, 0.001 μF, 10−9 F
nH	
Nanohenry
nm	
Nanometer
npn	
Transistor made from a p‐doped semiconductor layer between 
two n layers
ns	
Nanosecond, 10−9 s

Appendix D
170
OC	
Optical carrier
od	
Outside diameter
OEM	
Original equipment manufacturer
p	
Pico, 10−12
PC, pc	
1. Printed circuit
	
2. Personal computer
PCA	
Printed circuit assembly
PCB	
Printed circuit board
PCI	
Personal computer interface
PE	
Professional engineer
PECL	
Positive ECL
pf	
Power factor
pF	
Picofarad, 10−12 F
pH	
Picohenry, 10−12 H
PLL	
Phase‐locked loop
pn	
Junction of positive and negative doped semiconductor, diode
pnp	
Transistor, n‐doped semiconductor between two p layers
ps	
Picosecond, 10−12 s
PTFE	
Polytetrafluoroethylene (dielectric)
PWB	
Printed wiring board
PWR	
Power
Q	
charge in coulombs
QA	
Quality assurance
QFP	
Quad flat pack
R	
Resistor, resistance
RAM	
Random access memory
RC	
Resistor/capacitor
rf	
Radio frequency
rfi	
Radio frequency interference, general interference
rms	
Root mean square
RoHM	
Reduction of hazardous material (lead free)
ROM	
Read only memory
rpm	
Revolutions per minute
rps	
Revolutions per second
RTI	
Referred to input
RTO	
Referred to output
s	
Second
S	
Siemens. The unit of admittance. The real part is conductance, 
the imaginary part is susceptance
SCR	
Silicon controlled rectifier
sec	
1. Second (not recommended)
	
2. Secant
Si	
Silicon
SI	
Signal integrity
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix D
171
SIP	
Single inline package
SMD	
Surface mounted device
SMT	
Surface mount transistor
SPICE	
Special program for integrated circuit emulation
SRAM	
Static random access memory
SWR	
Standing wave ratio
t	
Time
T	
1. tesla, the unit of magnetic induction
	
2. Temperature
tan	
Tangent
TBD	
To be determined
TC	
Temperature coefficient
TDR	
Time domain reflectometer
TE	
Transverse electric (wave)
TEL	
1. Transitional electrical length. The distance a wave travels in a 
rise time
 	
2. Telephone
TELCO	
Telephone company
Tg	
Resin transition temperature in laminates
TIA	
Telecommunications Industry Association
TL	
Transmission line
TM	
Transverse magnetic (wave)
TQFP	
Thin quad flat pack
TTL	
Transistor– transistor logic
TV	
Television
UHF	
Ultrahigh frequency
UL	
Underwriters Laboratories
USB	
Universal serial bus
UTP	
Unshielded twisted pair
v	
Varying voltage
V	
Volt
V	
Volume usually in meters cubed
VA	
Volt amperes
VAR	
Volt amperes reactive
Vcc	
Positive voltage on a circuit board
VCR	
Voltage controlled rectifier
Vdd	
Positive voltage on a circuit board
VME	
Type of bus and hardware protocol
VOHmax	 Highest loaded voltage for a logic 1 of a driver
VOHmin	
Lowest loaded voltage for a logic 1 of a driver
VOLmax	
Highest loaded voltage for a logic 0 of a driver
Vss	
The ground or most negative voltage on a circuit board
VSW	
Voltage standing wave
W	
Watt

Appendix D
172
W	
Work
wan	 Wide area network
X	
Reactance in ohms
Y	
Admittance in siemens. The real part of admittance is conductance; the 
imaginary part is susceptance. Plus imaginary susceptance is associated 
with shunt capacitance. Negative imaginary susceptance is associated 
with shunt inductance
Z	
Impedance in ohms. The real part of impedance is resistance; the 
imaginary part is reactance. Plus imaginary reactance is associated 
with series inductance. Negative imaginary reactance is associated with 
series capacitance.
β	
Current gain for a transistor
εR	
Relative dielectric constant, permittivity
θ	
Angle, phase, or phase angle
λ	
Wavelength
μR	
Relative permeability
μ0	
Permeability of free space
μ	
Micro, 10−6
μA	
Microampere, 10−6 A
μF	
Microfarad, 10−6 F
μH	
Microhenry
µm	
Micrometer, 10−6 m
µs	
Microsecond, 10−6 s
μV	
Microvolt, 10−6 V
π	
3.14159
ρ	
1. Resistivity
	
2. Reflection coefficient
σ	
Conductivity
τ	
Transmission coefficient
τr	
Rise or fall time
φ	
Angle, phase, or phase angle
ω	
Radian frequency, 2πf
Ω	
ohm
www.ebook3000.com

173
Fast Circuit Boards: Energy Management, First Edition. Ralph Morrison. 
© 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
a
Abbreviations  163
Acronyms  163
A/D converter  118
Admittance  128
parallel R and C  153
parallel R and L  154
resistance  153
units  153
Aliasing errors  122
Ampere’s law  25
AM radio  101
Analog design  6
Antenna  96, 134
via  135
Antenna types  106
asymmetrical  135
Apertures  100, 137
Arithmetic of complex  
numbers  152
Asymmetric stripline  94
Atoms  3
Attenuation, waveguide  100
Aurora Australis  25
Aurora Borealis  25
Avogadro’s number  8, 11
b
Backshell connector  99
Balanced lines  101, 111
terminations  111
Balance of fields  50
Barium strontium titanate (BST)  20
energy source  77
B field  27, 34, 106
Boards, circuit
four-layer  83
six-layer  84
thickness  84
two-layer  95
Breaks in ground plane  89
BST, see Barium strontium titanate (BST)
c
Cables, shielded  96
characteristic impedance  99
piezoelectric  97
strain gage  96
Capacitance  2, 23
current flow  22
equations  20
farad  20
mutual  22
Index

Index
174
Capacitor  21
ceramic  21
clusters  75
decoupling  45
natural frequency  78
one port  77
stub  77
transmission line  7
Centered stripline  93
Ceramics  31
Characteristic impedance  43, 47, 52, 
81, 89
capacitors  78
control  89
embedded microstrip  93
free space  37, 107
parameters  90
traces  88
transitions  80
Charge  11
distribution  14
forces  12
test  13
Chemical properties  10
Circuit board  4
materials  101
multilayer  83
Circuit theory  5, 23, 45, 56, 60, 
71, 143
Clock rate  2
Coax  98
braided  97
nylon centering  97
Coaxial cable  82
Common  14, see also Ground
Common‐mode  111, 116
transient  117
Compass  2
Complex notation  56, 152
Conductance  153
Conducting planes  89
Conductors  17
magnetic forces  25
Conformal coating  37
Copper  8, 19
Cores
laminates  83
magnetic  30
Corner frequency  161
Coulomb  20
Cross coupling  28
parallel conductors  107
Cup cores  31
Current
forces  25
induced  16
initial  76
ramp  29
Current path, stripline  88
Cutoff frequency  100
d
Dc‐dc converters  35, 119
Dc fields  36
Decibel  164
Decoupling capacitor  36, 45, 78, 89, 
see also Capacitor
characteristic impedance  89
stripline  87
Dedicated ground  113
Delay, logic  80
Desert grounding  114
D field  22
return current  52
Diagrams  6
logic  8
Die  76, 80
Dielectric constant  19
relative  22
Dielectric losses  102
Differential amplifier  117
Diode protection  60
Displacement
current  52, 134
field  22
Distributed reflection  97
www.ebook3000.com

Index
175
Distribution transformers  119
Double braid  97
e
Earth  14, 113
conductivity  115
Eddy current  31
Effective radiated power  137
E field, see Electric field
Einstein  4
Electric field  1, 4, 9–12, 18
dipole  135
energy  17
lines  14
motion  28
patterns  14
space  33
static  16
units  13
Electrons  8–10, 13
drift  11
trapped  18
velocity  10, 71
Electrostatic discharge (ESD)  81, 106, 
120, 122
testing  122
Embedded energy  77
Embedded microstrip  93
Enclosures  139
Energy  2, 4
balance E and H  50
conversion  60
dedicated path  52
demand  44
embedded  77
first sources  75
flow  47
losses  50
magnetic field in space  34
reactive  96
shared space  77
sources  75
spreading  49
static fields  50, 70
un‐polarized  76
velocity  78
Energy dissipation  81
Energy flow, mechanical analogy  52
Energy, pulse  81
Energy sources  31
ground/power planes  75
Energy spectrum  81
Equipment ground  113, 116
safety  114
Equipotential surface  13
ESD, see Electrostatic discharge (ESD)
Even mode  111
f
Farad  20
Faraday shield  16
Feedback  3
Ferrite  31
beads  31
Feynman, Richard  10
Fiber optics  105
Field(s)
concentrations  17
definition  9
duality  11
energy  17
Faraday shield  16
ground plane  17
impedance  135
traces  17
Field energy, spaces  18
Filter, electronic  31
anodized surface  140
green wire  140
line  140
passive  111
power  141
Flashlight  36, 70
Floating power  114
Flux, magnetic  34
FM radio  101

Index
176
Force field  8, 9
electric  10
magnetic  24, 27
Forward current  46
Forward referencing amplifier  118
Four‐layer boards  83
Free space  37
characteristic impedance  107
Frequency, radian measure  143
g
Gaps  31, 87
magnetic material  28
sharing  87
Gaskets  100, 138
Glass epoxy  19
weave  101
GPS  8
Gravity  4, 9
weak field  11
Ground(ing)  7, 114
boats  115
circuit boards  115, 116
common  14, 118
dedicated  113
desert  114
earth  14, 114
equipment  116
flooded  95
grid  119
isolated  16
quiet  112
screened rooms  140
Ground plane  17, 46, 48, 84
Guard shield  96, 116
h
Halogen free  101
Harmonics  107, 159
Henry  29
H field  24, 27, 135
flux lines  27
Honeycomb filters  138
Humidity control  120
Hydrogen  8
i
I beams  30
IC  80, 118
Ideal voltage source  44
Impedance  128
free space  96, 107
levels  36
series R and C  151
series R and L  150
Inductance  28
current ramp  29
henry  29
solenoids  32
Induction or B field  27
Inductors  32
beads  31
Instrumentation  98
Insulators  17
Integrated circuits  6
Interference  34, 76
cable entry  105
transfomers  118
Ionosphere  9
Isolated ground  116
j
j  150
l
Laminations  83
Layer crossing  85
Layup  83
LC resonance  59
Leading edge  45, 47
displacement current  52
radiation  83
Light  10
Lightning  9, 38, 81, 106
www.ebook3000.com

Index
177
Line(s)
E field  14
filters  140
H field  29
Linear circuit theory  143
Lines of force  14
Logarithmic scale  163
Logic
diagrams  8
gate  36
switch  45
Losses, energy  50
Lumped parameter transmission line  45
m
Magnetic field  4, 24
closed curves  25
earth  25
energy  34
flux  27, 34
space  33, 35
traces  28
Magnetic materials  5, 24
Magnetic pole  26
Aurora Australis  25
Aurora Borealis  25
Magneto‐motive‐force  27
Magnets  25
Matching impedance  96
Maxwell  3, 11, 52, 58
Mechanical energy analogy  52
Microphone  96
Microstrip  91
asymmetric  94
centered  93
characteristic impedance  90
imbedded  93
Microwave beyond cutoff  100
Modulation  53
Moisture  19
MRI  24
Multilayer boards  83
Mutual capacitance  23, 109
Mutual inductance  34, 109
n
National Electrical Code  
(NEC)  113
Nature’s rules  4
Near field / far field interface   
107, 134
NEC, see National electrical code 
(NEC)
Neutral conductors  113
o
Odd mode  108
Ohm  153
Ohm’s law  35
Ohms‐per‐square  38
ω, radian frequency  143
Ω, ohms  153
Open transmission line  57
Orders of magnitude  11
p
Pad  80
Parasitics  36
Pendulum  53
Permanent magnets  24
Permeability  27
relative  31, 35, 39, 70, 73
Permittivity of free space  12, 50
Phase velocity  59
Piezoelectric transducer  97
Pith balls  9
Plane breaks  89
Positive charge  8
Power plane, noise  84
decoupling capacitor  88
return current  88
Power, Poynting’s vector  35
Power ratio, decibel  163
Power transistor  3

Index
178
Poynting’s vector  35
Prepreg  83, 101
Probe problems  115
Proton  8
q
Quiet ground  112
r
Radian frequency  145
Radiation
dipole  134
gaskets  138
leading edge  83
loops  106, 134, 136
seams  138
space  43
stripline vias  85
Rain  9
Rare earth  25
Reactance  32
capacitor  148
Inductor  147
series RC  151
series RL  150
Reactive energy  96
Reference conductor  14
Reflection, see also Transmission  
line
antennas  96
beads  31
coefficient  56, 128
distributed  97
Relative dielectric constant  19
Relative permeability  27
Resistance  36, 153
per square  38
Resistivity  14, 37
Resistors  5, 36
parasitic capacitance  36
Resonance  59, 155
Resonant frequency  155
Return current path  3, 46, 52, 85
shared  81
ρ, reflection coefficient  56
Rise time  46, 75, 106, 159
Rms  145
RoHS  101
s
Screened rooms  139, 141
Seams  138
Semiconductor  8
Separately derived power  119
Shared commons  77, 81, 101
Shield(s)  139
foil  96
Shielded cable  96
Shielding  14, 16, 110, 121
transformers  119
wire mesh  138
Ship hull  15
Siemans  153
Signal integrity (SI)  48
Signal path  6
Sine waves  5, 95
transmission lines  95
unit circle  143
Single‐point ground  113
Skin depth  71
Skin effect  36, 70
earth  115
Smith chart  127, 133
admittance  129
impedance  128
matching impedances  134
reflection coefficient   
128, 132
standing wave ratio  132
stubs  133
unit circle  128
wave impedance  130
Solenoid  26
Space  3, 11, 36
www.ebook3000.com

Index
179
S parameter  125
Spectrum  107, 159
Speed of light  10, 49
Square wave
ideal  159
spectrum  159
Stacks  83
Staircase current  83
Standing wave ratio  132
Static fields and energy  
motion  70
Steady state, sine waves  96
matching impedance  96
Step function  6, 43
Step waves  5, 43
Strain gage  96
Stripline  88
asymmetric  94
centered  93
Stubs  88, 133
delays  89
reactance  78
Smith chart  133
Sun  3, 4, 25
Superconductivity  14
Surface roughness  3
Susceptance  128, 154
Switch, ideal  37, 44
Symbol, capacitor  7
t
τ, transmission coefficient  127
Temperature  1
Termination
parallel  54
resistance  54
shunt  54
Tesla  27, 32, 122
Test charge  11
Three-phase power  119
Tidal action  18
Time delay  71
Traces  2, 6, 28, 33, 46
multi‐shields  120
over ground plane  33
three phase  119
utility  118
Transducer  116
Transfer impedance  97
Transformer(s)  5, 31
Transformer action  35
Transmission coefficient   
55, 127
Transmission line(s)  2, 21, 23, 29,  
43, 51
capacitor  7
delays  80, 87
die  76
energy conversion  60
extended  69
field pattern  46
lumped parameter  45
matched series termination  68
matched shunt termination  64
mismatch termination  66
open  57
oscillation  60
reactance  48
reflection  31
remote terminations  66
representations  45
resistance  48
resonance  59
rise time  64
short  60, 61
shunt termination  61
sine waves  95
termination in Z0, 54
transient response  48
velocity  78
voltage doubling  64
Triboelectric effect  97
Turning corners  79
Two‐layer boards  95

Index
180
u
Unterminated, see Open
Utility power  43, 105
Utility transfomers  118
v
Vector field  12
Velocity, waves  48
Vias
blind  85
buried  85
current path  85
holes  85
power planes  87
radiating  135
spacing  87
stripline  87
stubs  135
Voltage  11
definition  12
doubling  48
ideal source  44
w
Water, relative dielectric constant  19
Wave  46
Wave action  43, 55, 59
complex  83
energy conversion  58
energy direction  61
field  11
length  107
propagation  46
resonance  59
velocity  48, 78
voltage  48
Waveguide  100, 138
beyond cutoff  100
Wave impedance  107
Weak field  11
Weave, glass epoxy  101
Work  12
E field  19
y
Y, susceptance  154
z
Zappers  122
Z, impedance  128
www.ebook3000.com

