
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
1
THE ORIGINS OF
FIBER OPTIC
COMMUNICATIONS
J E F F  H E C H T
Optical communication systems date back two centuries, to the “optical tele-
graph” invented by French engineer Claude Chappe in the 1790s. His system was
a series of semaphores mounted on towers, where human operators relayed mes-
sages from one tower to the next. It beat hand-carried messages hands down, but
by the mid-19th century it was replaced by the electric telegraph, leaving a scat-
tering of “telegraph hills” as its most visible legacy.
Alexander Graham Bell patented an optical telephone system, which he
called the Photophone, in 1880, but his earlier invention, the telephone, proved
far more practical. He dreamed of sending signals through the air, but the 
atmosphere did not transmit light as reliably as wires carried electricity. In the
decades that followed, light was used for a few special applications, such as sig-
naling between ships, but otherwise optical communications, such as the experi-
mental Photophone Bell donated to the Smithsonian Institution, languished on
the shelf.
1
Thanks to the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for research support. This is a much expanded
version of an article originally published in the November 1994 Laser Focus World.

In the intervening years, a new technology that would ultimately solve the
problem of optical transmission slowly took root, although it was a long time
before it was adapted for communications. This technology depended on the phe-
nomenon of total internal reflection, which can confine light in a material sur-
rounded by other materials with lower refractive index, such as glass in air.
In the 1840s, Swiss physicist Daniel Collodon and French physicist Jacques
Babinet showed that light could be guided along jets of water for fountain dis-
plays. British physicist John Tyndall popularized light guiding in a demonstration
he first used in 1854, guiding light in a jet of water flowing from a tank. By the
turn of the century, inventors realized that bent quartz rods could carry light and
patented them as dental illuminators. By the 1940s, many doctors used illumi-
nated Plexiglas tongue depressors.
Optical fibers went a step further. They are essentially transparent rods of
glass or plastic stretched to be long and flexible. During the 1920s, John Logie
Baird in England and Clarence W. Hansell in the United States patented the idea
of using arrays of hollow pipes or transparent rods to transmit images for televi-
sion or facsimile systems. However, the first person known to have demonstrated
image transmission through a bundle of optical fibers was Heinrich Lamm (Fig-
ure 1-1), then a medical student in Munich. His goal was to look inside inaccessi-
2
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1-1
Heinrich Lamm as a German
medical student in 1929, about the time
he made the first bundle of fibers to
transmit an image. Courtesy Michael
Lamm

ble parts of the body, and in a 1930 paper he reported transmitting the image of
a light bulb filament through a short bundle. However, the unclad fibers trans-
mitted images poorly, and the rise of the Nazis forced Lamm, a Jew, to move to
America and abandon his dreams of becoming a professor of medicine.
In 1951, Holger Møller Hansen (Figure 1-2) applied for a Danish patent on
fiber optic imaging. However, the Danish patent office denied his application, cit-
ing the Baird and Hansell patents, and Møller Hansen was unable to interest
companies in his invention. Nothing more was reported on fiber bundles until
1954, when Abraham van Heel (Figure 1-3), of the Technical University of Delft
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
3
Figure 1-2
Holger Møller Hansen in his workshop.
Courtesy Holger Møller Hansen

in Holland, and Harold H. Hopkins (Figure 1-4) and Narinder Kapany, of Impe-
rial College in London, separately announced imaging bundles in the prestigious
British journal Nature.
Neither van Heel nor Hopkins and Kapany made bundles that could carry
light far, but their reports began the fiber optics revolution. The crucial innova-
tion was made by van Heel, stimulated by a conversation with the American opti-
cal physicist Brian O’Brien (Figure 1-5). All earlier fibers were bare, with total
internal reflection at a glass-air interface. Van Heel covered a bare fiber of glass
or plastic with a transparent cladding of lower refractive index. This protected
the total-reflection surface from contamination and greatly reduced crosstalk
between fibers. The next key step was development of glass-clad fibers by
Lawrence Curtiss (Figure 1-6), then an undergraduate at the University of Michi-
gan working part-time on a project with physician Basil Hirschowitz (Figure 1-7)
and physicist C. Wilbur Peters to develop an endoscope to examine the inside of
the stomach (Figure 1-8). Will Hicks, then working at the American Optical Co.,
4
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1-3
Abraham C. S. van Heel,
who made clad fibers at the Technical
University of Delft. Courtesy H. J.
Frankena, Faculty of Applied Physics,
Technical University of Delft
Figure 1-4
Harold H. Hopkins looks into
an optical instrument that he designed.
Courtesy Kelvin P. Hopkins

made glass-clad fibers at about the same time, but his group lost a bitterly con-
tested patent battle. By 1960, glass-clad fibers had attenuation of about one deci-
bel per meter, fine for medical imaging, but much too high for communications.
Meanwhile, telecommunications engineers were seeking more transmission
bandwidth. Radio and microwave frequencies were in heavy use, so engineers
looked to higher frequencies to carry the increased loads they expected with the
growth of television and telephone traffic. Telephone companies thought video
telephones lurked just around the corner and would escalate bandwidth demands
even further. On the cutting edge of communications research were millimeter-
wave systems, in which hollow pipes served as waveguides to circumvent poor
atmospheric transmission at tens of gigahertz, where wavelengths were in the
millimeter range.
Even higher optical frequencies seemed a logical next step in 1958 to Alec
Reeves, the forward-looking engineer at Britain’s Standard Telecommunications
Laboratories, who invented digital pulse-code modulation before World War II.
Other people climbed on the optical communications bandwagon when the laser
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
5
Figure 1-5
Brian O’Brien, who suggested
that cladding would guide light along fiber.
Courtesy Brian O’Brien, Jr.

6
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1-6
Lawrence Curtiss, with the equipment he used to make glass-clad
fibers at the University of Michigan. Courtesy University of Michigan News and
Information Services Records, Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan

CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
7
Figure 1-7
Basil Hirschowitz about 
the time he helped to develop the first
fiber optic endoscope. Courtesy 
Basil Hirschowitz
Figure 1-8
Prototype fiber optic endoscope made by Lawrence
Curtiss, Wilbur Peters, and Basil Hirschowitz at the University of
Michigan. Courtesy Basil Hirschowitz

was invented in 1960. The July 22, 1960, issue of Electronics introduced its
report on Theodore Maiman’s demonstration of the first laser by saying, “Usable
communications channels in the electromagnetic spectrum may be extended by
development of an experimental optical-frequency amplifier.”
Serious work on optical communications had to wait for the CW helium-
neon laser. While air is far more transparent to light at optical wavelengths than
to millimeter waves, researchers soon found that rain, haze, clouds, and atmos-
pheric turbulence limited the reliability of long-distance atmospheric laser links.
By 1965, it was clear that major technical barriers remained for both millimeter-
wave and laser telecommunications. Millimeter waveguides had low loss,
although only if they were kept precisely straight; developers thought the biggest
problem was the lack of adequate repeaters. Optical waveguides were proving to
be a problem. Stewart Miller’s group at Bell Telephone Laboratories was work-
ing on a system of gas lenses to focus laser beams along hollow waveguides for
long-distance telecommunications. However, most of the telecommunications
industry thought the future belonged to millimeter waveguides.
Optical fibers had attracted some attention because they were analogous in
theory to plastic dielectric waveguides used in certain microwave applications. In
1961, Elias Snitzer at American Optical, working with Hicks at Mosaic Fabrica-
tions (now Galileo Electro-Optics), demonstrated the similarity by drawing fibers
with cores so small they carried light in only one waveguide mode. However, vir-
tually everyone considered fibers too lossy for communications; attenuation of a
decibel per meter was fine for looking inside the body, but communications oper-
ated over much longer distances and required loss of no more than 10 or 20 deci-
bels per kilometer.
One small group did not dismiss fibers so easily—a team at Standard
Telecommunications Laboratories (STL), initially headed by Antoni E. Kar-
bowiak, that worked under Reeves to study optical waveguides for communica-
tions. Karbowiak soon was joined by a young engineer born in Shanghai, Charles
K. Kao (Figure 1-9).
Kao took a long, hard look at fiber attenuation. He collected samples from
fiber makers, and carefully investigated the properties of bulk glasses. His
research convinced him that the high losses of early fibers were due to impurities,
not to silica glass itself. In the midst of this research, in December 1964, Kar-
bowiak left STL to become chair of electrical engineering at the University of
New South Wales in Australia, and Kao succeeded him as manager of optical
communications research. With George Hockham (Figure 1-10), another young
STL engineer who specialized in antenna theory, Kao worked out a proposal for
long-distance communications over singlemode fibers. Convinced that fiber loss
should be reducible below 20 decibels per kilometer, they presented a paper at a
London meeting of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (IEE). The April 1,
1966, issue of Laser Focus noted Kao’s proposal:
8
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS

At the IEE meeting in London last month, Dr. C. K. Kao observed that
short-distance runs have shown that the experimental optical waveguide
developed by Standard Telecommunications Laboratories has an infor-
mation-carrying capacity . . . of one gigacycle, or equivalent to about
200 tv channels or more than 200,000 telephone channels. He described
STL’s device as consisting of a glass core about three or four microns in
diameter, clad with a coaxial layer of another glass having a refractive
index about one percent smaller than that of the core. Total diameter of
the waveguide is between 300 and 400 microns. Surface optical waves
are propagated along the interface between the two types of glass.
According to Dr. Kao, the fiber is relatively strong and can be easily
supported. Also, the guidance surface is protected from external influ-
ences. . . . the waveguide has a mechanical bending radius low enough to
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
9
Figure 1-9
Charles K. Kao making optical measurements at Standard
Telecommunications Laboratories. Courtesy BNR Europe

make the fiber almost completely flexible. Despite the fact that the best
readily available low-loss material has a loss of about 1000 dB/km, STL
believes that materials having losses of only tens of decibels per kilome-
ter will eventually be developed.
Kao and Hockham’s detailed analysis was published in the July 1966, Pro-
ceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers. Their daring forecast that fiber
loss could be reduced below 20 dB/km attracted the interest of the British Post
Office, which then operated the British telephone network. F.F. Roberts, an engi-
neering manager at the Post Office Research Laboratory (then at Dollis Hill in
London), saw the possibilities and persuaded others at the Post Office. His boss,
Jack Tillman, tapped a new research fund of 12 million pounds to study ways to
decrease fiber loss.
With Kao almost evangelically promoting the prospects of fiber communica-
tions, and the Post Office interested in applications, laboratories around the
world began trying to reduce fiber loss. It took four years to reach Kao’s goal of
20 dB/km, and the route to success proved different than many had expected.
Most groups tried to purify the compound glasses used for standard optics,
which are easy to melt and draw into fibers. At the Corning Glass Works (now
10
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
Figure 1-10
George Hockham with the metal waveguides he made to model
waveguide transmission in fibers. Courtesy BNR Europe

Corning, Inc.), Robert Maurer, Donald Keck, and Peter Schultz (Figure 1-11)
started with fused silica, a material that can be made extremely pure, but has a
high melting point and a low refractive index. They made cylindrical preforms by
depositing purified materials from the vapor phase, adding carefully controlled
levels of dopants to make the refractive index of the core slightly higher than that
of the cladding, without raising attenuation dramatically. In September 1970,
they announced they had made singlemode fibers with attenuation at the 633-
nanometer (nm) helium neon line below 20 dB/km. The fibers were fragile, but
tests at the new British Post Office Research Laboratories facility in Martlesham
Heath confirmed the low loss.
The Corning breakthrough was among the most dramatic of many develop-
ments that opened the door to fiber optic communications. In the same year, Bell
Labs and a team at the Loffe Physical Institute in Leningrad (now St. Petersburg)
made the first semiconductor diode lasers able to emit carrier waves (CW) at
room temperature. Over the next several years, fiber losses dropped dramatically,
aided both by improved fabrication methods and by the shift to longer wave-
lengths where fibers have inherently lower attenuation.
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
11
Figure 1-11
Donald Keck, Robert Maurer, and Peter Schultz (left to right), who
made the first low-loss fibers in 1970 at Corning. Courtesy Corning, Incorporated

Early singlemode fibers had cores several micrometers in diameter and in the
early 1970s that bothered developers. They doubted it would be possible to
achieve the micrometer-scale tolerances needed to couple light efficiently into the
tiny cores from light sources or in splices or connectors. Not satisfied with the
low bandwidth of step-index multimode fiber, they concentrated on multimode
fibers with a refractive-index gradient between core and cladding, and core diam-
eters of 50 or 62.5 micrometers. The first generation of telephone field trials in
1977 used such fibers to transmit light at 850 nm from gallium-aluminum-
arsenide laser diodes.
Those first-generation systems could transmit light several kilometers with-
out repeaters, but were limited by loss of about 2 dB/km in the fiber. A second
generation soon appeared, using new indium gallium arsenide phosphide
(InGaAsP) lasers that emitted at 1.3 micrometers, where fiber attenuation was as
low as 0.5 dB/km, and pulse dispersion was somewhat lower than at 850 nm.
Development of hardware for the first transatlantic fiber cable showed that sin-
glemode systems were feasible, so when deregulation opened the long-distance
phone market in the early 1980s, the carriers built national backbone systems of
singlemode fiber with 1300-nm sources. That technology has spread into other
telecom applications and remains the standard for most fiber systems.
However, a new generation of singlemode systems is now beginning to find
applications in submarine cables and systems serving large numbers of sub-
scribers. They operate at 1.55 micrometers, where fiber loss is 0.2 to 0.3 dB/km,
allowing even longer repeater spacings. More important, erbium-doped optical
fibers can serve as optical amplifiers at that wavelength, avoiding the need for
electro-optic regenerators. Submarine cables with optical amplifiers can operate
at speeds to 5 gigabits per second and can be upgraded from lower speeds simply
by changing terminal electronics. Optical amplifiers also are attractive for fiber
systems delivering the same signals to many terminals, because the fiber ampli-
fiers can compensate for losses in dividing the signals among many terminals.
The biggest challenge remaining for fiber optics is economic. Today tele-
phone and cable television companies can cost justify installing fiber links to
remote sites serving tens to a few hundreds of customers. However, terminal
equipment remains too expensive to justify installing fibers all the way to homes,
at least for present services. Instead, cable and phone companies run twisted wire
pairs or coaxial cables from optical network units to individual homes. Time will
see how long that lasts.
12
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Confining light in a material by surrounding it by another material with
lower refractive index is the phenomenon of _____________
a. cladding.
b. total internal reflection.
c. total internal refraction.
d. transmission.
2. Abraham van Heel, in order to increase the total internal reflection, cov-
ered bare fiber with transparent cladding of _____________
a. higher refractive index.
b. lower refractive index.
c. higher numerical aperture.
d. lower numerical aperture.
3. The high loss of early optical fiber was mainly due to _____________
a. impurities.
b. silica.
c. wave guides.
d. small cores.
4. _____________, using fused silica, made the first low loss (<20 dB/Km)
singlemode optical fiber.
a. Standard Telecommunications Laboratory
b. The Post Office Research Laboratory
c. Corning Glass Works
d. Dr. Charles K. Kao
5. Erbium-doped optical fiber can serve as _____________
a. cladding.
b. a pulse suppresor.
c. a regenerator.
d. an amplifier.
CHAPTER 1 — THE ORIGINS OF FIBER-OPTIC COMMUNICATIONS
13


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
2
BASICS OF
FIBER OPTICS
E L I A S  A.  AWA D
INTRODUCTION
Optical fiber is the medium in which communication signals are transmitted from
one location to another in the form of light guided through thin fibers of glass or
plastic. These signals are digital pulses or continuously modulated analog streams
of light representing information. These can be voice information, data informa-
tion, computer information, video information, or any other type of information.
These same types of information can be sent on metallic wires such as twisted
pair and coax and through the air on microwave frequencies. The reason to use
optical fiber is because it offers advantages not available in any metallic conduc-
tor or microwaves.
The main advantage of optical fiber is that it can transport more information
longer distances in less time than any other communications medium. In addition,
it is unaffected by the interference of electromagnetic radiation, making it possible
to transmit information and data with less noise and less error. There are also
many other applications for optical fiber that are simply not possible with metal-
lic conductors. These include sensors/scientific applications, medical/surgical
applications, industrial applications, subject illumination, and image transport.
Most optical fibers are made of glass, although some are made of plastic. For
mechanical protection, optical fiber is housed inside cables. There are many types
15

Figure 2-1
A typical fiber optic data link.
and configurations of cables, each for a specific application: indoor, outdoor, in
the ground, underwater, deep ocean, overhead, and others.
An optical fiber data link is made up of three elements (Figure 2-1):
1. A light source at one end (laser or light-emitting diode [LED]), including
a connector or other alignment mechanism to connect to the fiber. The
light source will receive its signal from the support electronics to convert
the electrical information to optical information.
2. The fiber (and its cable, connectors, or splices) from point to point. The
fiber transports this light to its destination.
3. The light detector on the other end with a connector interface to the
fiber. The detector converts the incoming light back to an electrical sig-
nal, producing a copy of the original electrical input. The support elec-
tronics will process that signal to perform its intended communications
function.
The source and detector with their necessary support electronics are called the
transmitter and receiver, respectively.
16
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
Transmitter
Source
Driver
Input
LED or Laser
Receiver
Output
Photodiode
Preamp/Trigger
Connectors
Cables

Figure 2-3
Optical fiber construction.
Figure 2-2
Long distance data links require repeaters to regenerate signals.
In long-distance systems (Figure 2-2) the use of intermediate amplifiers may
be necessary to compensate for the signal loss over the long run of the fiber.
Therefore, long-distance networks will be comprised of a number of identical
links connected together. Each repeater consists of a receiver, transmitter, and
support electronics.
OPTICAL FIBER
Optical fiber (Figure 2-3) is comprised of a light-carrying core surrounded by a
cladding that traps the light in the core by the principle of total internal reflec-
tion. By making the core of the fiber of a material with a higher refractive index,
we can cause the light in the core to be totally reflected at the boundary of the
cladding for all light that strikes at greater than a critical angle. The critical angle
is determined by the difference in the composition of the materials used in the
core and cladding. Most optical fibers are made of glass, although some are made
of plastic. The core and cladding are usually fused silica glass covered by a plas-
tic coating, called the buffer, that protects the glass fiber from physical damage
and moisture. Some all-plastic fibers are used for specific applications.
Glass optical fibers are the most common type used in communication appli-
cations. Glass optical fibers can be singlemode or multimode. Most of today’s
telecom and community antenna television (CATV) systems use singlemode
fibers, whereas local area networks (LANs) use multimode graded-index fibers.
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
17
Repeater
Repeater
Repeater
Repeater
Fiber
Fiber
Fiber
Core
Cladding
Buffer Coating

Multimode Step Index
Core
Cladding
Multimode Graded Index
Core
Cladding
Singlemode
Core
Cladding
Figure 2-4
The three types of optical fiber.
Singlemode fibers are smaller in core diameter than multimode fibers and offer
much greater bandwidth, but the larger core size of multimode fiber makes cou-
pling to low cost sources such as LEDs much easier. Multimode fibers may be of
the step-index or graded-index design.
Plastic optical fibers are large core step-index multimode fibers, although
graded-index plastic fiber is under development. Because plastic fibers have a
large diameter and can be cut with simple tools, they are easy to work with and
can use low-cost connectors. Plastic fiber is not used for long distance because it
has high attenuation and lower bandwidth than glass fibers. However, plastic
optical fiber may be useful in the short runs from the street to the home or office
and within the home or office.
There are two basic types of optical fiber—multimode and singlemode (Fig-
ure 2-4). Multimode fiber means that light can travel many different paths (called
modes) through the core of the fiber, entering and leaving the fiber at various
angles. The highest angle that light is accepted into the core of the fiber defines
18
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS

the numerical aperture (NA). Two types of multimode fiber exist, distinguished
by the index profile of their cores and how light travels in them (Table 2-1).
Step-index multimode fiber has a core composed completely of one type of
glass. Light travels in straight lines in the fiber, reflecting off the core/cladding
interface. The NA is determined by the difference in the indices of refraction of
the core and cladding and can be calculated by Snell’s law. Since each mode or
angle of light travels a different path, a pulse of light is dispersed while traveling
through the fiber, limiting the bandwidth of step-index fiber.
In graded-index multimode fiber, the core is composed of many different lay-
ers of glass, chosen with indices of refraction to produce an index profile approx-
imating a parabola, where from the center of the core the index of refraction gets
lower toward the cladding. Since light travels faster in the lower index of refrac-
tion glass, the light will travel faster as it approaches the outside of the core. Like-
wise, the light traveling closest to the core center will travel the slowest. A
properly constructed index profile will compensate for the different path lengths
of each mode, increasing the bandwidth capacity of the fiber by as much as 100
times over that of step-index fiber.
Singlemode fiber just shrinks the core size to a dimension about six times the
wavelength of light traveling in the fiber and it has a smaller difference in the
refractive index of the core and cladding, causing all the light to travel in only one
mode. Thus modal dispersion disappears and the bandwidth of the fiber increases
tremendously over graded-index fiber.
FIBER MANUFACTURE
Three methods are used today to fabricate moderate-to-low loss waveguide
fibers: modified chemical vapor deposition (MCVD), outside vapor deposition
(OVD), and vapor axial deposition (VAD).
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
19
Table 2-1
Fiber Types and Typical Specifications
Core/Cladding
Attenuation
Coefficient
(dBkm)
Bandwidth
Fiber Type
Diameter(m)
850 nm
1300 nm
1550 nm
(MHz-km)
Multimode/Plastic
1 mm
(1 dB/m
@665 nm)
Low
Multimode/Step Index
200/240
6
50 @ 850 nm
Multimode/Graded Index
50/125
3
1
600 @1300 nm
62.5/125
3
1
500 @1300 nm
85/125
3
1
500 @1300 nm
100/140
3
1
300 @1300 nm
Singlemode
8-9/125
0.5
0.3
high

Figure 2-5
Modified chemical vapor deposition (MCVD).
Modified Chemical Vapor Deposition (MCVD)
In MCVD a hollow glass tube, approximately 3 feet long and 1 inch in diameter
(1 m long by 2.5 cm diameter), is placed in a horizontal or vertical lathe and spun
rapidly. A computer-controlled mixture of gases is passed through the inside of
the tube. On the outside of the tube, a heat source (oxygen/hydrogen torch) passes
up and down as illustrated in Figure 2-5.
Each pass of the heat source fuses a small amount of the precipitated gas
mixture to the surface of the tube. Most of the gas is vaporized silicon dioxide
(glass), but there are carefully controlled remounts of impurities (dopants) that
cause changes in the index of refraction of the glass. As the torch moves and the
preform spins, a layer of glass is formed inside the hollow preform. The dopant
(mixture of gases) can be changed for each layer so that the index may be varied
across the diameter.
After sufficient layers are built up, the tube is collapsed into a solid glass rod
referred to as a preform. It is now a scale model of the desired fiber, but much
shorter and thicker. The preform is then taken to the drawing tower, where it is
pulled into a length of fiber up to 10 kilometers long.
Outside Vapor Deposition (OVD)
The OVD method utilizes a glass target rod that is placed in a chamber and spun
rapidly on a lathe. A computer-controlled mixture of gases is then passed between
the target rod and the heat source as illustrated in Figure 2-6. On each pass of the
heat source, a small amount of the gas reacts and fuses to the outer surface of the
rod. After enough layers are built up, the target rod is removed and the remaining
soot preform is collapsed into a solid rod. The preform is then taken to the tower
and pulled into fiber.
20
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
Rotating
Flame
Gases
Hollow Glass Preform
Heat Source Moving
Back and Forth
Soot Deposited
Inside Tube

Figure 2-6
Outside vapor deposition (OVD).
Figure 2-7
Vapor axial deposition (VAD).
Vapor Axial Deposition (VAD)
The VAD process utilizes a very short glass target rod suspended by one end. A
computer-controlled mixture of gases is applied between the end of the rod and
the heat source as shown in Figure 2-7. The heat source is slowly backed off as
the preform lengthens due to tile soot buildup caused by gases reacting to the heat
and fusing to the end of the rod. After sufficient length is formed, the target rod
is removed from the end, leaving the soot preform. The preform is then taken to
the drawing tower to be heated and pulled into the required fiber length.
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
21
Rotating
Flame
Gases
Soot Preform
Heat Source Moving
Back and Forth
Target Rod
Gases
Target Rod
Soot Preform
Heat Sources
Moving Down

Figure 2-8
Drawing the fiber from the preform and coating the fiber.
Coating the Fiber for Protection
After the fiber is pulled from the preform, a protective coating is applied very
quickly after the formation of the hair-thin fiber (Figure 2-8). The coating is nec-
essary to provide mechanical protection and prevent the ingress of water into any
fiber surface cracks. The coating typically is made up of two parts, a soft inner
coating and a harder outer coating. The overall thickness of the coating varies
between 62.5 and 187.5 µm, depending on fiber applications.
22
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
Moveable Blank Holder
Furnace
Fiber Drawing
Diameter Monitor
Coating Applicator
Ultraviolet Lamps
Screen Tester
Preform

CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
23
Figure 2-9
Total internal reflection in an optical fiber.
Critical angle
These coatings are typically strippable by mechanical means and must be
removed before fibers can be spliced or connectorized.
ADVANCED STUDY
What Is the Index of Refraction?
The index of refraction of a material is the ratio of the speed of light in vac-
uum to that in the material. In other words, the index of refraction is a
measure of how much the speed of light slows down after it enters the
material. Since light has its highest speed in vacuum, and since light
slows down whenever it enters any medium (water, plastic, glass, crystal,
oil, etc.), the index of refraction of all media is greater than one. For exam-
ple, the index of refraction in a vacuum is 1, that of glass and plastic opti-
cal fibers is approximately 1.5, and water has an index of refraction of
approximately 1.3
When light goes from one material to another of a different index of
refraction, its path will bend, causing an illusion similar to the “bent” stick
stuck into water. At its limits, this phenomenon is used to reflect the light
at the core/cladding boundary of the fiber and trap it in the core (Figure 
2-9). By choosing the material differences between the core and cladding,
one can select the angle of light at which this light trapping, called total
internal reflection, occurs. This angle defines a primary fiber specification,
the numerical aperture.
FIBER APPLICATIONS
Each type of fiber has its specific application. Step-index multimode fiber
is used where large core size and efficient coupling of source power are
more important than low loss and high bandwidth. It is commonly used
in short, low-speed datalinks. It may also be used in applications where

radiation is a concern, since it can be made with a pure silica core that is not read-
ily affected by radiation.
Graded-index multimode fiber is used for data communications systems
where the transmitter sources are LEDs. While four graded-index multimode
fibers have been used over the history of fiber optic communications, one fiber
now is by far the most widely used by virtually all multimode datacom
networks—62.5/125 µm.
The telephone companies use singlemode fiber for its better performance at
higher bit rates and its lower loss, allowing faster and longer unrepeated links for
long-distance telecommunications. It is also used in CATV, since today’s analog
CATV networks use laser sources designed for singlemode fiber and future
CATV networks will use compressed digital video signals. Almost all other high-
speed networks are using singlemode fiber, either to support gigabit data rates or
long-distance links.
FIBER PERFORMANCE
Purity of the medium is very important for best transmission of an optical signal
inside the fiber. Perfect vacuum is the purest medium we can have in which to
transmit light. Since all optical fibers are made of solid, not hollow, cores, we
have to settle for second best in terms of purity. Technology makes it possible for
us to make glass very pure, however.
Impurities are the unwanted things that can get into the fiber and become a
part of its structure. Dirt and impurities are two different things. Dirt comes to
the fiber from dirty hands and a dirty work environment. This can be cleaned off
with alcohol wipes. Impurities, on the other hand, are built into the fiber at the
time of manufacture; they cannot be cleaned off. These impurities will cause parts
of optical signal to be lost due to scattering or absorption causing attenuation of
the signal. If we have too many impurities in the fiber, too much of the optical
signal will be lost and what is left over at the output of the fiber will not be
enough for reliable communications.
Much of the early research and development of optical fiber centered on
methods to make the fiber purity higher to reduce optical losses. Today’s fibers
are so pure that as a point of comparison, if water in the ocean was as pure, we
would be able to see the bottom on a sunny day.
Optical glass fiber has another layer (or two) that surrounds the cladding,
known as the buffer. The buffer is a plastic coating(s) that provides scratch pro-
tection for the glass below. It also adds to the mechanical strength of the fiber
and protects it from moisture damage. On straight pulling (tension), glass optical
fiber is five times stronger than some steel. But when it comes to twisting and
bending, glass must not be stressed beyond its limits or it will fracture.
24
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS

Figure 2-10
Fiber loss mechanisms.
Fiber Attenuation
The attenuation of the optical fiber is a result of two factors—absorption and
scattering (Figure 2-10). Absorption is caused by the absorption of the light and
conversion to heat by molecules in the glass. Primary absorbers are residual OH+
and dopants used to modify the refractive index of the glass. This absorption
occurs at discrete wavelengths, determined by the elements absorbing the light.
The OH+ absorption is predominant, and occurs most strongly around 1000 nm,
1400 nm, and above 1600 nm.
The largest cause of attenuation is scattering. Scattering occurs when light
collides with individual atoms in the glass and is anisotrophic. Light that is scat-
tered at angles outside the critical angle of the fiber will be absorbed into the
cladding or scattered in all directions, even transmitted back toward the source.
Scattering is also a function of wavelength, proportional to the inverse fourth
power of the wavelength of the light. Thus, if you double the wavelength of the
light, you reduce the scattering losses by 24 or 16 times. Therefore, for long-
distance transmission, it is advantageous to use the longest practical wavelength
for minimal attenuation and maximum distance between repeaters. Together,
absorption and scattering produce the attenuation curve for a typical glass opti-
cal fiber shown in Figure 2-10.
Fiber optic systems transmit in the windows created between the absorption
bands at 850 nm, 1300 nm, and 1550 nm, where physics also allows one to fab-
ricate lasers and detectors easily. Plastic fiber has a more limited wavelength band
that limits practical use to 660-nm LED sources.
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
25
Attenuation
Scattering
Absorption
Wavelength (nm)
850
1300
1550

Figure 2-11
Modal dispersion, caused by different path lengths in the fiber, is
corrected in graded-index fiber.
Fiber Bandwidth
Fiber’s information transmission capacity is limited by two separate components of
dispersion: modal (Figure 2-11) and chromatic (Figure 2-12). Modal dispersion
occurs in step-index multimode fiber where the paths of different modes are of
varying lengths. Modal dispersion also comes from the fact that the index profile of
graded-index multimode fiber is not perfect. The graded-index profile was chosen
to theoretically allow all modes to have the same group velocity or transit speed
along the length of the fiber. By making the outer parts of the core a lower index of
refraction than the inner parts of the core, the higher order modes speed up as they
go away from the center of the core, compensating for their longer path lengths.
26
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
Multimode Step Index
Core
Cladding
Multimode Graded Index
Core
Cladding
Figure 2-12
Chromatic dispersion occurs because light of different colors
(wavelengths) travels at different speeds in the core of the fiber.
Longer wavelength goes faster

In an idealized graded-index fiber, all modes have the same group velocity
and no modal dispersion occurs. But in real fibers, the index profile is a piecewise
approximation and all modes are not perfectly transmitted, allowing some modal
dispersion. Since the higher-order modes have greater deviations, the modal dis-
persion of a fiber (and therefore its laser bandwidth) tends to be very sensitive to
modal conditions in the fiber. Thus the bandwidth of longer fibers degrades non-
linearly as the higher-order modes are attenuated more strongly.
The second factor in fiber bandwidth is chromatic dispersion. Remember, a
prism spreads out the spectrum of incident light since the light travels at different
speeds according to its color and is therefore refracted at different angles. The
usual way of stating this is the index of refraction of the glass is wavelength
dependent. Thus, a carefully manufactured graded-index multimode fiber can
only be optimized for a single wavelength, usually near 1300 nm, and light of
other colors will suffer from chromatic dispersion. Even light in the same mode
will be dispersed if it is of different wavelengths.
Chromatic dispersion is a bigger problem with LEDs, which have broad spec-
tral outputs, unlike lasers that concentrate most of their light in a narrow spectral
range. Chromatic dispersion occurs with LEDs because much of the power is
away from the zero dispersion wavelength of the fiber. High-speed systems such
as Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI), based on broad output surface emit-
ter LEDs, suffer such intense chromatic dispersion that transmission over only 2
kilometer of 62.5/125 fiber can be risky.
Modal Effects on Attenuation and Bandwidth
The way light travels in modes in multimode fiber can affect attenuation and
bandwidth of the fiber. In order to model a network or test multimode fiber optic
cables accurately and reproducibly, it is necessary to understand modal distribu-
tion, mode control, and attenuation correction factors. Modal distribution in
multimode fiber is important to measurement reproducibility and accuracy.
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
27
ADVANCED STUDY
What Is Modal Distribution?
In multimode fibers, some light rays travel straight down the axis of the
fiber while all the others wiggle or bounce back and forth inside the core.
In step-index fiber, the off-axis rays, called “higher-order modes,” bounce

28
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
back and forth from core/cladding boundaries as they are transmitted
down the fiber. Since these higher-order modes travel a longer distance
than the axial ray, they are responsible for the dispersion that limits the
fiber’s bandwidth.
In graded-index fiber, the reduction of the index of refraction of the
core as one approaches the cladding causes the higher-order modes to fol-
low a curved path that is longer than the axial ray (the “zero-order mode”).
However, by virtue of the lower index of refraction away from the axis, light
speeds up as it approaches the cladding, thus taking approximately the
same time to travel through the fiber. Therefore the “dispersion,” or varia-
tions in transit time for various modes, is minimized and bandwidth of the
fiber is maximized.
However, the fact that the higher-order modes travel farther in the
glass core means that they have a greater likelihood of being scattered or
absorbed, the two primary causes of attenuation in optical fibers. There-
fore, the higher-order modes will have greater attenuation than lower-order
modes, and a long length of fiber that was fully filled (all modes had the
same power level launched into them) will have a lower amount of power in
the higher-order modes than will a short length of the same fiber.
This change in modal distribution between long and short fibers can
be described as a “transient loss,” and can make big differences in the
measurements one makes with the fiber. It not only changes the modal
distribution, it also changes the effective core diameter and apparent
numerical aperture.
The term “equilibrium modal distribution” (EMD) is used to describe
the modal distribution in a long fiber that has lost the higher-order modes.
A “long” fiber is one in EMD, while a “short” fiber has all its initially
launched higher-order modes.
In the laboratory, a critical optical system is used to fully fill the fiber
modes and a “mode filter,” usually a mandrel wrap that stresses the fiber
and increases loss for the higher-order modes, is used to simulate EMD
conditions. A “mode scrambler,” made by fusion splicing a step-index fiber
into the graded-index fiber near the source, can also be used to fill all
modes equally.
When testing the network cable plant, using an LED or laser source
similar to the one used in the system and short launch cables may provide
as accurate a measurement as is possible under more controlled circum-
stances, since the LED approximates the system source. Alternately, one
may use a mode conditioner (described below) to establish consistent
modal distribution for testing cables.

Mode Conditioners
There are three basic “gadgets” used to condition the modal distribution in mul-
timode fibers: mode strippers that remove unwanted cladding mode light, mode
scramblers that mix modes to equalize power in all the modes, and mode filters
that remove the higher-order modes to simulate EMD or steady-state conditions.
These are discussed in Chapter 17.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The main advantage(s) of optical is (are) its ability to ________________
than other communications media.
a. transport more information
b. transport information faster
c. transport information farther
d. all of the above
2. A fiber optic data link is made up of three elements:
1. ________________
2. ________________
3. ________________
3. Plastic optical fibers are ________________ fibers.
a. singlemode
b. large core step-index
c. large core graded-index
d. either a or b
4. Optical fiber is comprised of three layers:
1. ________________
2. ________________
3. ________________
5. What does 62.5 refer to when written 62.5/125?
a. diameter of the core
b. diameter of the cladding
c. numerical aperture
d. index profile
6. In graded-index optical fiber, the index profile approximates a parabola.
The benefit of this is ________________
a. reduced bandwidth.
b. reduced cross-talk.
c. increased modal dispersion.
d. reduced modal dispersion.
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS
29

7. Three methods used to fabricate optical fiber:
1. ________________
2. ________________
3. ________________
8. Match the following fibers to the application they are best suited for:
______ Graded-index multimode
a. long-distance telecommunications
______ Step-index multimode
b. data communications
______ Singlemode
c. efficient source power coupling
9. The largest cause of attenuation is ________________
a. dopants.
b. absorption.
c. moisture.
d. scattering.
10. Optical fiber’s bandwidth, or information transmission capacity, is
limited by two factors:
1. ________________
2. ________________
30
CHAPTER 2 — BASICS OF FIBER OPTICS

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
3
FIBER OPTIC
NETWORKS
J I M  H AY E S  A N D  P H I L  S H E C K L E R
One often sees articles written about fiber optic communications networks that
imply that fiber optics is “new.” That is hardly the case. The first fiber optic tele-
phone network was installed in Chicago in 1976, and by 1979, commercial fiber
optic computer datalinks were available. Since then, fiber has become common-
place in the communications infrastructure.
If you make a long-distance call today, your voice is undoubtedly being
transmitted on fiber optic cable, since it has replaced over 90 percent of all voice
circuits for long-distance communications. Transoceanic links are being con-
verted to fiber optics at a very high rate, since all new undersea cables are fiber
optics. Phone company offices are being interconnected with fiber, and most
large office buildings have fiber optic telephone connections into the buildings
themselves. Only the last links to the home, office, and phone are not fiber.
CATV also uses fiber optics via a unique analog transmission scheme, but
they are already planning on fiber moving to compressed digital video. Most large
city CATV systems are being converted to fiber optics for reliability and in order
to offer new services such as Internet connections and phone service. Only fiber
offers the bandwidth necessary for carrying voice, data, and video simultaneously.
The LAN backbone also has become predominately fiber-based. The back-
end of mainframe computers is also primarily fiber. The desktop is the only hold-
out, currently a battlefield between the copper and fiber contingents.
31

Figure 3-1
Telephone fiber optic architecture.
Security, building management, audio, process control, and almost any other
system that requires communications cabling have become available on fiber
optics. Fiber optics really is the medium of choice for all high bandwidth and/or
long-distance communications. Let us look at why it is, how to evaluate the eco-
nomics of copper versus fiber, and how to design fiber networks with the best
availability of options for upgradeability in the future.
IT IS REALLY ALL A MATTER OF ECONOMICS
The use of fiber optics is entirely an issue of economics. Widespread use occurred
when the cost declined to a point that fiber optics became less expensive than
transmission over copper wires, radio, or satellite links. However, for each appli-
cation, the turnover point has been reached for somewhat different reasons.
Telephony
Fiber optics has become widely used in telephone systems because of its enor-
mous bandwidth and distance advantages over copper wires. The application for
fiber in telephony is simply connecting switches over fiber optic links (Figure 3-
1). Commercial systems today carry more phone conversations over a single pair
of fibers than could be carried over thousands of copper pairs. Material costs,
32
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
Long Distance
Local Loop (City)
Subscriber Loop
(Fiber to the Curb—FTTC)
Fiber to the Home—FTTH

installation, and splicing labor and reliability are all in fiber’s favor, not to men-
tion space considerations. In major cities today, insufficient space exists in cur-
rent conduit to provide communications needs over copper wire.
While fiber carries over 90 percent of all long-distance communications and
50 percent of local communications, the penetration of fiber to the curb (FTTC)
and fiber to the home (FTTH) has been hindered by a lack of cost-effectiveness.
These two final frontiers for fiber in the phone systems hinge on fiber becoming
less expensive and customer demand for high bandwidth services that would be
impossible over current copper telephone wires. Digital subscriber loop (DSL)
technology has enhanced the capacity of the current copper wire home connec-
tions so as to postpone implementation of FTTH for perhaps another decade.
Telecommunications led the change to fiber optic technology. The initial use
of fiber optics was simply to build adapters that took input from traditional tele-
phone equipment’s electrical signals on copper cables, multiplexed many signals
to take advantage of the higher bit-rate capability of fiber, and used high-power
laser sources to allow maximum transmission distances.
After many years of all these adapters using transmission protocols propri-
etary to each vendor, Bellcore (now Telcordia) began working on a standard net-
work called SONET, for Synchronous Optical NETwork. SONET would allow
interoperability between various manufacturers’ transmission equipment.
However, the telephone companies’ (telco’s) transition to SONET was slow,
a result of reluctance to make obsolete recently installed fiber optic transmission
equipment and the slow development of the details of the standards. Progress has
been somewhat faster overseas, where the equivalent network standard Synchro-
nous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) is being used for first-generation fiber optic sys-
tems. SONET is now threatened by Internet protocol (IP) networks, since data
traffic has surpassed voice traffic in volume and is growing many times faster,
mostly due to the popularity of the Internet and World Wide Web.
CATV
In CATV, fiber initially paid for itself in enhanced reliability. The enormous
bandwidth requirements of broadcast TV require frequent repeaters. The large
number of repeaters used in a broadcast cable network are a big source of failure.
And CATV systems’ tree-and-branch architecture means upstream failure causes
failure for all downstream users. Reliability is a big issue since viewers are a vocal
lot if programming is interrupted!
CATV experimented with fiber optics for years, but it was too expensive
until the development of the AM analog systems. By simply converting the signal
from electrical to optical, the advantages of fiber optics became cost-effective.
Now CATV has adopted a network architecture (Figure 3-2) that overbuilds the
normal coax network with fiber optic links.
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
33

Figure 3-2
CATV architectures before and after fiber overbuild.
Fiber is easy to install in an overbuild, either by lashing lightweight fiber
optic cable to the installed aerial coax or by pulling in underground ducts. The
technology, all singlemode with laser sources, is easily updated to future digital
systems when compressed digital video becomes available. The connection to the
user remains coaxial cable, which has as much as 1 GHz bandwidth.
The installed cable plant also offers the opportunity to install data and voice
services in areas where it is legal and economically feasible. Extra fibers can be
easily configured for a return path. The breakthrough came with the develop-
ment of the cable modem, which multiplexes Ethernet onto the frequency spec-
trum of a CATV system. CATV systems can literally put the subscriber on a
Ethernet LAN and connect them to the Internet at much higher speeds than a
dial-up phone connection. Adding voice service is relatively easy for the CATV
operator as well.
Local Area Networks
For LANs and other datacom applications, the economics of fiber optics are less
clear today. For low bit-rate applications over short distances, copper wire is
undoubtedly more economical, but as distances go over the 100 meters called for
34
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
Headend
Coax Network
Fiber Overbuild
Headend

in industry standards and speeds get above 100 Mb/s, fiber begins to look more
attractive since copper requires more local network electronics and there are
many problems installing and testing copper wire to high speed standards. Abil-
ity to upgrade usually tilts the decision to fiber since copper must be handled very
carefully to operate at speeds where fiber is just cruising along.
Fiber penetration in LANs is very high in long-distance or high bit-rate back-
bones in large LANs, connecting local hubs or routers, but still very low in con-
nections to the desktop. The rapidly declining costs of the installed fiber optic
cable plant and adapter electronics combined with needs for higher bandwidth at
the desktop are making fiber to the desk more viable, especially using centralized
fiber architectures.
There are a large number of LAN standards today. The most widely used,
called Ethernet or IEEE802.3 after its standards committee, is a 10, 100 MB/s or
1 GB/s LAN that operates with a protocol that lets any station broadcast if the
network if free. Token ring (most often referred to as IBM Token Ring after its
developer) is a 4 or 16 MB/s LAN that has a ring architecture, where each station
has a chance to transmit in turn, when a digital “token” passes to that station.
These two networks were developed originally based on copper wire standards.
Fiber optic adapters or repeaters have been developed for these networks to allow
using fiber optic cable for transmission where distance or electrical interference
justifies the extra cost of the fiber optic interfaces for the equipment.
Most LANs have been designed from the beginning to offer the option of
both copper wiring and fiber optics. Several of these networks were optimized for
fiber. All share the common specification of speed: they are high-speed networks
designed to move massive quantities of data rapidly between workstations or
mainframe computers.
Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) is a high-speed LAN standard that
was developed specifically for fiber optics by the ANSI X3T9.5 committee, and
products are readily available. FDDI has a dual counter-rotating ring topology (
Figure 3-3) with dual-attached stations on the backbone that are attached to both
rings, and single-attached stations that are attached to only one of the rings
through a concentrator. It has a token passing media access protocol and a 100-
Mbit/s data rate. FDDIs dual ring architecture makes it very fault tolerant, as the
loss of a cable or station will not prevent the rest of the network from operating
properly.
ESCON (Figure 3-4) is an IBM-developed network that connects peripherals
to the mainframe, replacing “bus and tag” systems. ESCON stands for Enterprise
System Connection architecture. The network is a switched star architecture,
using ESCON directors to switch various equipment to the mainframe comput-
ers. Data transfer rate started at 4.5 megabytes/second but was increased to 10
Mbytes/second. With an 8B/10B conding scheme, ESCON runs at about 200
Mbits/sec.
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
35

Figure 3-4
Enterprise system connection (ESCON) architecture.
36
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
Director
Director
Director
Director
Director
Peripheral
Peripheral
Director
Mainframe
Figure 3-3
Fiber distributed data interface (FDDI).
Counter Rotating
Primary
Node
(DAS)
Concentrator (DAC)
Secondary Nodes
(SAS or SAC)

Optically, ESCON and FDDI are similar. They use 1300-nm transmission for
the higher bandwidth necessary with high-speed data transfer rates. Both single-
mode and multimode cable plants are supported and distances up to 20 kilome-
ters between directors.
Fibre Channel and High Performance Parallel Interface (HIPPI) are both
high-speed links, not networks, that are designed to be used to interconnect high-
speed data devices. The link protocol supports most fiber types and even copper
cables for some short runs.
FIBER OR COPPER? TECHNOLOGY SAYS GO FIBER, BUT . . .
Fiber’s performance advantages over copper result from the physics of transmit-
ting with photons instead of electrons. Fiber optic transmission neither radiates
radio frequency interference (RFI) nor is susceptible to interference, unlike cop-
per wires that radiate signals capable of interfering with other electronic equip-
ment. Because it is unaffected by electrical fields, utility companies even run
power lines with fibers imbedded in the wires!
The bandwidth/distance issue is what usually convinces the user to switch to
fiber. For today’s applications, fiber is used at 100–200 Mb/s for datacom appli-
cations on multimode fiber, and telcos and CATV use singlemode fiber in the
gigahertz range. Multimode fiber has a larger light-carrying core that is compati-
ble with less expensive LED sources, but the light travels in many rays, called
modes, that limit the bandwidth of the fiber. Singlemode fiber has a smaller core
that requires laser sources, but light travels in only one mode, offering almost
unlimited bandwidth.
In either fiber type, you can transmit at many different wavelengths of light
simultaneously without interference; this process is called wavelength division
multiplexing (WDM). WDM is much easier with singlemode fiber, since lasers
have much better defined spectral outputs. Telephone networks using dense wave-
length division multiplexing (DWDM) have systems now operating at greater
than 80 MB/s. IBM developed a prototype system that uses this technique to pro-
vide a potential of 300 Gb/s on a LAN!
Which LANs Support Fiber?
That’s easy, all of them. Some, such as FDDI or ESCON, were designed around
fiber optics, whereas others, such as Ethernet or token ring, use fiber optic
adapters to change from copper cable to fiber optics. In the computer room, you
can get fiber optic channel extenders or ESCON equipment with fiber built in.
Where Is the Future of Fiber?
The future of fiber optics is the future of communications. What fiber optic offers
is bandwidth and the ability to upgrade. Applications such as multimedia and
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
37

video conferencing are driving networks to higher bandwidth at a furious pace.
Over wide area networks, the installed fiber optic infrastructure can be expanded
to accommodate almost unlimited traffic. Only the electronic switches need to be
upgraded to provide orders of magnitude greater capacity. CATV operators are
installing fiber as fast as possible since advanced digital TV will thrive in a fiber-
based environment. Datacom applications can benefit from fiber optics also, as
graphics and multimedia require more LAN bandwidth. Even wireless communi-
cations need fiber, connecting local low-power cellular or personal communica-
tion systems (PCS) transceivers to the switching matrix.
The Copper Versus Fiber Debate
Over the past few years, the datacom arena has been the site of a fierce battle
between the fiber people and the copper people. First, almost 10 years ago, fiber
offered the only solution to high-speed or long-distance datacom backbones.
Although fiber was hard to install then and electrical/optical interfaces were
expensive, when available at all, fiber was really the only reliable solution. This
led to the development of the FDDI standard for a 100 Mb/s token ring LAN and
the IBM ESCON system to replace bus and tag cables.
By 1989, FDDI was a reality, with demonstration networks operating at con-
ferences to show that it really worked and that various vendors’ hardware was
interoperable. In 1990, IBM introduced ESCON as part of the System 390 intro-
duction and fiber had become an integral part of their mainframe hardware.
Everybody thought fiber had arrived.
However, at the same time, the copper wire manufacturers had developed
new design cables that had much better attenuation characteristics at high fre-
quencies. Armed with data that their Category 5 unshielded twisted pair (UTP)
cables could transmit 100–150 Mb/s signals over 100 meters and surveys that
showed that most desktop connections are less than that distance, they made a
major frontal assault on the high-speed LAN marketplace. Simultaneously, other
high-speed LAN standards, high-speed Ethernet and asynchronous transfer mode
(ATM), which deliver FDDI speeds on copper wire, became popular. Now cop-
per manufacturers are offering proprietary designs for copper cables that promise
250 MHz bandwidth, although the designs are years away from standardization.
Many potential users continue to postpone making the decision to go to fiber.
So How Do You Decide Between Fiber and Copper?
Some applications are really black and white. Low bit-rate LAN connections at
the desktop with little expectation of ever upgrading to higher bit rates should
use copper. Long distances, heavy traffic loads, high bit rates, or high interference
environments demand fiber. So if you have a backbone and Ethernet or token
ring on the desktop, a fiber backbone and Category 5 UTP to the desktop makes
38
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS

good sense. If you already have a mainframe in the computer room and are using
channel connections, you probably will use bus and tag cables for connections.
But if you are extending those connections outside the computer room or buying
a new mainframe, you will be getting fiber optic channel extenders or ESCON.
If either media will work in your application, it really comes down to eco-
nomics—which solution is more cost-effective. But cost is a combination of fac-
tors, including system architecture, material cost, installation, testing, and
“opportunity cost.”
More end users are realizing that in a proper comparison, fiber right to the
desktop can actually be significantly cheaper than a copper network. Look at the
networks (Figure 3-5), and you will see what we mean.
The Traditional UTP LAN
The UTP copper LAN has a maximum cable length of 90 meters (about 290 ft.),
so each desktop is connected by a unique UTP cable to a network hub located in
a nearby “telecom closet.” The backbone of the network can be UTP if the clos-
ets are close enough, or fiber optics if the distances are larger or the backbone
runs a higher bandwidth network than can be supported on copper. Every hub
connects to the main telecom closet with one cable per hub.
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS
39
Figure 3-5
Fiber and copper use different network architectures.
Main
Cross-Connect
Backbone
Telecom Closets
(Hub, power, UPC,
interconnections)
Cat 5 Copper
Fiber Optics
Fiber Patch Panels
Horizontal

In the telecom closet, every hub requires conditioned, uninterruptable power,
since the network depends on every hub being able to survive a power outage. A
data quality ground should be installed to prevent ground loops and noise prob-
lems. It will probably also have a rack to mount everything in (and the rack must
be grounded properly.) Cables will be terminated in patch panels and patch cords
will be used to connect cables to hubs.
The Fiber to the Desk LAN
Fiber optics is not limited in distance as is UTP cable. It can go as far as 2 kilo-
meters (over 6,000 ft.), making it possible to bypass the local hubs and cable
straight to the main telecom closet. It is likely there will be a small patch panel or
wall box connecting desktop cables (probably zipcord) to a large fiber count
backbone cable. At least 72 desktops can be connected on one backbone cable,
which is hardly larger than one UTP cable.
So an “all-fiber” fiber network only has electronics in the main telecom
closet and at the desktop—nothing in between. That means we do not need power
or a UPS in the telecom closet—we do not even need a closet! Managing the net-
work becomes much easier since all the electronics are in one location. Trouble-
shooting is simpler as well.
The Myth That Fiber Is More Expensive
The myth that fiber is more expensive has been copper’s best defense against fiber
optics. In a typical cost comparison, the architecture chosen is the typical copper
one, and the cost of a link from the telecom closet to the desk, including elec-
tronics, is always higher for fiber—although by less and less each year.
But that is not a fair comparison! In a real comparison, we would price the
complete networks shown in Figure 3-5. It would look more like Table 3-1.
So what happens if we total up the costs with this comparison? One estimate
on a bank with no building construction costs had fiber costing only about $9
more per desktop. Another estimate had fiber costing only two-thirds as much as
UTP. Several new construction projects claimed saving millions of dollars by
eliminating all but one telecom closet in a large campus and thereby saving large
amounts in building construction costs.
Fiber also saves money on testing. For fiber, it is a simple matter of testing
the optical loss of the installed cable plant, including all interconnections to
worldwide standards. The test equipment costs less than $1,000 and testing takes
a few minutes per fiber.
Testing Category 5 or 6 UTP requires $3,000 to $50,000 in equipment and
very careful control of testing conditions. Standards for testing are still continu-
ously developed to keep up with new product development. If you consider the
cost of testing, copper will probably cost a lot more than fiber!
40
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER OPTIC NETWORKS

FUTURE-PROOFING THE INSTALLATION
As fast as networks are changing, always to higher speeds, future-proofing is a dif-
ficult proposition. When the decision to install fiber is made, follow up is needed
in the planning phases to ensure that the best fiber optic network is installed.
Planning for the future is especially important. You can easily install a cable plant
for your LAN today that will fill your current needs and allow for network
expansion for a long time in the future.
Follow industry standards such as EIA/TIA 568 and install a standard star
architecture cable plant. Install lots of spare fibers since fiber optic cable is now
inexpensive, but installation labor is expensive. Those extra fibers are inexpen-
sive to add to a cable being installed today, but installing another cable in the
future could be much more expensive.
What fibers should be installed? For multimode fibers, the most popular
fiber today is 62.5/125 micron, since every manufacturer’s products will operate
optimally on this fiber. However, most equipment is also compatible with
50/125 fiber, which has already been installed in some networks, especially mil-
itary and government installations in the United States and throughout Europe.
All singlemode fiber is basically the same, so the choice is easier, although for
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS
41
Table 3-1.
Comparison of Fiber and Copper Networks
UTP Copper
Fiber
Desktop
Ethernet Network Interface
Ethernet Network Interface
Card for Cat 5
Card for fiber
Horizontal Cabling
Cat 5 cable, jacks, wall box,
Fiber zipcord, connectors,
patch cord
wall box, patch cord
Telecom Closet
Patch panel, patch cord, rack,
Wall mount patch panel
hub, power
connection, UPS,
data ground
Backbone Cabling
One Cat 5 cable per 
One multifiber cable per
connection
consolidation point
Main Telecom Closet
Patch panels, patch cords,
Patch panels, patch cords,
electronics, power, UPC
electronics, power, UPC
Building
Space for large bundles of
Not needed
(relevant for new
cable, large floor or wall
construction or
penetrations, big telecom
major renovations)
closets, separate grounding
for network equipment

most applications the specialty singlemode fibers (e.g., dispersion shifted or flat-
tened) should be avoided.
Paying a premium for higher bandwidth or lower attenuation specifications
in multimode fibers can allow more future flexibility. Very high-speed networks
have forced fiber manufacturers to develop better fibers for gigabit networks.
Installing that fiber today may make migrating to gigabit networks easier in the
future.
How many fibers should be installed? Lots! Installation costs generally will
be larger than cable costs. To prevent big costs installing additional cables in the
future, it makes good sense to install large fiber count cables the first time; how-
ever, terminate only the fibers needed immediately, since termination is still the
highest labor cost for fiber optics.
Backbone cables should include 48 or more fibers, half multimode and half
singlemode. If you are installing fiber to the desktop, 12 fibers, again half and
half, will provide for any network architecture now plus spares and singlemode
fiber for future upgrades.
The new generation of gigabit networks may even be too fast for multimode
fiber over longer distances and they will use lasers and singlemode fiber to
achieve >1 GB/s data rates. If you want to use fiber for video or telecom, you may
need the singlemode fiber now. But you may not want to terminate the single-
mode fiber until you need it, since singlemode terminations are still more expen-
sive than multimode; however, they are getting less expensive over time.
Fiber optics has grown so fast in popularity because of the unbelievably pos-
itive feedback from users. With proper planning and preparation, a fiber optic
network can be installed that will provide the user with communication capabil-
ity well into the next decade.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Three areas in which fiber is used:
1. ________________
2. ________________
3. ________________
2. Match the application with the main reason fiber is the choice of transi-
tion medium.
______ LAN
a. upgradeability
______ CATV
b. reliability
______ Telecom
c. high bandwidth and distance advantages
3. FTTC stands for ________________ .
4. FTTH stands for ________________ .
42
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS

5. The development of ________________ made fiber cost-effective for
CATV applications.
a. repeaters
b. FM systems
c. AM analog systems
d. enormous bandwidth
6. Match the following LAN standards with their counterparts in the right
column.
______ Ethernet
a. dual counter-rotating ring
______ ESCON
b. most widely used LAN
______ FDDI
c. connects peripherals to a mainframe
______ Token ring
d. originally developed for copper networks
CHAPTER 3 — FIBER-OPTIC NETWORKS
43


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
4
OPTICAL
FIBER CABLES
P AU L  R O S E N B E R G
OPTICAL FIBER CABLE CONSTRUCTION
Because of the wide variety of conditions to which they are exposed, optical
fibers have to be encased in several layers of protection. The first of these layers is
a thin protective coating made of ultraviolet curable acrylate (a plastic), which is
applied to the glass fiber as it is being manufactured. This thin coating provides
moisture and mechanical protection.
The next layer of protection is a buffer that is typically extruded over this
coating to further increase the strength of the single fibers. This buffer can be
either a loose tube or a tight tube. Most data communication cables are made
using either one of these two constructions. A third type, the ribbon cable, is fre-
quently used in telecommunications (Figure 4-1).
Loose-tube (loose-buffer) cable is used mostly for long-distance applications
and outside plant installations where low attenuation and high cable pulling
strength are required. Several fibers can be incorporated into the same tube, pro-
viding a small-size, high-fiber density construction. The cost per fiber is also
lower than for tight-buffered cables. The tubes may be filled with a gel or
wrapped in an absorbent tape, which prevents water from entering the cable and
offers additional protection to the fibers. Since these cables must be terminated
either by fusion splicing to preconnectorized pigtails or by using breakout kits,
45

Figure 4-1
(a) Tight buffered fiber optic cable. (b) Loose-tube fiber optic cable.
(c) Ribbon fiber optic cable.
46
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
(a)
(b)
(c)
PVC Jacket
Kevlar (Dupont™) Strength Member
Coated Optical Fiber
Loose Tubes Containing Fibers
Inner Jacket
Outer Jacket
Region for Kevlar™ Reinforcement,
Metal Armor, etc.
Central
Strength Member
Inner Jacket
Outer Jacket
Regions for Kevlar™
Reinforcement or
Metal Armor
Fiber Ribbons
Filler
Tube

they are more cost-effective for longer-distance applications than they are for
short-distance applications. The fibers are completely separated from the outside
environment. Therefore, the loose-tube cables can be installed with higher pulling
tensions than tight-buffered cables.
A tight-buffered cable design is better when cable flexibility and ease of
termination are a priority. Most inside cables are of the tight-buffered design
because of the relatively short distances between devices and distribution racks.
Military tactical ground support cables also use a tight-buffered design because
of the high degree of flexibility required. A tight-buffered fiber can be cabled with
other fibers, and then reinforced with Kevlar™, and jacketed to form a tightpack
(distribution) cable. Another option is to individually reinforce each fiber with
Kevlar, then jacket it. Several single fiber units can then be cabled together to
obtain a breakout-style cable where each fiber can be broken out of the bundle
and connectorized as an individual cable.
A ribbon-style cable consists of up to 12 coated fibers bonded to form a rib-
bon. Several ribbons can be packed into the same cable to form an ultra-high-
density, low-cost, small-size design. Over 100 fibers can be put into a 1/2-inch
square space with ribbon cables. Ribbon fibers can be either mass fusion spliced
or mass terminated into array connectors, saving up to 80 percent of the time it
takes to terminate conventional loose or tight-buffer cables.
Cable Jacketing
The materials used for the outer jacket of fiber optic cables not only affect the
mechanical and attenuation properties of the fiber, but also determine the suit-
ability of the cable for different environments, and its compliance to various
National Electric Code (NEC) and Underwriters Laboratories (UL) requirements.
A cable that will be exposed to chemicals can utilize an inert fluorocarbon
jacket such as Kynar, PFA, Teflon FEP, Tefzel, or Halar. These materials are suit-
able for a very wide range of applications, although they may be too stiff for
some industrial applications.
Aerospace applications require that the cables be able to withstand a wide
temperature range and be routed through the cramped environment of an air-
craft. These cables are frequently rated for continuous operation from –65°C to
+200°C, are less than 1/10 inch in size, and can sustain a bend radius of 1/2 inch.
Fire safety is a major issue. Cables used in an industrial environment, such as
a power plant, are usually placed in horizontal trays. Several cable trays may be
stacked in close proximity. In the event of a fire, both horizontal fire propagation
and the ignition of lower cable trays by the dripping of flaming outer jacket ma-
terial must be prevented. An irradiated Hypalon or XLPE jacket will meet 
the flame spread requirements (IEEE-383, 1974). When exposed to a flame, the
jacket material will char rather than melt and drop burning material, thus
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
47

Figure 4-2
(a) Simplex cable. (b) Zipcord cable. (c) Tightpack cable. 
(d) Breakout cable. (e) Armored loose-tube cable.
preventing the ignition of cables in lower trays. Inside premises cables have to
meet the requirements of the NEC Article 770. The outer jacket selection is essen-
tial to ensure compliance to the flame and smoke requirements.
Environmental and Mechanical Factors
Aside from buffer type, jacketing system, and flammability requirements, the
cable design also must be based on the mechanical and environmental conditions
that will be encountered throughout the system’s life span.
A cable that will be pulled through conduits, ducts, or cable trays will have to
incorporate a number of strength members and stiffening elements to add tensile
strength and to prevent sharp bends from damaging the fibers. The addition of
Kevlar increases the cable tensile strength. Kevlar can either be braided or longi-
tudinally applied underneath the cable or fiber component jackets. The central
strength member also serves both as a filler around which the fiber components
48
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
49
Figure 4-3
Simplex cable shown in cross-section.
Coated Optical Fiber
900 uM Tight Buffer
Aramid Yarn Strength Member
PVC Jacket 3.00 MM OD
are cabled and as a strength member when it incorporates steel, Kevlar, or epoxy
glass rods. Another function of the epoxy glass central member is to act as an
antibuckling component, counteracting the shrinkage of the jacketing elements at
low temperatures and preventing microbends in the fibers. An epoxy glass rod
central member should always be used in cables that may be exposed to tempera-
tures below 0°C.
Industry Standards
Physical construction of optical cables is not governed by any agency. It is up to
the designer of the system to make sure that the cable selected will meet the appli-
cation requirements. However, five basic cable types (Figure 4-2) have emerged
as de facto standards for a variety of applications.
1. Simplex and zipcord: One or two fibers, tight-buffered, Kevlar-rein-
forced and jacketed. Used mostly for patch cord and backplane applica-
tions (Figures 4-3 and 4-4).
Figure 4-4
Zipcord cable shown in cross-section.
Web—Thickness Approximately .015"
PVC Outer Jacket
3.00 MM Nominal Diameter
Aramid Yarn Strength Member
900 uM PVC Tight Buffer

Figure 4-6
Breakout cable shown in cross-section.
2. Tightpack cables: Also known as distribution style cables, consist of sev-
eral tight-buffered fibers bundled under the same jacket with Kevlar rein-
forcement. Used for short, dry conduit runs and riser and plenum
applications. These cables are small in size, but because their fibers are
not individually reinforced, they need to be terminated inside a patch
panel or junction box (Figure 4-5).
3. Breakout cables: Made of several simplex units cabled together. This is a
strong, rugged design, and is larger and more expensive than the tight-
pack cables. Breakout cables are suitable for conduit runs and riser and
plenum applications. Because each fiber is individually reinforced, this
design allows for a strong termination to connectors and can be brought
directly to a computer backplane (Figure 4-6).
50
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
Outer Jacket
Kevlar™ Strength Member
6 Fiber Subgroup
Central Member UP-Jacket
Central Strength Member
Figure 4-5
Tightpack cable shown in cross-section.
Polypropolene Binder
Optical Fiber Tight Buffer
to 900 uM
Aramid Yarn, Dupont
Kevlar™
PVC Jacketed Subgroup
Ripcord
E-Glass Reinforced
Epoxy Rod
Nomex Core Wrap
Central Member
UP-Jacket

Figure 4-7
Loose-tube cable shown in cross-section.
4. Loose-tube cables: Composed of several fibers cabled together, provid-
ing a small, high-fiber count cable. This type of cable is ideal for outside
plant trunking applications. Depending on the actual construction,
loose-tube cables can be used in conduits, strung overhead, or buried
directly in the ground (Figure 4-7).
5. Hybrid or composite cables: A lot of confusion exists over these terms,
especially since the 1993 NEC switched its terminology from “hybrid”
to “composite.” Under the new terminology, a composite cable is one
that contains a number of copper conductors properly jacketed and
sheathed depending on the application, in the same cable assembly as the
optical fibers. In issues of the code previous to 1993, this was called
hybrid cable.
This situation is made all the more confusing because another type
of cable is also called composite or hybrid. This type of cable contains
only optical fibers but of two different types: multimode and single
mode.
Remember that there is a great deal of confusion over these terms,
with many people using them interchangeably. It is my contention that
you should now use the term composite for fiber/copper cables, since
that is how they are identified in the NEC. And, you should probably use
hybrid for fiber/fiber cables, since the code does not give us much choice.
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
51
Central Strength Member
Outer Jacket
Inner Jacket
Kevlar™ Reinforcement
Mylar Wrap
Loose tube

CHOICE OF CABLES
The factors to be considered when choosing a fiber optic cable are:
1. Current and future bandwidth requirements
2. Acceptable attenuation rate
3. Length of cable
4. Cost of installation
5. Mechanical requirements (ruggedness, flexibility, flame retardance, low
smoke, cut-through resistance)
6. UL/NEC requirements
7. Signal source (coupling efficiency, power output, receiver sensitivity)
8. Connectors and terminations
9. Cable dimension requirements
10. Physical environment (temperature, moisture, location)
11. Compatibility with existing systems
Composite Cables
If a system design calls for copper and fiber lying next to each other or in the
same conduit, the designer should consider a composite cable. This would carry a
number of copper conductors, properly jacketed and sheathed depending on the
application, in the same cable assembly as the fiber optic cable.
Installation
Although the installation methods for both electronic wire cables and optical
fiber cables are similar, there are two very important additional considerations
that must be applied to optical fiber cables:
1. Never pull the fiber itself.
2. Never allow bends, kinks, or tight loops.
In order to keep these two rules, you must identify the strength member and
fiber locations within the cables, then use the method of attachment that pulls
most directly on the strength member. By paying careful attention to the strength
limits and minimum bending radius limits and by avoiding scraping at sharp
edges, damage can be avoided.
One guideline is that the pulling tension on indoor cables should never exceed
300 pounds. Another is that the minimum bending radius of an optical fiber
cable should be no less than 10 times the cable diameter when not under tension,
and 20 times cable diameter when being pulled into place (that is, 20 times cable
diameter when under tension).
52
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES

Cables in Trays
Optical fiber cables in trays should be carefully placed without tugging on the
outer jacket of the cable. Care must be taken so that the cables are placed where
they cannot be crushed. Flame retardant cables are recommended for interior
installations.
Vertical Installations
Optical fibers in any type of vertical tray, raceway, or shaft should be clamped at
frequent intervals, so that the entire weight of the cable is not supported at the
top. The weight of the cable should be evenly supported over its entire length.
Clamping intervals may vary from between 3 feet for outdoor installations with
wind stress problems to 50 feet for indoor installations.
In such instances, the fibers sometimes have a tendency to migrate down-
ward, especially in cold weather, which causes a signal loss (attenuation). This
can be prevented by placing several loops about 1 foot in diameter at the top of
the run, at the bottom of the run, and at least once every 500 feet in between.
Cables in Conduit
For all but the shortest pulls, loose-buffer cables are preferred, since they are
stiffer and their jackets generally cause less friction than tight-buffered cables.
Long pulls should be done with a mechanical puller that carefully controls pulling
tension (Figure 4-8).
The cable lubricant must be matched to the jacket material of the cable. Most
commercial lubricants will be compatible with popular types of cable jackets, but
not in every case. Lubrication is considerably more important for optical fiber
cables than for copper cables, since the fibers can be easily damaged.
Installation
In difficult installations, the cable-pulling force should be monitored with a ten-
sion meter. In these cases, the conduit should be prelubricated, and the cable
lubricated also, as it is installed. Special lubricant spreaders and applicators are
often used as well (Figure 4-9).
Except when tension meters are used, cable pulling should be done by hand,
in continuous pulls as much as possible. Often this means pulling from a central
manhole or pull box. During the pulling process, all tight bends, kinks, and twists
must be carefully avoided. If they are not, the damaged cable may need to be
removed and replaced with undamaged cable.
Two important devices to use when pulling optical fiber cables are swivel
pulling eyes and breakaway swivels. The swivel pulling eyes allow the cable to
turn independently of the pulling line or fish tape as it travels through the
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
53

Figure 4-8
For long pulls, the mechanical puller applies consistent
tension and monitors it to prevent overstressing the fiber.
54
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES

Figure 4-9
(a) Cable lubricant can be poured directly into the conduit before
pulling. (b) For larger conduit, lubricant can be spread by pulling prepackaged
bags through the conduit. Courtesy American Polywater Corporation
conduit. Since these cables are relatively fragile, the excessive twisting that could
develop without the swivels should be carefully avoided. The breakaway swivel
works in the same way as the swivel pulling eye, except that it will pull apart
(thus stopping the pull) when the tension rises beyond a safe limit. In such a case,
the cable must be pulled back out and reinstalled with more lubricant.
Attachment
The proper method of pulling optical fiber cables is to attach the pull wire or tape
to the cable’s strength member with the correct type of pulling eye (Figure 4-10).
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
55
(a)
(b)

Figure 4-10
Numerous pulling eyes are available for various types of cable.
This avoids any tension on the fibers themselves. Unfortunately, it is not always
easy to do.
When attaching to the strength members, the outer coverings are stripped
back. Care must be taken not to damage the strength members, but stripping can
normally be done with common tools. Kevlar or steel strength members can be
tied directly to the pulling eye. Other more rigid types of strength members (such
as fiberglass-epoxy) must be connected to a special set-screw device.
Indirect attachment can usually be well done with Kellems grips that firmly
grip the cable jacket. For some larger cables, this type of attachment may actually
be preferred. If you prestretch the Kellems grip and tape it firmly to the cable,
much of the cable strain will be avoided.
Indirect attachment is not desirable when the fibers will be in the path of the
forces between the pulling grip and the strength members. This is the case when
the strength member is in the center of the cable, surrounded by the fibers. In
such cases, only a small pulling force can be used.
56
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES

Direct Burial
Generally, only heavy-duty cables can be directly buried. Numerous hazards
affect directly buried optical fiber cables, such as freezing water, rocky soils, con-
struction activities, and rodents (usually gophers). Burying the cables at least 3 or
4 feet deep avoids most of these hazards, but only strong metal braids or cables
too large to bite will deter the gophers.
When plowing is used as an installation means, only loose-buffered cables
are used, since they can withstand uneven pulling pressures better than tight-
buffered cables. Where freezing water presents a problem, metal sheaths, double
jackets, and gel fillings can be used as water barriers.
Installation
Rather than using expensive, heavy-duty cables, 1-inch polyethylene gas pipe is
sometimes used to form a simple conduit. These tubes are also used as inner
ducts, placed inside of larger (usually 4 inch) conduits. The plastic pipes provide
a smooth passageway; by using several units inside of the larger conduit (with
spacers holding them in place), the cables stay well organized. The plastic pipe
can be smoothly bent, providing for very convenient installations and can reduce
friction for easier and longer cable pulls.
Aerial Installations
When optical fibers are to be installed aerially, they must be self-supporting or
supported by a messenger wire (See Article 321 of the NEC). Round, loose-buffer
cables are preferred and should be firmly and frequently clamped or lashed to the
messenger wire.
Cables for long outdoor runs are usually temperature stabilized. For the sta-
bilization, steel is used if there are no lightning or electrical hazards. In other
cases, fiberglass-epoxy is used. This type of dielectric cable is preferred for high
vertical installations such as TV or radio towers.
Utilities use a special type of aerial cable called optical ground wire (OGW),
which is a power cable capable of conducting high voltages with several fibers in
the center. This type of power cable has gained acceptance with many power util-
ities that want communications fibers and prefer to install the OGW to get fiber
capacity almost free.
Blown-in Fiber
Another method of installing fiber is to install special plastic tubes and blow the
fibers in through the tubes using air pressure. This method does not use cable at
all, merely buffered fibers. This method is not widely used and few installations
of this type currently exist. However, it is becoming more popular since fibers can
be easily removed and replaced for upgrades.
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
57

THE NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE
The requirements for optical fiber cable installation are detailed in Article 770 of
the NEC. There are also alternate and/or supplementary requirements in the Life
Safety Code.
Cable Designations
Remember that the NEC designates cable types differently than the rest of the
trade. The code specifies horizontal cables, riser-rated cables, and plenum-rated
cables. It also specifies cables as conductive or nonconductive. Note that a
conductive cable is a cable that has any metal in it at all. The metal in a conduc-
tive cable does not have to be used to carry current; it may simply be a strength
member.
All cables used indoors must carry identification and ratings per the NEC.
Cables without markings should never be installed as they will not pass code!
NEC ratings are:
(OFN) Optical fiber nonconductive
(OFC) Optical fiber conductive
(OFNR) or (OFCR) Riser-rated cable for vertical runs
(OFNP) or (OFCP) Plenum-rated cables for installation in air-handling
plenums
A legitimate question is whether an electrical inspector has any jurisdiction
over installations that do not use conductive cables, the fact being that such
cables do not carry any electricity. Nevertheless, such cables are dependent upon
electronic devices to send and receive their signals. In addition, the NEC does
address itself to all optical fiber cables.
Requirements
The main requirements of Article 770 are:
When optical cables that have noncurrent-carrying conductive members
contact power conductors, the conductive member must be grounded as
close as possible to the point at which the cable enters the building. If
desired, the conductive member may be broken (with an insulating joint)
near its entrance to the building instead.
Nonconductive optical cables can share the same raceway or cable tray
with other conductors operating at up to 600 volts.
Composite optical cables can share the same raceway or cable tray as
other conductors operating at up to 600 volts.
Nonconductive optical cables cannot occupy the same enclosure as power
conductors, except in the following circumstances:
58
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES

1. When the fibers are associated with the other conductors.
2. When the fibers are installed in a factory-assembled or field-assem-
bled control center.
3. Nonconductive optical cables or hybrid cables can be installed with
circuits exceeding 600 volts in industrial establishments where they
will be supervised only by qualified persons.
Both conductive and nonconductive optical cables can be installed in the
same raceway, cable tray, or enclosure with any of the following:
1. Class 2 or 3 circuits.
2. Power-limited fire protective signaling circuits.
3. Communication circuits.
4. Community antenna television (CATV) circuits.
Composite cables must be used exactly as listed on their cable jackets.
All optical cables must be installed according to their listings. Refer to Sec-
tion 770-53 to see the cable substitution hierarchy.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Buffered fiber comes in three styles:
1. ________________
2. ________________
3. ________________
2. Loose-tube cable is used where ________________
a. ease of termination is a concern.
b. high pulling strength is required.
c. high flexibility is a concern.
d. several fibers must fit in a small space.
3. A composite cable contains ________________
a. tight-buffered cables.
b. singlemode and multimode fibers.
c. loose-tube and tight-buffered fibers.
d. copper conductors and optical fibers.
4. Match the type of cable listed with description in the right column.
______ Zipcord cable
______ Tightpack cable
______ Breakout cable
______ Loose-tube cable
______ Composite cable
______ Hybrid cable
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES
59
a. contains single and multimode fibers
b. two fibers, tight-buffered, mostly used
for patch cords
c. contains copper conductors and optical
fiber
d. distribution cables
e. a small diameter, high-fiber count cable
f. several simplex units cabled together

5. When pulling fiber it is best to pull on the ________________ of the
cable.
a. fiber
b. buffer tubes
c. jacket
d. strength member
6. The minimum bending radius of an optical fiber cable should be no less
than ________________ times the cable diameter when being pulled into
place.
a. 10
b. 15
c. 20
d. 25
60
CHAPTER 4 — OPTICAL FIBER CABLES

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
5
SPECIFYING
FIBER OPTIC CABLE
E R I C  P E AR S O N
CABLE PARAMETERS AND TYPICAL VALUES
In order to completely specify a fiber optic cable, you need to define at least 38
specifications. We divide these cable specifications into two subgroups, installa-
tion specifications and environmental, or long-term, specifications. Most of these
specifications have a standard test technique by which the parameter is tested.
Note that not all specifications apply to all situations. You will need to
review your application to determine which of the specifications in this section
are needed. For example, cable installed in conduit or in protected locations will
not need to meet crush load specifications.
INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS
The installation specifications are those that must be met in order to ensure suc-
cessful installation of the cable. There are six such specifications:
1. Maximum recommended installation load, installation load, or installa-
tion force (in kg-force or pounds-force, or N)
2. Minimum recommended installation bend radius, installation bend radius,
short-term bend radius, or loaded bend radius (in in. or mm)
3. Diameter of the cable
61

4. Diameter of subcable and buffer tubes
5. Recommended temperature range for installation (in degrees centigrade)
6. Recommended temperature range for storage (in degrees centigrade)
Maximum Recommended Installation Load
The maximum recommended installation load is the maximum tensile load that
can be applied to a cable without causing a permanent change in attenuation or
breakage of fibers. This characteristic must always be specified. It is particularly
important in installations that are long, outdoors, or in conduits; it is of lesser
importance when cables are laid in cable trays or installed above suspended ceil-
ings. We present typical and generally accepted values of installation loads in
Table 5-1. Choose the value that best fits your application.
If you believe that your application will require a strength higher than those
typically specified, then you will want to specify a strength higher than those in
Table 5-1. The cost increase of specifying such a higher strength is a small per-
centage, typically 5 to 10 percent, of the cost of the cable.
Minimum Recommended Installation Bend Radius
The minimum recommended installation bend radius is the minimum radius to
which cable can be bent while loaded to the maximum recommended installation
load. This radius is limited more by the cabling materials than by the bend radius
of the fiber. This bending can be done without causing a permanent change in
attenuation, breakage of fibers, or breakage of any portion of the cable structure.
This bend radius is usually, but not always, specified as being no less than 20
times the diameter of the cable being bent. Specifying the bend radius is impor-
tant when pulling by machine or hand through conduit, or in any long pulls.
62
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
Table 5-1
Typical Maximum Recommended Installation Loads
Application
Pounds Force
1 fiber in raceway or tray
67
1 fiber in duct or conduit
125
2 fiber in duct or conduit
Multifiber (6–12) cables
250–500
Direct burial cables
600–800
Lashed aerial cables
>300
Self-support aerial cables
>600

In order to determine this value, you need to examine the locations in which
you are to install your cable in order to determine the bend radius to which you
will bend the cable during installation. Conversely, you can choose the cable and
specify the conduits or ducts in which you are to install the cable so that you do
not violate this radius.
Diameter of the Cable, Subcable, and Buffer Tubes
The cable must fit in the location in which it is to be installed. This is especially
true if the cable is to be installed in a partially filled conduit. It will not be impor-
tant if the cable is directly buried, installed above suspended ceilings, or in cable
trays. If the diameter is limited by the space available, the diameter limits may be
the only factor that determines which of the five designs of the cable you must
choose. If cable diameter must be limited, the ribbon designs will be the smallest.
The diameter of the subcable and the buffer tube of the cable can also
become a limiting factor. In the case of a “breakout” style cable, the diameter of
the subcable must be smaller than the maximum diameter of the connector boot
so that the boot will fit on the subcable. In addition, the diameter of the element
must be less than the maximum diameter that the back shell of the connector will
accept.
Recommended Temperature Ranges for Installation and Storage
All cables have a temperature range within which they can be installed without
damage to either the cable materials or the fibers. It is more important for out-
door installations or in extreme (arctic or desert) environments and not impor-
tant for indoor installations. In general, the materials of the cable restrict the
temperature range of installation more than do the fibers. Note that not all cable
manufacturers include the temperature range of installation in their data sheets.
In this case, the more conservative temperature range of operation can be used.
In severe climates, such as those in deserts and the arctic, you will need to
specify a recommended temperature range for storage (in degrees Centigrade).
This range will strongly influence the materials used in the cable.
ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIFICATIONS
The environmental specifications are those that must be met in order to ensure suc-
cessful operation of the cable in its environment. There are 21 such specifications.
1. Temperature range of operation
2. Minimum recommended long-term bend radius
3. Compliance with the NEC or local electrical codes
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
63

4. Long-term use load
5. Vertical rise distance
6. Flame resistance
7. UV stability or UV resistance
8. Resistance to damage from rodents
9. Resistance to damage from water
10. Crush loads
11. Resistance to conduction under high voltage fields
12. Toxicity
13. High flexibility/static versus dynamic applications
14. Abrasion resistance
15. Resistance to solvents, petrochemicals, and other chemicals
16. Hermetically sealed fiber
17. Radiation resistance
18. Impact resistance
19. Gas permeability
20. Stability of filling compounds
21. Vibration
Temperature Range of Operation
The temperature range of operation is the temperature range within which the
attenuation remains less than the specified value. Typical ranges of operation are
given in Table 5-2 for various types of applications. In general, there are very few
applications in which fiber optic transmission cannot be used solely for reasons
of temperature range of operation. In fact, some fibers have coatings that will
survive continuous operation at 400°C. For operation at such high temperatures,
fibers are usually, but not always, incorporated into a cable structure consisting
of a metal tube. For operation at exceedingly low temperatures, cables are con-
64
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
Table 5-2
Typical Temperature Ranges of Operation
Temperature Range
Application
(°C)
Indoor
–10 to +60, –10 to +50
Outdoor
–20 to +60,
–40 to +50,
–40 to +70
Military
–55 to +85
Aircraft
–62 to +125

structed of plastic materials that will retain their flexibility. For cables used at less
severe temperatures (80–200°C), fluorocarbon plastics such as Teflon, Tefzel,
Kynar, and others are used.
There are two reasons for considering the temperature range of operation:
the physical survival of the cable and the increase of attenuation of the fiber when
the cable is exposed to temperature extremes.
All cables are composed of plastic materials. These plastic materials have
temperatures above and below which they will not retain their mechanical prop-
erties. After long exposure to high temperatures, plastics deteriorate, become
soft, and, in some materials, crack. Under exposure to low temperatures, plastics
become brittle and crack when flexed or moved. Obviously, under these condi-
tions, the cable would cease to provide protection to the fiber(s).
The second reason for considering the temperature range of operation is the
increase in attenuation that occurs when cables are exposed to extremes of tem-
perature. Optical fibers have a sensitivity to being handled. This sensitivity is seen
when the fibers are bent. This bending, which results in an increase in attenua-
tion, is referred to as a “microbend-induced increase in attenuation.” When a
cable is subjected to temperature extremes, the plastic materials will contract and
expand at rates much greater (100 times) than those rates of the glass fibers.
This contracting and expanding results in the fiber being bent on a micro-
scopic level. Either the fiber is forced against the inside of the plastic tube as the
plastic contracts, or the fiber is stretched against the inside of the tube as the plas-
tic expands. In either case, the fiber is forced to conform to the microscopically
uneven surface of the plastic. On a microscopic level, this is similar to placing the
fiber against sandpaper. This microscopic bending results in light escaping from
the core of the fiber. This escaping light results in an increase in attenuation. This
type of behavior means that the user must determine the temperature range of
operation in order to ensure that there will be enough light for the system to func-
tion properly.
Minimum Long-Term Bend Radius
The minimum recommended long-term bend radius is the minimum bend radius
to which the cable can be bent for its entire lifetime. It is important for cables
installed in conduits designed for electrical cables. It is usually, but not always,
specified as being no less than 10 times the diameter of the cable.
Compliance with Electrical Codes
Fiber optic cables used in indoor applications must meet the requirements of the
NEC and applicable local electric codes, some of which are more stringent than
the NEC. Consult your local fire regulation authorities for those codes to which
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
65

you must conform. Article 770 of the 1987 NEC addresses optical cables. Article
800 addresses cables that combine copper and fiber.
The NEC specifies six ratings. The first two letters in all ratings are “OF.”
The third is either an “N” or a “C.” An “N” in the third place indicates a non-
conductive, or all-dielectric design. A “C” in the third position indicates a cable
containing conducting materials. The fourth letter, if any, indicates the rating.
The least stringent are for “general use” cables, which must pass the UL 1581
test. Such cables are designated “OFN” or OFC.”
Cables used in risers must not support the movement of fire from floor to
floor. Such cables must pass the UL 1666 shaft test, which is more stringent than
the UL 1581 test. Such cables are designated “OFNR” or “OFCR.”
Cables installed in air-handling plenums must pass UL 910, the most strin-
gent of the three tests. Such cables are designated “OFNP” or “OFCP” and must
demonstrate adequate fire resistance and low smoke-generation characteristics.
Use of plenum-rated cables allows you to reduce the total installed cost of the
cables by eliminating the cost for the installation of metal conduit. The specifica-
tion concerned with the requirements for plenum cables (both copper and fiber)
is the NEC, Section 770. When choosing plenum-rated cables (OFNP or OFCP),
consider plenum-rated PVC cables. These products have lower cost, easier instal-
lation, and better appearance than the original fluorocarbon cables.
Long-Term Use Load
Most fiber optic cables are designed for unloaded use, not for use with any sub-
stantial load. Substantial load occurs in applications such as vertical runs in ele-
vator shafts, cables strung to elevators, cables placed on radio/TV towers, and
cables strung outdoors between poles (aerial cables). In these cases, the cables are
subjected to loads, either self-loads or loads from the environment, such as wind,
snow, and ice loads on aerial cables. All of these factors depend on the spacing
between poles.
Care in specifying the long-term use load characteristic is required to ensure
that the strain the cable allows to be applied to the fiber(s) does not exceed a crit-
ical value. If this critical value is exceeded, it is likely that the fiber(s) will sponta-
neously, and for no apparent reason or cause, break. This value depends on the
design and construction of the cable, but typically runs 10 to 30 percent of the
maximum recommended installation load.
If the cable will experience a significant long-term use load, this specification
will be more important than the maximum recommended installation load. Such
cables, called “self-support” cables, are available from a number of manufactur-
ers and are the cable of choice for use by power utilities for suspensions as long as
3,000 feet. In these cases, the maximum span length is specified instead of the
long-term use load. Typical long-term use loads are presented in Table 5-3.
66
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE

Vertical Rise Distance
The vertical rise distance is related to the maximum use load. When cables are
installed in a riser (within a building) or in a long vertical length (outdoors), the
self-weight of the cable imposes a load on the cable. This load must be less than
the maximum use load. Typical vertical rise distances are presented in Table 5-4.
Flame Resistance
Flame resistance is required for applications other than building applications,
including shipboard and aircraft installations. In these applications, you will
want to specify that the cables be constructed of flame-resistant materials. Many
commonly used materials are either flame resistant in their most commonly used
formulations, or can be made flame resistant through the use of additives. When
you specify flame resistance, you will need to reference a specification, such as the
UL specification 94, and specify the level of flame resistance required (i.e., V-0,
V-1, V-2, etc.).
UV Stability or UV Resistance
If the cables are to be used continuously outdoors, then you need to specify that
the cables be “UV resistant” or “UV stable.” Otherwise, the cable jacket will
crack and lose flexibility under exposure to sunlight. Most cables used continu-
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
67
Table 5-3
Typical Maximum Recommended Use Loads
Application
Pounds Force
1 fiber in raceway or tray
23–35
1 fiber in duct or conduit
23–35
Multifiber (6–12) cables
33–330
Direct burial cables
132–180
Table 5-4
Typical Maximum Vertical Rise Distances
Application
Feet
1 fiber in raceway or tray
90
2 fiber in duct or conduit
50–90
Multifiber (6–12) cables
50–375
Heavy duty cables
1000–1640

ously outdoors have black polyethylene jacketing materials because this material
has built-in UV-absorbing material and does not have plasticizers that evaporate
over time. UV-resistant polyurethanes and polyvinyl chlorides (PVCs) are also
available. However, the expected life of these two materials is much less than the
more than 20-year life exhibited by polyethylene-jacketed telephone cables.
Before choosing any jacket material other than black polyethylene for outdoor
use, check its expected life span.
Resistance to Damage from Rodents
In environments containing active rodents, you will want to protect buried cable
from damage caused by gnawing. There has been a trend away from the use of
armored cables. Instead, buried inner ducts are used to provide the rodent resis-
tance previously met by armored designs.
In some situations, you may need to specify the use of “armored” cables.
This type of cable has an additional layer of material that acts to give the cable
significant resistance to crushing and being bitten through. In addition, a final
layer of plastic jacketing material is usually applied/extruded over the armor.
There are penalties to these additional layers. First, armored cables are more
expensive than nonarmored cables. Second, these cables are usually much less
flexible than unarmored cables.
There are four basic types of armored cable products: galvanized steel armor
(with or without plastic coating on the armor), copper tape armor, braided
(stainless steel or bronze) armor, and dielectric armor. The armor most com-
monly used on fiber optic cables is galvanized steel. It is applied in a corrugated
form or in a longitudinally welded/sealed form. It is effective and has the lowest
cost of the armoring materials. However, it is the stiffest of the metallic armoring
materials. Copper tape armor is helically wrapped around the cable with some
spacing between the successive wraps. This type of product is rarely used on fiber
optic cables. Because of its relatively flexible nature, braided armor is used in sit-
uations if rodent resistance and flexibility are required. Dielectric armoring is
only available from a single source in the United States. This type of armoring is
rarely needed and rarely used. It is the stiffest and most expensive of all types of
armoring. The addition of a dielectric armor often doubles the cost of the cable.
Resistance to Damage from Water
If the cable is to be immersed in water, either permanently or for extended peri-
ods of time, as in most outdoor installations and all underwater installations, you
will need to specify a “filled and blocked” cable. A filled and blocked cable has a
filling material inside each of the loose buffer tubes and a blocking material that
fills all empty space between the tubes. Failure to specify this type of cable will
eventually result in an increase in attenuation and/or breakage of fibers. In addi-
68
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE

tion, cables that are not filled and blocked can act as pipes by channeling water
into electronic vaults
Some manufacturers supply “filled” cables. These cables are not as water-
resistant as filled and blocked cables. Breakout cables are not filled and blocked.
Before using any design that is not filled and blocked, request test data to support
the water resistance claimed.
Crush Loads
The crush load is the maximum load that can be applied perpendicular to the axis
of a cable without causing a permanent increase in attenuation or breakage of
fibers. There are two crush loads: short-term and long term. Short-term can mean
during installation or during use. The long-term crush load is that load that can
be applied during the entire life of the cable.
Before you can determine the crushing requirements for your cable, you have
to answer two basic questions. First, is the occurrence of crushing likely? If it is
not a likely occurrence, then you will not need to be concerned with the crush
performance of the cable you need. It has been the experience of the author that
most of the cable products available today have crush performance sufficient to
meet the needs of the typical user. This is so because most of the applications
involve installation in relatively benign locations in which the occurrence of
crushing is not likely. Examples of these benign locations include conduits, trays,
cable troughs, plenums, and aerial locations. Examples of locations in which
crushing performance is of importance are field tactical cables (in which the cable
is likely to be run over by trucks and tanks), electronic news gathering (ENG),
and temporary cable placement for sporting broadcast applications, shipboard
use (in which the cable has a reasonable possibility of being crushed between
bulkhead doors), and direct burial of fiber optic cable.
If you determine that crushing is of concern, then you need ask the second
question: Is the application of a crush load likely to be a short-term or a long-
term condition? If it is to be a short-term condition, then you will have two 
basic concerns: first, that the fiber not break; and second, that the “residual” or
“hysteresis-type” increase in attenuation (which remains after the crush load is
removed) be acceptable. Typical performances of commercial cables are given in
Table 5-5.
Resistance to Conduction under High Voltage Fields
In a number of typical applications under high voltage fields, fiber optic cables
need to be nonconducting. Some fiber optic cables in use are exposed to voltages
as high as 1,000,000 volts. In other applications, fiber optic cables need to be
unattractive to lightning. In these situations, you will specify that the cable be of
an “all-dielectric construction.” Such designs are commonly available.
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
69

Toxicity
Some applications—such as shipboard, aircraft, and mass transit—require
“halogen-free” cables. These cables contain no halogens, which burn to produce
acidic gases that attack lungs and corrode electronic equipment. These cables are
10 to 15 percent more expensive than PVC cables.
In addition to toxicity requirements, some municipalities require registration
of all cables installed in order to keep track of the material content. In the United
States, New York is the first state to require such registration. Cables manu-
factured for use in Japanese and European buildings are required to be halogen
free.
High Flexibility/Static versus Dynamic Applications
In applications such as military field-tactical units and elevators, cables are sub-
jected to repeated bending or flexing. In these applications, the cables need to
meet a flexibility requirement. The need for high flexibility results in any of four
requirements: flexure, high and/or low temperature bend, cable knot, and cable
twist. Flexibility requirements must be met by both cable materials and by fibers.
Polyurethane jacketing materials are commonly used to meet this require-
ment. These materials will result in an increase in the cost of the cable, but will
increase the flexibility to 10,000 cycles from the 1,000-cycle level available with
the lower cost PVC and polyethylene jacketing materials.
Fibers can be made to meet the requirements of high flexibility and dynamic
applications through the inclusion of a proof stress level. In such situations, as in
elevator cables and in optical power ground wire (OPGW), some users have
adopted a policy of requiring that the fibers be proof tested to at least 100 kpsi.
Failures have been observed with dynamic loading of cables containing fibers
proof stressed to only 50 kpsi.
70
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
Table 5-5
Typical Crush Strengths
Characteristic
Type of Cable
Pounds/Inch
Long-term crush load
>6 fibers/cable
57–400
1–2 fiber cables
314–400
Armored cables
450
Short-term crush load
>6 fibers/cable
343–900
1–2 fiber cables
300–800
Armored cables
600

Abrasion Resistance
In situations in which the cable is subject to abrasion, abrasion resistance must be
specified. Need for this resistance will determine the material used as the jacket.
Resistance to Solvents, Petrochemicals, and Other Chemicals
In some situations, you need to specify that the cables be resistant to deteriora-
tion from exposure to certain chemicals. Examples to which cables are occasion-
ally exposed are gasoline, aircraft fuel, fuel oil, greases, and crude oil. To ensure
such resistance, an immersion test is required.
Hermetically Sealed Fiber
In applications requiring exposure of the cable to very high water pressures or
high temperatures, the fiber must be hermetically sealed in order to retain its
mechanical strength and/or its low attenuation. Hermetic sealing is required
because contact with moisture (or other chemicals) results in significant reduction
in the strength of the fiber, and absorption of hydrogen from water results in a
significant increase in attenuation.
This hermetic sealing can be done in one of two methods. In the first method,
the fiber is sealed inside of a welded steel tube. In the second method, the fiber 
is coated with a proprietary hermetic coating by the manufacturer. With both
methods, the fiber is protected from degradation of its performance.
Radiation Resistance
When you intend to use a fiber optic cable in an environment subjected to ioniz-
ing radiation—such as in the core of a nuclear power plant, outer space, or an x-
ray chamber—you must specify that both the cable materials and the fiber be
radiation resistant. The cable materials must be radiation resistant in order to
retain acceptable mechanical properties, since these properties tend to be degraded
by exposure to ionizing radiation. The fiber must also be radiation resistant, since
the attenuation of a fiber can be increased by such exposure.
Radiation-resistant fibers are available from a number of suppliers. Such
fibers have smaller increases in attenuation (with increasing radiation dosage)
than other more commonly used commercial fibers. In addition, these fibers have
shorter recovery times and lower total residual increases in attenuation after such
exposure.
Impact Resistance
In certain situations, you may want to specify the resistance of your fiber optic
cable to impact forces. Examples of situations in which impact resistance is usually
specified are cables used by military organizations in field tactical environments,
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
71

cables being used in ENG applications, and any other situations in which heavy
objects can be dropped on the cable. In these situations, you will specify impact
resistance. When you do so, you will reference an Electronic Industries Alliance
(EIA) RS 455 specification or a military specification.
As a practical matter, we have found most fiber optic cables to be highly
resistant to damage from impacts. Unless impact is a likely occurrence in the envi-
ronment in which the cable must survive, specification of impact resistance is not
needed.
Gas Permeability
Some environments require that the cable not allow gases or moisture to travel
through the cable. Examples of such environments are cables carrying signals
from underground nuclear tests to equipment on the surface and underground
cables leading to equipment located in underground vaults. In this case, gas or
moisture permeability tests and limits must be specified.
Stability of Filling Compounds
Some environments subject the cable to frequent temperature and strain cycling.
Such cycling has the potential to “pump” the filling compounds out of the ends
of the cable. The pumping of filling compounds can cause problems to equipment
at the ends of the cable. In this case, stability or flow tests and limits must be
specified.
Vibration
In some situations, vibration may cause loose-tube cables to experience changes
in attenuation. There is insufficient data available to recommend against loose-
tube designs. However, in such situations, a tight-tube design may be preferable.
FOUR WAYS TO FUTURE-PROOF A SYSTEM
1. Include Spare Fibers in Cables
The U.S. ratio of currently used to total installed fibers is 1:4. Installing spare
fibers offers two major advantages. First, you can use spare fibers in the event of
a cable or connector problem. Second, spare fibers provide for future growth of
fiber applications. Fiber is very inexpensive relative to installed cable cost and
there is no cost for installing spare fibers as part of a cable being installed. If 
you need to install additional fibers in the future, you will incur two installation
charges.
72
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE

2. Include Singlemode Fibers in Multimode Cables
As bandwidths and bit rates increase, multimode fibers will eventually run out of
capacity. Singlemode fibers provide essentially unlimited bandwidth.
3. Include Fibers in Any Copper Cables
Include fiber in any copper cable, as the cost of installing the fiber is free. You
need not install connectors, although doing so is advised.
4. Use Dual Wavelength
Install 62.5/125 fibers that have been specified as dual wavelength, FDDI-grade
fibers or better.
DESIGN SHORTCUTS
Fiber Choice
Multimode
Choose 62.5/125 µm fiber, the de facto standard for multimode fiber in the
United States and the fiber specified by most network standards. Some other
countries and some U.S. military applications use 50/125 µm, and new versions
of 50/125 fiber are being developed for use with lasers in higher bandwidth sys-
tems such as 10 gigabit Ethernet.
Singlemode
Choose the 1300-nm singlemode fiber. Systems designed to operate at this wave-
length have lower cost than 1550-nm systems. Do not choose fiber designed for
both 1300 and 1550 nm unless you expect to use wavelength division multiplex-
ing or optical amplifiers in the future.
Cable Design Choice
Indoor
1. For short distances [<1,200-1,335 feet], use breakout-type cable.
2. For longer distances, use premise-type cable.
3. If your environment is rugged, use breakout design; it is more rugged
than the premise. The price premium is insurance against future mainte-
nance cost.
4. Use all-dielectric design.
5. If plenum cables are required, look for plenum-rated PVC products.
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
73

Outdoor
1. Use one of three water-blocked and gel-filled loose-tube designs.
2. If fiber count is large [>36], compare the total installed cost of ribbon
design to that of the other two loose-tube designs.
3. If midspan access is important, use the stranded loose-tube design.
4. Use all-dielectric design.
Indoor/Outdoor Cable Path
If cable path is both indoors and outdoors, you can eliminate a splice or connec-
tor pair by using an indoor/outdoor cable design. This design has an easily
removable outdoor jacket over an inner structure that meets NEC requirements.
Or, use a blocked cable that meets the appropriate NEC requirements.
Fiber Performance
Multimode
Choose dual wavelength specifications.
wavelength: 850/1300 nm
attenuation rate: < 3.75/1.0 dB/km
bandwidth-distance product: > 160/500 MHz-km
numerical aperture: .275 nominal (High bandwidth multimode fiber is becom-
ing available to support new high-speed network such as Gigabit Ethernet.)
Singlemode
Choose single wavelength specifications.
wavelength: 1300 nm
attenuation rate: < 0.5 dB/km
dispersion: < 3.5 ps/km/nm @ 1310 nm
Cable Performance
Indoor
maximum recommended installation load: 360–500 pounds
temperature operating range: –10 to +60°C
Outdoor
maximum recommended installation load: 600 pounds
temperature operating range: –40 to +60°C
if rodent resistance required: armored or install in inner duct
strength members: epoxy fiberglass or flexible fiberglass
jacket: material black polyethylene
74
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Two specifications must be considered when specifying optical cable.
They are:
1. ___________________________________
2. ___________________________________
2. A nonconductive optical fiber cable for use in an air-handling plenum
would be labeled ___________________________________
a. OFNP.
b. OFCP.
c. OFNR.
d. OFCR.
3. Match items on the right with cables on left.
______ Minimum recommended 
installation bend radius
______ Minimum long-term 
bend radius
______ Plenum rated
______ “Self support” cable
______ Armored cable
______ “Filled and blocked” cable
4. Four ways to “Future-proof” an installation:
1. ___________________________________
2. ___________________________________
3. ___________________________________
4. ___________________________________
CHAPTER 5 — SPECIFYING FIBER OPTIC CABLE
75
a. resistance to water damage
b. OFCP
c. rodent resistance
d. no less than 20 time the 
diameter of the cable
e. cable designed for long-term 
use loads
f. no less than 10 times the
diameter of the cable


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
6
FIBER OPTIC
CONNECTORS, SPLICES,
AND TOOLS
J O H N  H I G H H O U S E
FIBER JOINTS (CONNECTIONS)
For the purposes of this chapter we define a fiber joint as the point where two
fibers are joined together to allow a light signal to propagate from one fiber into
the next continuing fiber with as little loss as possible. Also, to keep from com-
plicating procedures too greatly, all references are to glass fiber unless plastic
fiber is specifically mentioned.
Although there are many reasons for fiber joints, the four most common are:
1. Fibers and cables are not endless and therefore must eventually be joined.
2. Fiber may also be joined to distribution cables and splitters.
3. At both transmit and receive termination points, fibers must be joined to
that equipment.
4. The last and scariest reason is cable cuts and their subsequent restoration.
Since we have established a need for fiber joints, we should now make that
task worthwhile. To that end, all fiber joints must be mechanically strong and
optically sound with low loss. Fiber joints must be capable of withstanding mod-
erate to severe pulling and bending tests. And, since the purpose of fiber is to
77

transmit light, the fiber joint must transmit as much light power as possible with
as little loss and back reflection as can be designed into the joint.
Fiber joints fall generally into two categories: the permanent or fixed joint
that uses a fiber splice, and the terminating (nonfixed) joint that uses a fiber optic
connector. Let us examine these individual types of joints.
Splices are used as permanent fixtures on outside and inside plant cables.
Typical uses include reel ends, pigtail vault splices, and distribution breakouts. In
addition to the benefits of low loss and high mechanical strength, additional con-
siderations are expense per splice and possible reusability of the splice itself.
Fiber optic connectors are used as terminating fixtures for inside plant cables,
outside plant cables as they terminate in a central office, interfaces between ter-
minals on LANs, patch panels, and terminations into transmitters and receivers.
Whether one joins fibers using splices or connectors, one negative aspect is
always common to both methods—signal loss. This loss of light power at fiber
joints is called attenuation.
ATTENUATION
Attenuation is the loss of signal or light intensity as it travels through an optical
fiber transmission system. Sometimes the losses occur in the fiber itself and other
times at fiber joints. Measurement of attenuation loss is made in decibels (dB).
The decibel is a mathematical logarithmic unit describing the ratio of output
power to input power in any system (fiber or copper).
Attenuation in the optical fiber itself usually occurs as a result of absorption,
reflection, diffusion, scattering, or dispersion of the photon packets within the
fiber. However, losses also occur at splices and connections. The factors that
cause attenuation in connectors or splices (Figure 6-1) fall into two categories:
intrinsic and extrinsic losses.
Intrinsic losses occur from factors over which the craftsperson has very little
control and are generally caused by engineering design or manufacturing flaws in
the fiber itself. The more prominent intrinsic losses include:
1. Core eccentricity
2. Core ellipticity
3. Numerical aperture (NA) mismatch
4. Core diameter mismatch
Core eccentricity means that the exact center of the core center and the exact
center of the cladding are not precisely the same, causing an overlap or underlap
of fiber cores at a splice point. Core ellipticity (or ovality) is a departure from cir-
cularity. A very small variation in the roundness of a fiber core can affect the
total system loss. Intrinsic loss through mismatch of NAs is not the fault of the
craftsperson; however, care must be taken to butt the fibers as closely as possible
78
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS

Figure 6-1
Connector loss factors.
to counteract this mismatch. When splicing fibers having cores of different diam-
eters, testing will show a significant loss when testing from the large core into the
small core, and will show a supposed gain when testing from the small core into
the large core.
Extrinsic losses, on the other hand, are caused by the mechanics of the joint
itself. Frequent causes of extrinsic loss attenuation at splicing points include:
1. Misalignment of fiber ends caused by improper insertion techniques into
splices and connectors.
2. Bad cleaves and poor polishing techniques resulting in poor end face
quality.
3. Inadvertent air spaces between fibers at a splice or connection that have
not been corrected with index-matching gel or liquid.
4. Contamination caused by dirt, wiping tissue, cotton swabs, shirt sleeves,
or airborne dust particles. REMEMBER, IF YOU CAN SEE THE CON-
TAMINATION, IT’S TOO BIG FOR THE CORE TO PASS LIGHT
THROUGH. See the section on cleaning connectors later in this chapter.
5. Another loss mechanism is back reflection or reflectance and is measured
as optical return loss (Figure 6-2). As the light travels through the fiber,
passing through splices and connections, finally arriving at the end point,
some of that light is reflected back by fiber end faces at those man-
made points. Optical return loss is generally only an issue with high-
performance singlemode networks but is now also an issue with multi-
mode networks used for gigabit networks.
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
79
End Gap
Concentricity
End Angle
NA Mismatch
Finish and Dirt
Coaxiality
Axial Run-Out
Core Mismatch

Figure 6-2
Optical return loss.
Typical allowable splice losses for singlemode fiber are 0 to 0.15 dB and with
a return loss of better than 50 dB. In multimode fiber, typical splice losses are 0.0
to 0.25 dB, with an average of 0.20 dB and return loss of less than –50 dB. In the
case of fiber connectors, singlemode allowable connector losses range from 0.1 to
1.0 dB per mated pair and return loss typically is less than –30 dB. Multimode
connectors have a nominal connector loss of less than 0.75 dB per mated pair
with a typical return loss better than 25 dB .
CONNECTORS
Remember that connectors are used as terminating fixtures for temporary non-
fixed joints. As such, they are made to be plugged in and disconnected hundreds
and possibly thousands of times. Since no one connector is ideal for every possi-
ble situation, a wide variety of connector styles and types have been developed
over the short life of fiber communications. We can classify connectors by assign-
ing them into five major categories:
1. Resilient ferrule
2. Rigid ferrule
3. Grooved plate hybrids
4. Expanded beam
5. Rotary
Of these types the rigid ferrule is by far the most common. Rigid ferrule types
include the popular ST (compatible), FC, and SC, which use a single 2.5-millimeter
cylindrical ferrule for fiber alignment. Other simplex connectors housing a single
fiber, but no longer in common use today, include the SMA (905 and 906), D4,
and the Biconic.
Duplex connectors contain two fibers allowing for a single connector body
for both transmit and receive fibers. These connectors have come to the fore in
recent years and are expected to gain popularity in the LAN arena. LAN hard-
80
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
Incident Light
Back Reflection
Transmitted Light
Connector or Splice Joint

CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
81
ware manufacturers have already adopted these connectors since they offer a
much smaller size, allowing more links per panel space on network equipment.
Early examples of duplex connectors include the FDDI and ESCON. These
connectors are rather large and cumbersome. Newer duplex connectors are
designed to fit in the same work area outlet space as a standard RJ45 telephone
jack and include the MT-RJ, Opti-Jack, and Volition connectors. These are com-
monly referred to as small form factor (SFF) connectors.
Although some SFF connectors are duplex designs, several others are minia-
ture simplex connectors that are similar in design to the SC. The LC, LX-5, and
MU connectors use smaller 1.25-millimeter ferrules and miniature bodies to
allow twice the panel density of the earlier simplex connector designs. Examples
of typical connector designs are shown in figure 6-3.
The end of an optical connector (Figure 6-4) can be either polished flat or
with a PC finish, a slightly rounded, domed end to create a “physical contact,”
hence the PC designation. Physical contact of the fibers reduces the back reflec-
tion caused by air between the fiber ends. Some singlemode connectors may also
have an “angled PC” (APC) finish. The ends are angled at 8 degrees to minimize
back reflections at the point of connection. These connectors cannot be mated
with the normal flat or domed polish types (Figure 6-4).
Although few, if any, of the original designs were compatible, nowadays
compatibility exists between the same types from different manufacturers (i.e., ST
or SC designs), thanks to marketplace pressures and standards committees.
Although not compatible with all other connector styles, most ferrules are 2.5
millimeters and will loose fit for temporary testing purposes. For example, by
lightly inserting the ferrule of an ST into an FC coupler, a “quick-and-dirty” test
can be made for continuity. Hybrid adapters to allow coupling of different types
of connectors are generally available as either sleeve connectors or patch cords.
Although no single connector is best for every application, Table 6-1 lists the cur-
rently popular connectors found in many different types for various applications.
Choosing a Fiber Connector
With all of the myriad selections of connector types, styles, and physical charac-
teristics available on the market, choosing the specific connector for your job is
often a mystifying task. One important criterion is connector performance. When
selecting a connector, comparisons of performance are generally based on:
Insertion loss, usually 0.10 to 1.0 dB per connection
Return loss (back reflection) varies from –20 (air gap like a SMA) to –60
dB (the best APC angle polished connectors)
Repeatability of connection, usually specified at thousands of times
Your choice of fiber connector also may depend on whether you are mount-
ing it onto singlemode or multimode fiber. Since singlemode connectors have a

82
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
Figure 6-3
Connector styles.
DEUTSCH 1000
AMP OPTIMATE
SMA
BICONIC
D4
FC
ST
SC
FDDI
ESCON
MT-RJ
SC-DC
LC
OptiJack
3M Volition
Duplex SC
(for size 
comparison)

CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
83
Air Gap
Flat PC
Flat PC
APC
Figure 6-4
Connector and finishes.
Table 6-1
Popular Connectors for Data Communications and
Telecommunications
Data communications
Telecommunications
(Mostly multimode)
(Mostly singlemode)
SMA (obsolete)
Biconic (obsolete)
ST (most widely used)
D4 (fading)
SC (for newer systems)
FC/PC (widely used)
FDDI (duplex)
SC (growing)
ESCON (duplex)
ST (singlemode version)
MT-RJ (new SFF duplex style)
LC (new SFF)
Volition (new SFF duplex style)
MU (SFF, outside United States)
Opti-Jack (new SFF duplex style)
much tighter tolerance than multimode connectors, they may be used on either
type of fiber. However the reverse is not true, that is, one may not use multimode
connectors on single mode fiber because the loose tolerance will cause high loss
with the very small singlemode core size. Generally multimode connectors are fit-
ted onto multimode fibers because they are less precise and cost about one-half to
one-third the cost of single mode connectors.
The accessibility of the fiber to casual users may cause you to anticipate rough
handling. In this case, gripping strength of the connector on the cable becomes

84
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
important to avoid pullouts by users. Gripping points of the connector may
include the fiber itself, the primary plastic buffer coating (tight buffer), the loose-
tube buffer, the cable strength members (Kevlar), and/or the cable jacket itself.
Another reason for choosing a particular type of connector is the type of
equipment already purchased or currently in use. If, for instance, you are adding
to an existing system already equipped with ST connectors, you should continue
to use ST connectors to ensure compatibility systemwide. If you are using previ-
ously purchased electronics with Biconic connectors installed, then that will be
your choice, unless, of course, you want to change all of the connections on the
patch panels and electronics!
Finally, your choice may be influenced by industry standards or new devel-
opments in the marketplace. The Electronic Industries Alliance/Telecommunica-
tions Industry Association (EIA/TIA) standards for premises cabling calls for the
SC connector, although they are considering the new SFF connectors. Many of
the newer connectors offer the promise of lower cost or higher performance,
which can also influence the decision.
Cable Termination and Connector Installation
Fiber optic connectors can be installed directly on most fiber optic cables, as long
as the fiber has a tight buffer or jacket to protect it. Before the installation of con-
nectors onto a loose-tube or ribbon fiber optic cable, a breakout kit may have
to be installed. This procedure is not necessary on breakout cables having 3-
millimeter jacketed fibers, but will be required on 250-, 500-, and some 900-
micron tight-buffer cables. The breakout kit consists of plastic tubing into which
the bare fibers are inserted to provide handling protection and strength when
mounted onto connectors.
Installing a fiber connector onto a fiber is a widely varied process. The most
common mounting methods are:
Adhesives to hold the fiber in the connector and polished ferrules
Epoxy glue with room temperature or oven cure
Quick curing adhesives
Hot Melt, preloaded adhesive (Hot Melt is a 3M trademark)
Crimping to hold the fiber, with or without requiring polishing of the fer-
rule end
Prepolished ferrules with fiber stub; connector is spliced onto the fiber.
The epoxy/polish method (Figure 6-5) is the oldest of all methods and is used
today in all manufacturing plants and many field installations. This process
involves filling the connector with a premixed two-part epoxy. The prepared and
cleaned fiber is then inserted into the connector, which is crimped onto the cable.
After curing the epoxy in an oven for the proper time (5 to 40 minutes) or
overnight at room temperature, the end of the fiber is polished. The fiber must be

scribed and cleaved nearly flush with the end of the connector and polished with a
two or three fine lapping papers (Figure 6-6). The cleaved fiber is usually removed
gently with hand-held film of about 12-micron finish in a process called “air pol-
ishing.” Final polish papers start at 3 microns and go as fine as 0.3-micron grit.
High volume terminations are usually lapped on polishing machines (Figure 6-7)
that can handle anywhere from one to a dozen connectors simultaneously.
The Hot Melt (trademark of 3M) uses an adhesive preloaded into the con-
nector. The connector is placed into an oven to soften the glue and allow inser-
tion of the prepared fiber. After cooling, the scribe and polish process is the same
as previously described.
Quick-cure adhesives include one- and two-part adhesives that cure in less
than one minute. Many different adhesives are used for fiber termination, but it is
important to not just use any quick-curing adhesive. The adhesive must meet
stringent requirements for adhesion to the fiber and resistance to moisture or
temperature extremes.
Some connectors, such as the 3M “CrimpLok” connector use no adhesive to
capture the fiber. Instead, an internal malleable metal V-groove plate is locked on
to the fiber holding it in place in the ferrule. The fiber cable is then affixed to the
backbone of the connector by crimping. The connector requires a special fiber
optic cleaver to prepare the fiber and a special polishing procedure.
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
85
Fiber
Scribe Tool
Connector
Epoxy
Pull
Straight
Away
Figure 6-5
The fiber is epoxied into the connector body, then scribed and
broken off just above the connector face before polishing.

Impact mounting, as used by the Valdor connector, is another termination
method that requires no adhesive. This connector uses a special metal ferrule
rather than ceramic. After the fiber is stripped and cleaned, it is inserted into the
86
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
Figure 6-7
Automatic polishers can polish large quantities of connectors
quickly. Courtesy Buehler LTD
Figure 6-6
A polishing puck holds the connector properly for polishing.

connector and a hollow tool impacts the end face of the ferrule, swaging connec-
tor onto the fiber. The fiber stub is then scribed off and the end face is polished
on a glass plate to provide a flat finish.
Another type of connector crimps the fiber to hold it in place, and then uses
a special tool to cleave the fiber flush with the end face of the ferrule. These con-
nectors require no polishing, so they are quickly terminated, but they typically
have higher loss than polished connectors.
Cleave and crimp connectors, on the other hand, do not require any type of
polish procedure and can be terminated very quickly (Figure 6-8). They already
have a polished ferrule tip and are spliced to the fiber. They require only the
insertion of a properly cleaved fiber to butt against the internal fiber stub. Once
in place, the fiber connector is crimped to hold the fiber. These connectors often
have higher loss than polished connectors, since they include both a connection
and a splice and require more expensive tools for termination.
Each mounting method has its advantages and disadvantages, varying from
ease of installation to cost per connector to performance qualities. See the section
at the end of this chapter that compares actual termination procedures for several
types of connectors.
Strip, Clean, and Cleave
The three basic steps for any fiber joint, whether splicing or connectorizing, are
strip, clean, and cleave. Stripping involves the removal of the 250-micron pri-
mary coating and any other layers of protection on the individual fiber. Some-
times this protection takes the form of a 900-micron tight-buffer coating such as
is found in indoor riser cables. The strip process must be accomplished using the
correct stripping tool of the correct size. When stripping 250-micron coated
loose-tube fiber, the entire length of fiber (usually no more than 3 inches) may be
stripped in one pass with the tool. However, stripping 900-micron tight buffer
will require that no more than 1/4 inch of tight buffer be removed at a time to
prevent breaking the fiber. To avoid microbends and fiber stress, always use the
tool at a near right angle and never wrap the fiber around your fingers to “get a
better grip.”
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
87
Figure 6-8
Cleave and crimp
connectors have a short fiber
already glued in the ferrule
and polished.

The cleaning process is also an inspection and testing process. Once the fiber
is stripped it must be cleaned using a lint-free wipe and reagent-grade isopropyl
alcohol. The wipe is moistened and the fiber is pinched tightly and wiped using a
curling motion. This will cause a fiber that has been scratched or cracked by the
stripping process to break. Better now than later! Cleaning should be done in one
pass if possible to minimize fiber handling. Make that wiping pad squeak to be
sure that all stripped plastic residue is removed!
Cleaving (Figure 6-5) will take place using either a cleaver or a scribe and
break process. In either case the fiber should end up with a cleave as near to 90
degrees as possible. When splicing using a cleaver, do not be tempted to clean the
fiber again using a wipe as this will draw small glass particles and dirt to the end
face. Instead, use a small piece of plastic tape to remove any remaining end-face
contamination by performing the “tape-tap” procedure.
Fiber Optic Adhesives
Adhesives have been used since the onset of fiber optics to affix most connectors.
The primary purpose is to hold the fiber in place and prevent any movement (pis-
toning). The adhesives can also supply support and strength to the fiber, specifi-
cally at the connector end. Adhesives are also being used to hold protective boots to
the fiber jacket. Similar materials are also being used for laser applications. This
discussion focuses on the traditional application of attaching fiber into a connector.
Enormous strides have been made in the past 15 years to keep pace with the
high performance demands of the latest fiber connectors. New increasingly rigor-
ous aging tests require formulated adhesives that allow little or no dimensional
movement of the fiber in the ferrule over strenuous conditions. These systems
must be rigid enough for polishing and yet flexible enough to withstand differ-
ences in expansion rates from the wide variety of substrates used in fiber optic
connectors and cables. Of course, they also must maintain a good bond to all of
these substrates.
Application techniques of epoxies vary depending on the type of connector
and the production requirements. Most common is the injection of adhesive into
the connector using a syringe or automated cartridge. Applying the adhesive
directly to the fiber is also used. However, to provide the best bond strength, the
adhesive must wet out the surfaces of the fiber and the connector ferrule suffi-
ciently. It is more difficult to achieve the maximum physical properties using the
latter method.
There is a misconception concerning the use of epoxies with plastic fibers.
Epoxies work well with both plastic and glass fibers. Formulations currently
available will not “attack” or contaminate plastic fibers. Room temperature-curing
88
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
This section was contributed by Barry Siroka, formerly Photonics Business Manager, Tracon.

epoxies are usually used for plastic fibers, although heat-curing and fast-gelling
epoxies have been used successfully.
Three basic types of epoxies are currently available for fiber optic connec-
tors. Heat-curing, room temperature-curing, and fast-gelling epoxies can all be
used in most connectors with any type of fiber.
Heat-curing epoxies have the highest temperature capabilities of all epoxy
systems. These systems are primarily used in connectors where fast cure is desired.
It is usually recommended that these systems reach a temperature of 90–100°C in
order for the chemical reaction between the epoxy and the hardener to take place.
Some heat-curing epoxies can cure in as quickly as one minute at 150°C. An
added benefit to this high temperature curing requirement is that these systems
usually have the longest working life. They can also be color coded to ensure a
proper mix, and some will change color upon cure.
The second type of epoxy used in fiber optic connectors are the room
temperature-curing (RT) systems. These are the most popular and can be used in
singlemode and multimode connectors. These systems will cure with no heat
overnight to a tack-free surface. Many fabricators will speed up the cure by heat-
ing the connectors up to 65°C. Full cure is in 1 hour with sufficient cure occur-
ring in 15 minutes for polishing. Some systems can be completely cured at 90°C
in 10 minutes. RT-curing systems have a working life of 15 to 60 minutes.
Fast-gelling epoxies are used primarily in field installations where no power is
available for ovens and/or speed is essential. These systems have a dual cure mech-
anism that allows for the fast gel (and therefore can be polished in as little as 10
minutes). After gelling, they will complete their cure overnight at room tempera-
ture. Properly applied formulations have been shown not to piston after curing.
Fast-gelling epoxies traditionally have an approximate working time of 5 min-
utes. New variations can offer a 10-minute working time. These new variations
allow for less waste as there is more time to use all the material from one mix.
These versions can be polished in as quickly as 20 minutes and will also complete
their cure in 12 to 18 hours.
In dealing with epoxies, do not overlook safety issues. Many chemicals can
cause dermatitis or respiratory ailments. Therefore, when handling any adhesive
product, it is always recommended that care be taken to prevent contact with the
skin and adequate ventilation should be employed. The hardeners are usually the
most offensive. Again, prepackaged epoxies help limit exposure to chemicals and
fumes.
Fiber End-Face Polish Techniques
The polishing technique used on fiber optic connectors depends on the connector
ferrule. The fiber end face at the ferrule end may be finished in one of three ways:
flat, PC-domed, or Angled-PC (Figure 6-4). The flat finish is accomplished by
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
89

polishing the connector ferrule end on a glass (or hard plastic) surface. This finish
produces a somewhat higher back reflection than other methods but is nonethe-
less acceptable for most multimode applications.
The most common of all finishes is the domed or PC type. In this case the
polishing takes place on a rubber pad. This allows the fiber end face to become
slightly rounded providing for contact of the cores only when the fibers are mated
together in a mating sleeve.
Angled PC singlemode connectors are relatively new to the fiber market and
use an 8-degree chamfer on the end face of the connector ferrule. These connec-
tors produce the least loss and lowest back reflection of the three finish methods.
They are, however, difficult to field terminate and cannot be mixed with either of
the other two finish types.
Cleaning Fiber Optic Connectors
With fiber optics, tolerance to dirt is near zero. Airborne particles are about the
size of the core of SM fiber and are usually silica based. They may scratch PC
connectors if not removed! With most network cable plants, every connection
should be cleaned during installation and not removed except for testing. Test
equipment that has fiber-bulkhead outputs and test cables needs periodic clean-
ing, since there may be hundreds of insertions in a short timeframe. Here’s a sum-
mary of what we have learned about cleaning fiber optic connectors.
1. Always keep dust caps on connectors, bulkhead splices, patch panels, or
anything else that is going to have a connection made with it.
2. Use lint-free pads and isopropyl alcohol to clean the connectors. Some
solvents might attack epoxy, so only alcohol should be used. Cotton swabs and
cloth leave threads behind. Some optical cleaners leave residues. Residues usually
attract dirt and make it stick. For over 10 years we have been supplying “Alco
Pads” with every Fotec Test Kit with no problems.
3. All “canned air” now has a liquid propellant. Years ago, you could buy
a can of plain dry nitrogen to blow things out with, but no longer. Today’s
aerosol cleaners use non-CFC propellant and will leave a residue unless you hold
them perfectly level when spraying, and spray for three to five seconds before
using to insure that any liquid propellant is expelled from the nozzle. These cans
can be used to blow dust out of bulkheads with a connector in the other side or
an active device mount (xmit/rcvr). NEVER use compressed air from a hose (This
emits a fine spray of oil from the compressor!) or blow on connectors (Your
breath is full of moisture, not to mention all those yucky germs!).
4. A better way to clean these bulkheads is to remove both connectors and
clean with Alco Pads, then use a swab made of the same material with alcohol on
it to clean out the bulkhead.
90
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS

5. Detectors on fiber optics power meters should also be cleaned with the
Alco Pads occasionally to remove dirt. Take the connector adapter off and wipe
the surface, then air dry.
6. Ferrules on the connectors/cables used for testing will get dirty because
they scrape off the material of the alignment sleeve in the splice bushing. Some of
these sleeves are molded glass-filled thermoplastic and sold for multimode appli-
cations. These will give you a dirty connector ferrule in 10 insertions. You can see
the front edge of the connector ferrule getting black. The alignment sleeve will
build up an internal ledge and create a gap between the mating ferrules—Voila! A
1–2 dB attenuator! Use the metal or ceramic alignment sleeve bulkheads only if
you are expecting repeated insertions. Cleaning the above requires aggressive
scrubbing on the ferrules with the Alco Pad and tossing the bulkhead away.
7. Some companies sell a cleaning kit for fiber optics. These are good solu-
tions but perhaps not as cost-effective as making your own to meet your needs.
SPLICES
Splices normally are a permanent joint between two fibers. The two basic cate-
gories of splices are fusion and mechanical. Generally speaking, splices offer a
lower return loss, lower attenuation, and greater physical strength than connec-
tors. Also, splices are usually less expensive per splice (or per joint) than connec-
tors, require less labor, constitute a smaller joint for inclusion into splice closures,
offer a better hermetic seal, and allow either individual or mass splicing.
Fusion Splicing
Fusion splicing (Figure 6-9) works on the principle of an electric arc ionizing the
space between the prepared fibers to eliminate air and to heat the fibers to proper
temperature (2,000°F). The fiber is then fed in as a semiliquid and melds into its
mate. The previously removed plastic coating is replaced with a plastic sleeve or
other protective device. The perfect fusion splice results in a single fiber rather
than two fibers having been joined. One drawback to fusion splicing is that it most
generally must be performed in a controlled environment, that is, a splicing van or
trailer, and should not be done in open spaces because of dust and other contami-
nation. Fusion splicing in manholes is prohibited because the electric arc generated
during this process may cause explosions if gas is present. Due to the welding
process, it is sometimes necessary to modify the fusion parameters to suit particu-
lar types of fibers, especially if it is necessary to fuse two different fibers (from two
different manufacturers or fibers with different core/cladding structures).
Fusion splicers can be purchased rather plain, such as the fixed V-groove type,
for as little as $10,000, or completely automated and capable of fusing 12 fibers in
a ribbon simultaneously. To assure consistent low-loss splices, an automated
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
91

splicer costing $25,000–40,000 can be acquired with features such as self-align-
ment and automatic loss testing.
Mechanical Splicing
Mechanical splicing, on the other hand, is quick and easy for restoration, its
major use, and is also used for new construction, especially with multimode fiber.
It does not require a controlled environment other than common sense dust con-
trol. The strength of a mechanical splice is better than most connectors; however,
fusion remains the strongest method of splicing. Back reflection and loss vary
dramatically from one type of splice to another. Equipment investment for spe-
cific splicing kits need not exceed $5,000.
Mechanical splices (Figure 6-10) employ either a V-groove or tube-type
design to obtain fiber alignment. The V-groove is probably the oldest and is still
the most popular method, especially for multifiber splicing of ribbon cable.
Examples of this type include the 3M Fibrlok, Siecor CamSplice, AMP CoreLink,
and the Lucent CSL splice.
92
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
Figure 6-9
Fusion splicer.

Tubular splices, on the other hand, require that the fibers be inserted into a
small tube, which provides alignment. The splice is then glued or crimped to hold
the fibers together. Examples of this type of splice include the Fastomeric, Elas-
tomeric, the AMP Optimate, and the Norland Optical Splice.
Splices originally were either glued (GTE Elastomeric) or polished (AT&T
Rotary). However, splices using adhesives have been phased out of common use
because of the reusability of the more modem “no-glue” type. Polished splices are
very much like miniaturized connectors using ferrules and a polishing process.
Because of the extensive time required, polish type splices are also extinct.
In nearly all of today’s splices, the fibers are crimped or locked to achieve
fiber alignment and attachment. Most of them may be reopened for fine-tuning
and possible reuse. These mechanical splices must all use some type of index-
matching gel inside to eliminate back reflection and reduce splice loss. This gel is
subject to contamination, so care is required when handling the splice, particu-
larly if it is going to be reused later.
To prepare for mechanical splicing, the fibers are first stripped of all primary
coating material, cleaned with alcohol, and then cleaved as previously described.
Completed splices, whether fusion or mechanical, are then placed into splicing
trays designed to accommodate the particular type of splice in use. Splicing trays
then fit into splice organizers and in turn into a splice closure.
Choosing a Splice Type
The type of splice chosen is usually determined by the following criteria:
I. Type of fiber: Most singlemode fiber is fusion spliced because this results
in lower loss and better return loss performance. Multimode fiber, with
its complicated core structure, does not always fusion splice easily, so
mechanical splices can give equal performance at a lower amortized cost.
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER-OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
93
Figure 6-10
Typical mechanical splices and a fusion splice on the far left.

2. Attenuation, including return loss: Today’s automated fusion splicers
can produce incredibly low-loss splices (typically 0.0 to 0.15 dB).
Although a properly installed mechanical splice may also achieve a near-
zero loss, the consistency of the fusion splice is hard to beat. The main
difference between the two is the back reflection caused by the nature of
mechanical splices.
3 . Physical durability: The welding process used in the fusion splice gives
higher strength and greater durability. Fusion splicing retains the original
mechanical tensile strength of the fiber, that is 50,000 to 75,000 psi.
Most mechanical splices are rated at a pullout strength of no more than
1 to 2 pounds.
4. Ease of installation: A fully automated fusion splicer is very expensive but
makes the splicing a one-button process. Mechanical splicing types vary
but usually are less expensive to purchase and use for low-count fiber jobs.
5. Cost per splice: In the case of fusion splicing, which is the most common
type of splicing being performed on singlemode fiber for new construc-
tion, the initial capital investment is much greater than the cost for
mechanical splicing. A fusion splicing machine is a very large investment.
Also, fusion splicing must be performed in a controlled environment,
necessitating a splicing trailer or van. Mechanical splicing, on the other
hand, requires no controlled environment, has a very low initial capital
outlay, and the splices themselves vary from $7 to $20 each.
Terminating Singlemode Fibers with Pigtails
Singlemode cables are generally terminated using a combination of connector
installation and splicing. Since singlemode connectors have such critical dimen-
sions and mating surface requirements, they are generally terminated in a manu-
facturing lab. There the proper fiber insertion and physical contact polishing can
be controlled precisely. Complete cable assemblies with connectors on both ends
are made and tested, since testing a cable with two ends is easier than with bare
fiber on one end. In the field, the assemblies are cut in half and spliced onto the
installed backbone cables. Although the splice contributes some additional loss
and cost, the overall method provides a higher yield and better connection at
lower cost than trying to control the termination process in the field.
TOOLS
No job can be completed without the correct tools, and fiber splicing/connector-
ization is no exception. Following is a summary of the tools and test equipment
needed.
94
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER-OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS

Handtools
Handtools can be purchased in a prepackaged tool kit or on an individual basis
as needed. At a minimum the following will be needed to complete most fiber
optic operations.
1. Cleaning fluid and lint-free wipes (approved cable cleaner)
2. Buffer tube cutter
3. Reagent grade isopropyl alcohol (99%) in nonspill bottle or presoaked
pads
4. Canned “air”
5. Tape: masking and Scotch invisible
6. Coating stripper
7. Cleaver or scribe
8. Microscope or cleave checker
9. Splicing method—fusion or mechanical—determines specific tooling
needs
10. Connectorization method determines specific tool kit (if required)
The total cost of these tools can vary from as little as $750 to as much as $5,000
depending on the quality and quantity of tools purchased.
Major Equipment
1. Fusion splicer (optional)
2. Optical time domain reflectometer (OTDR) (optional, rentable)
3. Splicing van or trailer (nice to have an organized workplace, especially
for outside plant work)
4. Power meter (for measuring optical power or loss)
5. LED or laser light source (to inject a test signal for loss)
6. Visible light source (for tracing cables, absolutely mandatory!)
7. Fiber optic talkset (to communicate over the fiber; alternatives are
walkie-talkies and cellular phones)
8. Termination kits (these may be made by purchasing tools individually
rather than in a kit form. Sometimes the splicing or connectorization kits
will contain too many small insignificant tools that you may already
own. Once you determine the needed tools, you can purchase only those
tools.)
Since the major tools and test equipment represent a large capital invest-
ment, you should consider leasing the more expensive of these to determine
which will fit your intended purposes. After a period of use, a purchase might be
considered.
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER-OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS
95

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Fiber optic joints should have ________________
a. back reflection.
b. an index matching gel.
c. high mechanical strength and low loss.
d. attenuation.
2. Loss of light power is called ________________
a. dBm.
b. attenuation.
c. absorption.
d. diffusion.
3. Identify the following as either an
a. intrinsic loss.
b. extrinsic loss.
____ core eccentricity
____ NA mismatch
____ misalignment
____ contamination
____ poor cleave
____ core diameter mismatch
____ core ellipticity
____ air gap between fiber ends
4. ________________ connectors do not need to be polished.
a. Epoxy glue
b. “Hot Melt”
c. Anaerobic
d. Cleave and crimp
5. Match the terms right column with appropriate terms in left column.
____ Mechanical splicing
a. nonpermanent connections
____ Fusion splicing
b. permanent singlemode connection
____ Connector
c. restoration
96
CHAPTER 6 — FIBER-OPTIC CONNECTORS, SPLICES, AND TOOLS

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
7
FIBER OPTIC
HARDWARE
S T E V E  P A U L O V
The main purpose for hardware is to protect and organize splice and termination
points. Hardware can be divided into two categories; indoor and outdoor. We
deal primarily with indoor hardware in this chapter, as applicable to commercial
buildings and campus environments, with a final review of outside plant hard-
ware at the end of the chapter.
Fiber optic cable plant design requires preplanning to select the proper hard-
ware. You need to know the number of fibers to pull to each location and the
purpose for each fiber. From there you can plan your hardware and the type of
cable to be used for riser, plenum, or other applications. You should also plan the
conduit, duct, and inner duct. The designer should decide in advance on the net-
works, support systems, and topologies to be used, such as Ethernet, token ring,
voice, data, video, imaging, control, and industrial applications. Once the appli-
cation is determined and the fiber and connection/splice is known, the route must
be determined. Then we can decide on locations for the hardware cabinets, racks,
and associated panels.
There are rules for fiber distribution established by the EIA/TIA 568 Commit-
tee. The EIA/TIA 568 Commercial Building Wiring standard is based on a hierar-
chical star for the backbone and a single star for horizontal distribution. Rules for
backbone wiring include a 2,000-meter (6,557-ft.) maximum distance between
the main cross-connect and the telecommunications closet, with a maximum of
97

Figure 7-1
Backbone cabling.
one intermediate cross-connect between the main cross-connect and the telecom-
munications closet (Figure 7-1) Many networks are installed in a simpler, less
expensive “homerun” design (Figure 7-2). The four main functions of each distri-
bution point (using the EIA/TIA 568 nomenclature) are as follows:
98
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
500 m
(1,639')
90 m
(295')
Horizontal Wiring
Telecommunications
Closet
Work Area
Telecommunications
Outlet
Intermediate
Cross-Connect
Main
Cross-Connect
2,000 m
(6,557' )
Backbone Wiring
1,500 m
(4,918')

Figure 7-2
“Homerun” or centralized fiber cabling system.
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
99

1. Main cross-connect. The main cross-connect (MC), also referred to as
the main distribution frame (MDF), should be in proximity to or in the
same location as the data center or PBX. This placement ensures a cen-
tralized management point for reconfiguration of the fiber optic net-
work. Equipment in the MC should be capable of the following:
Handling adequately large fiber counts
Accepting either direct termination of equipment or pigtail splices and
preterminated assemblies for splicing at the frame
Providing jumper storage and reconfiguration capabilities
Allowing for growth
Typically, MC equipment can be installed in racks or wall cabinets.
2. Intermediate cross-connect. The intermediate cross-connect (IC) typi-
cally connects the intrabuilding cable plant to the interbuilding cable
plant. It is smaller in scope with lower fiber counts than the MC. Prod-
ucts in the IC may need to be wall mounted. The size of the IC will deter-
mine which products will be used.
3. Telecom closet hardware. Telecom closet (TC) equipment makes the
transition from the backbone to the horizontal cable plant.
4. Work area telecom outlet. The work area telecom outlet is the end point
of the horizontal wiring. The cables may be fiber only or a combination
of fiber and copper.
In each of the above distribution points, one or more of the following hardware
components can be installed.
1. Splice panel. The splice panel changes outside cable to riser or plenum
cable or breaks out the outside cable to individual buffered fibers. After
being spliced, the fibers are routed to the appropriate splice tray and
positioned to prevent damage. The splice panel may accommodate
fusion or mechanical splices and can be mounted in a rack or wall cabi-
net (Figure 7-3).
2. Patch panel. A patch panel provides a centralized location for patching
fibers, testing, monitoring, and restoring riser or trunk cables. Figure 7-4
shows an incoming riser cable being terminated on one side of a coupling
panel with a connector. On the other side of the coupling panel is
another group of connectors terminating the LAN cables. In small
offices, the patch panel can be used as an MC or IC. To order this type of
panel, you must know the type of connectors for the coupling panels, the
number of connections needed, the type of cabinet, whether the panel
will be wall or rack mounted, and the size of the cabinet required for the
number of panels to be installed.
3. Wall outlet. A wall outlet (Figure 7-5) terminates the permanent wiring
and provides a connection for a short jumper cable to connect the network
100
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE

CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
101
Figure 7-3
Splice panels connect individual fibers from cables to
pigtails. Courtesy AMP
Figure 7-4
The patch panel makes connection between two cables.
Here we see single fiber jumpers connected to a breakout cable.
Courtesy 3M

equipment. Wall outlets can be wall mounted or permanently installed
into the wall surface.
4. Panels. When designing your cabinets, you can select the panel with the
type of coupling to fit the connectors you have chosen. You can also
order coupling panels without the couplers and install these yourself if
the type of connectors to be used will not be known until the cut-over
date.
Each manufacturer has a unique design for stacking equipment
panels. One such method involves stacking the panels on a relay rack.
Another method places the panels in a cabinet, and each cabinet is
installed on the wall above each other or side by side. When ordering any
cabinet make sure it is equipped with cable-terminating equipment such
as ground clamps, a place to secure the dielectric central member, Kevlar
or other fill material, and cable ring or channel guides.
5. Pigtail splicing. A fiber optic pigtail splice is a fiber cable that has been
factory connectorized on one end with an optical connector. The other
end remains unterminated. The unterminated end of the pigtail is spliced
to the fiber requiring termination. Pigtails are used almost exclusively for
singlemode applications but occasionally for multimode. Generally pig-
tails are bought as terminated jumpers and cut in half for splicing. That
way, they can be tested more easily to ensure the connectors are good
before splicing them onto the fibers.
102
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
Figure 7-5
Wall outlets terminate cables
in convenient locations for desktop
connections. Courtesy AMP

6. Outside plant hardware. For cable runs outside, one generally is con-
cerned with splice closures (Figure 7-6), since connectors are used only at
the terminated ends inside buildings. Splice closures are available for
direct burial, use in controlled environment vaults (CEVs), aerial or
pedestal installation. Most closures are sealed once splices are loaded.
Closures must be chosen to be appropriate for the installation location
and splice trays must fit the type of splice to be used.
7. Conduit. Fiber optic cable is often installed in conduit (Figure 7-7). The
conduit can protect the cable from damage, water, or stress, both during
and after installation. Conduit comes in many types from simple corru-
gated innerduct to steel pipe. Due to the concern over damaging fiber
optic cable during installation, many types of conduit have been designed
to facilitate installing long lengths of cable without exceeding the cable
pull limits.
Even indoors, fiber is often installed in simple innerduct. This identifies the
cable as fiber and protects it from damage during the installation or removal of
other cables. It may also make installation faster, if the innerduct has preinstalled
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
103
Figure 7-6
Outside plant splice closure for 3M Fiberlok mechanical splice.
Courtesy 3M

pulling tape. The duct can be installed by relatively unskilled personnel, the fiber
installed quickly without as much concern for damage, since it is protected by the
innerduct.
Outdoors, conduit and innerduct, along with proper lubrication, can extend
the pulling length considerably. They can be chosen from a number of styles and
sizes to fit the number and sizes of cables to be installed, especially considering
future expansion. Some manufacturers even offer conduit or innerduct with fiber
optic cable supplied to the customer’s specifications preinstalled and ready for
direct burial or pulling into preinstalled conduit.
Trenching for conduit: In paved areas, the surface should be carefully cut to
prevent unnecessarily excessive width at the top of the trench and thus reduce the
amount of surface to be repaved. For economical operation, particularly where
paving is involved, the trench width should be no greater than is needed to pro-
vide adequate working space. Generally, this dimension is controlled by the types
of excavating equipment used. As a minimum, the trench must be 4 inches wider
than the width of the conduit structure where backfill will be used, and 3 inches
wider where concrete encasement will be used. Individual job specifications will
dictate trench width. Grade and level the trench bed. Where necessary, provide
104
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
Figure 7-7
Two fiber optic cables being pulled through innerduct that has
previously been pulled into conduit. Courtesy Condux

sand and/or other granular backfill as bedding material so the conduit will be
evenly supported over the length of each section.
In order to make optimum use of the conduit for subsequent cable placing
operations, particular care should be taken concerning direction changes. The
ideal duct structure is one that is essentially straight and allows for grading for
drainage into manholes. Direction changes should be made as gradual as possible.
When a road bore has to be made, the recommended procedure is to install a
pipe that is large enough for the joined sections of conduit to slide completely
through. In an instance where this is not possible and only a 4-inch steel pipe is
present for the bore, the innerduct can be used for insertion through the steel
pipe.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. ________________ provides a centralized management point for network
configuration.
a. Work area telecom outlet
b. Telecom closet
c. Intermediate cross-connect
d. Main cross-connect
2. ________________ make the transition from the backbone to the hori-
zontal cable plant.
a. Work area telecom outlet
b. Telecom closet
c. Intermediate cross-connect
d. Main cross-connect
3. The main purpose of hardware is to ________________
a. splice fibers.
b. protect and maintain fiber optic cable.
c. simplify pulling cable.
d. provide an airtight enclosure.
4. The ideal duct structure is ________________
a. indoors.
b. straight and allows for drainage.
c. color coded.
d. 4 inches wider than the conduit.
CHAPTER 7 — FIBER OPTIC HARDWARE
105


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
8
GETTING STARTED
IN FIBER OPTICS
P A U L  R O S E N B E R G
Contractors have many reasons to be interested in the installation of fiber optics.
Since contractors already know how to install cables, the work is generally clean,
and it is easier to supervise than most electrical projects. However, you need to
know more about fiber optics than installation techniques to have a successful
fiber optics business. Learning about the basics of fiber optics and getting hands-
on training in the techniques of installation are important and essential subjects,
but in reality, they are only the first step to a business in fiber optics. The problem
is that getting started in fiber optic installations is not without pain.
The first obstacle you have to deal with is an investment in training. Training
can be acquired in several ways, some of which can be expensive. No matter how
the training is handled, it must be done well. It would be business suicide to send
an untrained crew out to terminate fibers. The cost of replacing just one cable run
would cover a significant amount of training expense. And any way you look at
it, teaching someone to perform fiber optics installation is not as simple as teach-
ing someone to bend 1/2-inch thinwall.
One training method is to send your people to a special school. Although this
usually provides excellent training, it can be expensive, and usually your people
will get hands-on experience with only one brand of equipment. Alternatively,
you may send your people to an installers’ conference to give them hands-on
experience with products from a variety of manufacturers.
107

You may wish to train one or two of your best people and have them teach
the rest of the crew. Make sure the ones you send are very good teachers. When
they return, you must give them plenty of time to teach their newfound skills to
the others. Make sure you buy enough materials for them to practice with (and
throw away when they are done).
Another obstacle to getting into the fiber optics business is the cost of tools
and equipment. This cost is not necessarily a tremendous impediment to getting
started in fiber optics; it is one that continues to grow as a fiber optic business
grows. For example, it is not difficult to get started installing multimode fiber,
glued terminations, and perhaps mechanical splices. You need only a termination
kit for the type of connectors you will install and some basic test equipment.
It is more difficult (and more expensive) if you want to take on a singlemode
project. You will probably need to buy or rent a fusion splicer and new types of
ancillary equipment. Later, if you want to take a larger project, you will need a
better fusion splicer, and so on. And due to the quick pace of technology, your
tools and testers may become obsolete long before they are worn out.
The difficulty of having to build business relationships with an entirely new
group of people is another obstacle to getting into fiber optics. Electrical contrac-
tors have been dealing with electrical wholesalers for many years and are quite
used to the process. Unfortunately, electrical wholesalers do not always deal with
fiber cables and associated materials, although the number of those involved with
fiber optics is growing rapidly. This means electrical contractors are forced to
deal with new people, buying directly from manufacturers, through a specialty
supply house, or via mail order.
Another obstacle for contractors is keeping up to date with technologies.
Since today most technologies change quickly, information has a short life
span—maybe three or four years. That means that if you were to learn everything
possible about fiber this week, the information could be almost entirely out of
date three or four years from now. Resign yourself to this idea. Subscribe to the
appropriate magazines and devote some time regularly to reading articles about
the state of the art technology.
WADING INTO THE MARKET
The best way to enter the market as an installer of optical fiber is to wade in
slowly.
1. Learn as much about the technology as possible. Learn about the fibers,
the cable types, testing, and terminations. Also learn about communica-
tions and data networks.
2. Train your workers in installation and termination techniques. Buy some
basic tools and test equipment and give them time to practice. Make sure
that they are competent before you go on to the next step.
108
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER OPTICS

3. Contract a small job. Take one small job and give it lots of attention.
Watch all of the details on the project and note any difficult or unex-
pected parts. You can probably either subcontract a small installation
from another electrical contractor or contract directly from one of your
existing customers.
4. Begin to advertise. (We go through more details on advertising in a
moment.)
5. Step up to larger and more complex projects. Move up slowly, and never
take more than one step at a time. For instance, moving from a 50-ter-
mination project to an 80-termination project or from a 50-termination
multimode to a 50-termination singlemode project is fine. However,
going from a 50-termination multimode project to an 80-termination
singlemode project may not be a good idea.
Remember, initially you will sell installation of cables, termination of fibers,
splicing, and testing to customers. As you proceed further into the fiber optics
business, you can sell design services as well.
GETTING BUSINESS
The best place to get fiber optic installation business is from your existing cus-
tomers, although how much fiber work you can get from them will vary depend-
ing on their businesses. One place to get business is from other contractors who
need a subcontractor with fiber experience.
Some other typical fiber customers are process-control people; network man-
agers in business, college, and institutional settings; utility companies and cable
television companies. Also work on getting referrals from distributors and
component dealers. These people often have customers who ask them about
installers. Give your vendors a sales pitch and ask them for their referrals.
Advertising is a good way to get business. The first thing to do is to put
together a brochure. Be sure the brochure stresses experience and references. To
get started in fiber optics you must convince customers that you know what you
are doing. Distribute the brochure to your existing customers. Next, you should
send copies of the brochure to all potential customers in your area. Follow up on
the mailing with telephone calls to the recipients, and follow up on the calls with
another mailing. Remember that ad campaigns such as this take time, but they
are usually fairly successful.
As an installer of optical fiber systems, your customers will expect you to act
like a consultant. This means you will need to dress appropriately for customer
visits, and in general behave more like a consultant. (Of course, this means 
you can charge more for your design and troubleshooting services, just as does a
consultant.)
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER OPTICS
109

Customers will expect you to understand communications technology and to
help them find answers to their communications problems. Also, you will have to
understand data networking, since a big part of your job will be helping your cus-
tomers switch from copper to fiber networks and control wiring.
Tooling Up
Certain items are absolutely necessary for fiber work. If you are going to get
started in the fiber optics business, you must have the right equipment to get the
fibers in place and terminate and test them. No matter how you start, you will
need the following:
A test kit or power meter and source for loss testing
Swivel pulling eyes
Breakaway swivel
Microscopes for inspecting polished connectors
Termination kit or polishing tools, polishing films, adhesive syringes,
cleavers, stripping tools, solvent and wipes, canned air, and adhesives
These things are in addition to the equipment and tools you already have for
the installation of wire and cable. Fortunately, most of the items on this list are
relatively inexpensive. In general, it is best to rent an OTDR if you need one for a
singlemode fiber project. They generally are not needed for short-length multi-
mode projects. The price of OTDRs is too high unless you use them all the time,
and prices should continue to drop. It does not make sense to put out a signifi-
cant amount of money for equipment until you get firmly entrenched in the opti-
cal fiber business.
OVERSEEING FIBER INSTALLATIONS
With fiber work, getting a job right is more difficult than getting it done on time.
This is why it is critical that you know how to supervise the work of your people.
Be willing to look over their shoulders on the job to make sure they are doing
things right
Mistakes in fiber work, especially regarding terminations, are difficult to
detect. A mistake that could keep the entire system from working might not show
up until the system is completely installed and turned on. (Think about that for a
minute—it is a scary situation.)
Job number one is to assure that all the terminations are done correctly. Ter-
minating fiber is delicate work; make sure that your people work like jewelers,
not like framers.
Make sure your people have all the right parts; make sure they don’t rush;
make sure they have a well-lit work area; make sure they have test equipment;
and make sure they use it!
110
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER OPTICS

Next, make certain they mark every run of cable and termination well. Invest
money in cable markers and numbers; invest time in written cable and termina-
tion schedules and cable plant documentation—DO NOT lose track of which
cable is which.
Inspection
Inspection is a bit of a wild card in fiber installations. Since optical fibers do not
carry electricity, they are not exactly the domain of the electrical inspector. And
since electrical inspectors do not always inspect communications wiring, they are
even less likely to inspect fiber installations. Nonetheless, take a moment to check
with local electrical inspectors before you do work in their jurisdiction. Also,
make sure you are familiar with the requirements of National Electrical Code
Article 770.
Always make sure that you know who will inspect your work before you give
your customer a final price. You must know what the inspector will expect of
you and what he or she will be looking for. In most cases, the inspector of a fiber
installation will be the person who signs the contract. In some cases, it will be a
third party. Be especially careful of third-party inspectors, since they are getting
paid to find your mistakes.
The bottom line in installation quality is signal strength from one end of the
network to the other. But be careful of other details that may be noticed by an
inspector. Among other things, many inspectors will give a lot of attention to
proper cable marking, mechanical protection, and workmanship.
HOW MUCH DO I CHARGE?
Once you have made the decision to enter the fiber installation market, you have
to decide how to come up with prices for the jobs you will bid. You also will need
to become familiar with the RFP process (RFP stands for “request for proposal”).
In the network world, an RFP is more or less the same as a bid document, except
it is not as detailed. An RFP gives you the general details of a project and asks you
to furnish a complete design, schedule, and price. Completing the RFP process is
similar to figuring and bidding a design/build project.
The first thing you have to do when putting together an estimate is figure out
your real costs. Add an appropriate amount for overhead to these costs. This
should leave you with a comfortable base price. (If not, raise the price until you
are comfortable. Never intentionally take a job that will cause you to lose money.)
Pricing fiber optic work is difficult because it is easy to leave things out. To
avoid such errors, think through the design of the installation carefully. Also, put
a bit of contingency money in your estimates to compensate for surprises. A small
percentage of your total cost should be all that you need. This is especially impor-
tant while technology continues to change so quickly.
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER OPTICS
111

In general, the parts of an optical fiber installation that you must account for
are cables, terminations, splices, jumpers, attenuators, breakout kits, distribution
cabinets, cross-connects, patch panels, outlets and jacks, grounding clamps, cable
lubricants, pulling hardware, conduit, inner duct, racks, tie-wraps, and cable
markers.
For pricing very small fiber installations, it is generally best to calculate your
material expenses first, and then calculate your time in bulk. That is, figure your
labor as X number of days for a two-man crew. On larger jobs, you should use
the itemized estimating method you use for standard power estimates. You can
find fiber labor units from different industry sources. Developing your own is a
pretty big chore.
General guideline numbers can be useful when putting together an estimate.
Remember, however, that such numbers are “for informational purposes only.”
Do not use them for pricing your own projects; it is the height of foolishness to
take a contract without knowing your costs.
Once you get competitive with fiber bidding, remember that estimating and
bidding are very different operations. The purpose of estimating is to know the
lowest price for which you can perform any given project and not lose money.
The purpose of bidding is get the highest possible price for a project. For more
detailed guidelines on estimating, see Chapter 14.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The best place to get fiber optic installation business is from __________
a. trade journals.
b. existing customers.
c. vendors.
d. distributors.
2. When first starting out in fiber optics, if needed, it is best to rent a(n)
________________ rather than purchase one.
a. power meter
b. termination kit
c. OTDR
d. pulling eye
3. The purpose of a(n) ________________ is to get the highest possible price
for a project.
a. RFP
b. bid
c. estimate
d. guideline
112
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER OPTICS

4. The purpose of a(n) ________________ is to know the lowest price to
complete a project and not lose money.
a. RFP
b. bid
c. estimate
d. guideline
3. Installed fiber must be ________________
a. documented.
b. tested.
c. terminated correctly.
d. all of the above.
CHAPTER 8 — GETTING STARTED IN FIBER-OPTICS
113


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
9
GUIDELINES FOR
FIBER OPTIC DESIGN
AND INSTALLATION
E R I C  P E A R S O N
GENERAL GUIDELINES
Use these guidelines for evaluating and comparing vendors, choosing products,
and evaluating options and cost impacts of your decisions.
1. Start with a list of specifications. After the cable plant is designed, but
before you contact any manufacturers, copy the information you have
generated onto a specification summary sheet so you have all of the spec-
ifications for each component conveniently available when talking with
potential suppliers.
2. All performance numbers need test specifications. In addition to learning
whether the numbers are minimums, maximums, or typical perfor-
mances, you need to know how the numbers were determined. When
comparing products from different vendors, be certain that the specifica-
tions are the same, so that you know that you are comparing apples to
apples.
3. Talk to at least four vendors for each component. Remember that the
fiber optic industry is highly competitive. You will be able to ask for, and
115

usually receive, the best price possible, even though you may be compar-
ing several products that are not identical, such as cables or connectors.
Remember to ask the question “Why should I buy your product instead
of another supplier’s product?” The answer to this question may include
mention of other suppliers or of equivalent products.
4. Talk with representatives more knowledgeable than yourself—avoid the
“blind leading the blind.” By this step in the process of designing your
fiber optic system, you should be more knowledgeable than many of the
individuals selling fiber optic products. Therefore, when you need infor-
mation, deal with people who know what they are talking about, even if
you have to bypass the salesmen or representatives and talk directly with
the factory.
5. Expect and resolve conflicting facts/opinions. At this step in the process
of designing your fiber optic system, you have defined the performance
criteria that will result in the lowest-cost fiber optic system possible.
Now, you need to find sources for the components for which you have
specifications. Be aware that you will probably learn from potential sup-
pliers some facts that differ from the facts and information you may have
learned elsewhere. Expect this to happen. When it does, you should
resolve these differences.
6. Use the five-year rule. Unless you have an excellent and compelling rea-
son not to do so, deal with suppliers who have been in business for at
least five years. Such companies have been in business long enough to
know how to avoid most of their problems, how to guide you to avoid
your problems, and how to be around in another five years (when you
need repair or some other support).
7. Use the “high serial number” rule. Unless you have an excellent and
compelling reason to do so, avoid buying a product with a low serial
number [or kilometer number]. For any product other than the most
simple, you are less likely to experience problems if the serial number is
100 than if it is 11. This and the previous guideline should not limit the
number of vendors who can supply what you need. When talking with
potential suppliers, ask questions such as How long have you been mak-
ing this product? How many customer returns or field problems have
you had with this product? and How many kilometers have you made of
this product? The answers to these types of questions will help you eval-
uate the reliability, workmanship, quality, and delivery considerations
that you will use in deciding on a supplier.
8. Know the cost impact of your design decisions. Know or learn the cost
impact of your choice of one design over another. This guideline applies
equally to optoelectronics (wavelength of operation and light source-LED
116
CHAPTER 9 — GUIDELINES FOR FIBER OPTIC DESIGN AND INSTALLATION

or laser diode), to connectors (ST versus ESCON or FDDI), and to cables
(loose tube versus breakout distribution).
9. Buy only the performance you need. Do not be influenced by an answer
that includes any phrase such as “our product has higher or better per-
formance that justifies its higher price” unless you need that “better”
performance. In general, most products available in today’s marketplace
exceed the performance needs, either in distance of transmission, or of
bandwidth, or of accuracy of transmission, of most applications. You
will gain nothing by paying a premium price for “higher” performance
that you will not use.
10. Ask for competitive information. Ask questions such as Who is your
competition? Or Who do you compete against? You may not get an
answer, but sometimes you will find new suppliers this way.
CABLE GUIDELINES
1. Ask for product close to your needs. After you have presented your list of
specifications, ask whether each supplier has any other products avail-
able at a lower price. Cable manufacturers will often have leftover
lengths, lengths with a single broken fiber (for example, 1 broken fiber
out of 12 when you need 10), or lengths with one fiber with an attenua-
tion rate higher than the specification for which it was originally manu-
factured. These types of products may well suit your needs. They can
often be purchased at a significant savings over the “exact” product you
need, if they meet your needs without compromising performance.
2. Look for the best price possible. The fiber optic cable industry is highly
competitive, so you will be able to get a good price by shopping around.
It has been our experience that at any point in time, there is always some
manufacturer hungry enough for business to offer exceptionally low
prices. In some cases, manufacturers have been selling cable at a loss in
order to capture market share. You should contact at least four suppli-
ers, but should not need to contact more than seven or eight in order to
get the best price possible.
3. Be cautious about premium prices. Be cautious about paying premium
price for premium performance, unless your design calculations support
this need. Most data communication applications do not use the optical
power budget available or the bandwidth distance product. Before pay-
ing premium prices for premium bandwidth-distance product (BWDP),
be certain to perform the effective bandwidth calculations. These calcu-
lations will demonstrate that 850-nm operation usually does not justify
premium BWDP. These calculations may justify premium BWDP for
CHAPTER 9 — GUIDELINES FOR FIBER OPTIC DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
117

1300-nm operation. And you can safely assume the fiber being used all
exceeds manufacturers’ minimum specifications by a large margin.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Of course, price is not the only consideration. Reliability, workmanship, quality,
and delivery are also important. In order to evaluate these other considerations,
we provide the following observations. We have found that most manufacturers
of fiber optic cable have about the same level of reliability and other considera-
tions. In addition, as we review the data sheets of comparable cables, we find that
no supplier has the best products. Finally, our conversations with both pur-
chasers of cables and others in our industry support this observation: Most man-
ufacturers are reasonably reliable in the products they supply to their customers.
This is as it should be, since most cable manufacturers have been in business for
at least five years.
CONNECTOR GUIDELINES
1. Are any connectors easier to install? Remember to be skeptical of any
salesperson who tells you that his or her product has the “best perfor-
mance,” “highest convenience,” or “easiest installation.” Most of these
statements are sales propaganda. The most accurate statement is that
some connector installation techniques are easier than others. The reality
is that there is no universally “best product.” All fiber optic connector
types have advantages and disadvantages, which will add up differently
depending on the factors in your specific situation. These factors are
many: product performance, product price, cost of installation tools and
fixtures, the number of connectors being installed, the level of experience
of the installer, the need—or lack thereof—for training, and a number of
additional factors.
2. Know about ceramic connectors. When considering connectors with
ceramic ferrules, remember that most ceramic ferrules are manufactured
by the same few Japanese companies. As such, there should be no signif-
icant price differences from different manufacturers.
3. Ease of installation may result in undesirable performance. Some con-
nectors are sold as “requiring no adhesive or epoxy.” The sales pitch
here is ease of installation. To be certain, the use of an adhesive or epoxy
is time-consuming and inconvenient. However, these other methods may
result in other performance disadvantages. For instance, all of the con-
nectors not requiring these materials use a clamping mechanism for grip-
ping the fiber. Use of this mechanism can allow the fiber to move into
118
CHAPTER 9 — GUIDELINES FOR FIBER OPTIC DESIGN AND INSTALLATION

and out of the connector, called “pistoning.” In some situations, this
pistoning will not result in any problems. However, in other situations, it
will cause severe problems, including destruction of active devices in the
optoelectronic boxes. The point in both of these examples is that your
choice of connectors needs to be made on the basis of performance and
cost, not solely on the basis of style or design, and not solely on the basis
of any single characteristic.
4. There is no substitute for experience. Whatever components you choose
to generally use, you must learn how to use them and practice doing it
continuously to not lose the technique. This is especially important for
connector termination and splicing. Unless you are doing it continu-
ously, you must work your way back up the learning curve each time you
begin a new job. Your yield (number of good connectors out of the num-
ber attempted) will be a function of how much practice you have. Setting
aside some time to practice before going on a field installation may be an
excellent investment.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the first thing needed to start evaluating fiber optic vendors,
products, and pricing?
a. How long the manufacturer has been in business.
b. A specification summary sheet for each component.
c. Alternative product options.
d. Experience with the product or vendor.
2. What is the most important thing to determine when talking to a repre-
sentative of a fiber optic manufacturer?
a. How long the person has worked for the company.
b. Who is the company’s competition.
c. Is the person knowledgeable about the products and applications
such as yours.
d. all of the above
3. Which of the following are true about these connector specifications?
Ease of installation, High performance, Low cost
a. T or F: Ceramic ferrule connectors have about the same performance
regardless of cost, so you should buy for price and delivery.
b. T or F: High performance connectors are easier to install.
c. T or F: Connectors that are easy to install are more expensive to buy
but may not be more expensive when labor is included in the
cost.
CHAPTER 9 — GUIDELINES FOR FIBER OPTIC DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
119


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
10
CABLE PLANT
LINK LOSS BUDGET
ANALYSIS
D A V E  C H A N E Y
In order to operate properly, a fiber optic network link must have an adequate
loss margin. That is, the total loss in the installed cable plant must be less than the
tolerable loss of the transmitters and receivers in the transmission equipment
being used. Figure 10-1 graphically illustrates the link loss parameters.
During the design phase, the cable plant loss must be estimated, based on
average component specifications and the total cable length, to ensure the chosen
equipment will work properly. Ideally, there should be at least 3 dB less loss in
the cable plant than the link dynamic range to allow for component degradation
and potential restoration splicing.
Loss budget analysis calculation and verification of a fiber optic system’s
operating characteristics includes all items in the cable plant, such as fiber length,
number of connectors and splices, and any other passive components such as
optical splitters. Optical loss is the key parameter for loss budget analysis, but
bandwidth must be considered in some high bit-rate multimode systems such as
FDDI, where a maximum cable length is specified regardless of optical loss.
Prior to implementing or designing a fiber optic circuit, a cable plant loss
analysis is required. Prior to system turn up, test the circuit with a source and
fiber optic power meter to ensure that it is within the loss budget.
121

Figure 10-1
Fiber optic link loss budget.
CABLE PLANT PASSIVE COMPONENT LOSS
Consider the link shown in Figure 10-1 for operation at 1300 nm on multimode
fiber.
Step 1. Fiber Loss at the Operating Wavelength
Cable length (km)
2.0
Typical fiber loss:
Fiber type
Multimode
Singlemode
Wavelength (nm)
850
1300
1300
1550
Fiber attenuation (dB/km)
3
1
0.5
0.4
Total fiber loss for system
operating on multimode
fiber at 1300 mn
2.0
122
CHAPTER 10 — CABLE PLANT LINK LOSS BUDGET ANALYSIS
System
Transmitter
System
Receiver
Connnector
Splice
Power Coupled from Transmitter
Connnector Loss
Fiber Loss
Link Loss Margin
Received Power
Receiver Sensitivity
Distance
Splice Loss
Power
Connnector
Connnector

Step 2. Connector Loss
Typical connector loss
0.5 dB
Total number of connector pairs
5 (including connectors on ends of cable.)
Total connector loss
2.5 dB
Step 3. Splice Loss
Typical splice loss
0.2 dB
Total number of splices
1
Total splice loss
0.2 dB
Step 4. Total Cable Plant Attenuation
Total fiber loss (dB)
2.0
Total connector loss (dB)
2.5
Total splice loss (dB)
0.2
Other (dB)
0
Total link loss (dB)
4.7
EQUIPMENT LINK LOSS BUDGET CALCULATION
Step 5. From Manufacturer’s Specification for Active Components
Operating wavelength (nm)
1300
Fiber type
MM
Receiver sensitivity (dBm@ specified BER)
–31
Average transmitter output (dBm)
–18
Dynamic range (dB)
13
Recommended excess margin (dB)
3
Maximum cable plant loss (dB)
10
Step 6. Loss Margin Calculation
Dynamic range (dB)
10
Cable plant link loss (dB)
–4.7
Link loss margin (dB)
5.3
This calculation must be verified by testing with a source of the proper wave
length and a power meter after installation. In some cases, where the equipment
may be operating on two different wavelengths or future upgrades are planned,
testing at two wavelengths may be required. If the calculated and tested values
differ considerably, but all the tested fibers in the cable are similar in loss,
remember the specifications used for calculations are not exact. As long as proper
operating margins are available, the cable plant should be acceptable.
CHAPTER 10 — CABLE PLANT LINK LOSS BUDGET ANALYSIS
123

REVIEW QUESTIONS
cable length: 3 km
number of connections: 2
number of splices: 1
operating wavelength: 1300 nm
fiber type: MM
receiver sensitivity: –35 dBm
average transmitter output: –25 dBm
Using this example fiber link and the typical losses on page 122, determine the
following.
1. Connector loss: _____________
a. 1 dB
b. .5 dB
c. 2 dB
d. 3 dB
2. Total cable plant loss: _____________
a. 7.2 dB
b. 4.2 dB
c. 5.2 dB
d. 2.7 dB
3. Maximum allowable loss (with excess margin factored in): ___________
a. 10 dB
b. 5 dB
c. 7 dB
d. 2.8 dB
4. Link loss margin: _____________
a. 3 dB
b. 2 dB
c. 1.8 dB
d. 2.8 dB
5. Will the above fiber link loss be acceptable if the wavelength was
changed to 850 nm? Assume the transmitter and receiver specifications
remain the same.
_____________ Yes
_____________ No
124
CHAPTER 10 — CABLE PLANT LINK LOSS BUDGET ANALYSIS

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
11
FIBER OPTIC
INSTALLATION SAFETY
P H I L  S H E C K L E R
When speaking of safety in fiber optic installation, the first image that most peo-
ple conjure up is a laser burning holes in metal or perhaps burning off warts.
These images have no relevance to fiber optics. Optical sources used in fiber
optics are of much lower power levels and are not focused into a time spot like
these applications.
In fact, most datacom links use LEDs of very low power levels, and even the
lasers in most fiber optic installations are of relatively low power. The light that
exits an optical fiber is also spreading out in a cone, so the farther away from the
end of the fiber you are, the lower the amount of power striking a given spot.
Furthermore, the light is of a wavelength that cannot penetrate your eye because
of the absorption of the water in your eyeball at those wavelengths. In order to
do any damage, the end of the fiber would have to be held against your eyeball
for hours! A complete safety study and report is in ANSI Z136.2, if you want to
read the details.
BARE FIBER SAFETY
However, fiber optics installation is not without risks. As part of the termination
and splicing process, you will be continually exposed to small scraps of bare
fiber, cleaved off the ends of the fibers being terminated or spliced. These scraps
125

are very dangerous. If they get into your eyes, they are very hard to flush out. The
ends are extremely sharp and can easily penetrate your skin. They invariably
break off and are very hard to find and remove. Most times, you have to wait for
them to infect and work themselves out, which can be painful!
Wear safety glasses at all times when working with bare fibers. Be careful not
to stick the broken ends into your fingers. Dispose of all scraps properly. You can
keep a piece of double-stick tape on the bench to stick them to or put them in a
properly marked paper cup or other container to dispose of later. Do not drop
them on the floor where they will stick in carpets or on shoes and be carried else-
where. And obviously do not eat anywhere near the work area.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
Fiber optic splicing and termination use various chemical cleaners and adhesives
as part of the processes. Normal handling procedures for these substances should
be observed. Even simple isopropyl alcohol used as a cleaner is flammable and
should be handled carefully. Note that fusion splicers use an electric arc to make
splices, so care must be taken to ensure no flammable gases are contained in the
space where fusion splicing is done.
Smoking should not be allowed around fiber optic work. The ashes from
smoking contribute to the dirt problems with fibers, in addition to the possible
presence of combustible substances.
FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION SAFETY RULES
1. Keep all food and beverages out of the work area. If fiber particles are
ingested, they can cause internal hemorrhaging.
2. Wear disposable aprons to minimize fiber particles on your clothing.
Fiber particles on your clothing can later get into food, drinks, and/or be
ingested by other means.
3. Always wear protective gloves and safety glasses with side shields. Treat
fiber optic splinters the same as you would glass splinters.
4. Never look directly into the end of fiber cables especially with a micro-
scope until you are positive that there is no light source at the other end.
Use a fiber optic power meter to make certain the fiber is dark. When
using an optical tracer or continuity checker, look at the fiber from an
angle at least 6 inches away from your eye to determine if the visible light
is present.
5. Only work in well-ventilated areas.
6. Contact lens wearers must not handle their lenses until they have thor-
oughly washed their hands.
126
CHAPTER 11 — FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION SAFETY

7. Do not touch your eyes while working with fiber optic systems until your
hands have been thoroughly washed.
8. Keep all combustible materials safely away from the curing ovens.
9. Put all cut fiber pieces in a safe place.
10. Thoroughly clean your work area when you are done.
11. Do not smoke while working with fiber optic systems.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The major safety concern regarding fiber optics is _____________
a. high power levels.
b. warts.
c. bare fiber ends.
d. explosion.
2. Double-stick tape can be used for _____________
a. removing fiber splinters.
b. protecting bare fiber from dust.
c. collecting bare fiber ends.
d. none of the above.
3. Fusion splicers should not be used _____________
a. with multimode fiber.
b. with singlemode fiber.
c. in a flammable space.
d. near an open flame.
4. The most important installation safety rule is _____________
a. to work quickly when using epoxy or solvents.
b. to brush any fiber ends off your clothes.
c. to wear safety glasses.
d. to work with a partner.
CHAPTER 11 — FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION SAFETY
127


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
12
PLANNING THE
INSTALLATION
T H O M A S  A.  D O O L E Y  A N D  
J E R A L D  R.  R O U N D S
THE PROCESS OF PLANNING
Planning is one of the most important parts of any project and is particularly crit-
ical in construction. One of the characteristics of construction is that it is not
repetitive. Although specific activities such as pulling cable or making termina-
tions appear to be repetitive, each is done under different circumstances. The
cumulative result of these small differences is that jobs differ considerably. As a
result, each job must be planned in detail to take its unique characteristics into
consideration.
In manufacturing, prototypes are designed and manufactured to test the
design and the manufacturing procedures. When mistakes and oversights occur,
another prototype is developed to solve the problems. This process is repeated
many times over until both the product and the process of making that product
are flawless, at which time the product goes into production.
In the construction industry, you do not have that luxury. Designers must
design correctly the first time. Constructors must build right the first time. Errors,
either in design or construction, are costly to repair or replace and cause time
delays. Some errors are hidden and do not become obvious until the system is
operating. Then, the mistakes become not only costly and time-consuming, but
129

are disastrous to those who depend on a fully operational and properly working
system.
The only way to produce a quality job is to avoid errors, omissions, and mis-
takes by properly planning and by establishing correct installation procedures. A
side benefit of the planning process, of course, is that it improves the efficiency of
installation, which results in higher profits for a contractor. Preplanning of every
aspect of fiber optic installation is not an option; it is a necessity.
MEASURING FOR CONDUIT PULLS
Planning for proper cable lengths is extremely important in fiber optic installa-
tion for two reasons. The most important is that splices cause loss in both signal
quality and strength—this should be avoided. In fact, most designers specify
point-to-point or device-to-device runs to avoid needless signal loss due to
splices. The second reason, especially important to the contractor, is that splices
cost time and money.
Measurements must be taken by an experienced field hand who understands
the importance of correct and accurate measurements. Often, this is done by the
project engineer or the job site superintendent.
There are three ways to measure the path to be used for the fiber. They are
listed from least to most desirable.
1. Measurements taken from the set of prints. This works if you want to
invest in a great deal of extra material. The objective of design drawings
is to show generally where runs are supposed to be located. However, it
is virtually impossible for the designer to anticipate all field conditions,
and it is not the designer’s intent to do so. Thus, taking accurate mea-
surements from the design drawings is not possible and results in runs
that are, at best, marginally long or short. Long pieces of fiber must be
recut and short pieces are wasted.
2. Field measurements taken with a wheel. A site visit with a measuring
wheel and a set of drawings will yield much better accuracy. Certain
characteristics of the job site are given perspective with a field visit that
are not obvious from inspection of the drawings alone. During the site
visit, the drawings can be verified for accuracy, installation details such
as pulling locations can be noted, changes such as variations in align-
ment or elevation can be identified, obstacles that might hinder the pull
can be discovered, and termination locations can be recorded.
3. Measuring with measurement/pull tape. By far the most accurate and
efficient method of measurement is with measurement/pull tape (some-
times called mule tape). This is a flat ribbon, consecutively numbered in
feet, that is usually made with polyester or aramid yarn and sometimes
130
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION

coated with plastic for waterproofing. It comes in different lengths and
pull strengths.
Completing the measurement process requires adding extra length for
splices, terminations, and future access coils, if specified. The amount of addi-
tional cable needed for splicing depends on site conditions, splicing method used,
and long range plans for cable usage. Termination needs only about 7 to 10 feet
of additional cable beyond the place the terminal will be mounted. Access or
repair coils generally range in length from 30 to 50 feet per span. A good guide-
line is to allow 1 percent extra for outside plant cable and 5 to 7 percent extra for
inside cable.
SPLICING
Fusion splicing cannot be done in explosive environments such as manholes.
Therefore, each end coming into the splice that will finally end up in the manhole
will have to have enough length to reach a tent or van near the manhole where
the splice will actually be made. Usually, about 30 feet of extra length should be
added for each side of the splice—resulting in additional 60 feet of cable.
Mechanical splicing can be done inside manholes. Mechanical splices require
only about 10 feet of overlap, instead of the 60 feet for a fusion splice. Remember
that these measurements are in addition to whatever length will be required to
properly rack the cable within the manhole.
TERMINATIONS
When terminating fiber, it is important to place the terminal in a safe, noncon-
gested area. If the end user has no preferences, place the terminal as close as pos-
sible to the fiber optic transmission equipment. It is most important to protect the
exposed fibers, so choice of a termination location must consider a working envi-
ronment that allows adequate working space.
EFFICIENT PULLING
When installers first become involved in fiber optic installations, they can easily
become overconfident about how much cable length can be successfully pulled at
one time. This is probably because of the small size and weight of fiber optic
cable. It is better to divide a pull in half, or even thirds, usually at corners or pull
boxes, than to fail in pulling a long run.
A pulling operation must be discontinued when the pulling tension reaches
the cable limit. The discontinued pull will have to be aborted, the cable pulled
back out and replaced on the reel, and the pull started again, either with shorter
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION
131

runs or better lubrication or both. The cable may be reused if the pull or extrac-
tion has not damaged it.
Every effort must be made to plan the pull so that pulling locations have
plenty of work space. The knowledgeable designer will designate several appro-
priate locations for breaking up the pull. The installer must ensure that if the
designer has not indicated where multiple pulls are necessary, he or she can deter-
mine appropriate locations for intermediate pulls before work is begun in the
field. It is better to tie up one lead technician before the pulling starts than the
whole crew after it has begun.
Most point-to-point pulls can be accomplished by crews of two or three peo-
ple. One person pays the cable off the reel and into the duct in order to reduce tail
load (the term used to designate that force required to get cable off the reel and
into the duct). One or two people pull at the other end. The size of crew is deter-
mined by considerations such as:
Length of pull
Total degrees of bend
Tail loading
Use of lubricant
Use of power pulling equipment
When planning to start a pull, the installer must make sure there is enough
time to finish the job the same day. It is unwise to leave half a reel of cable, worth
anywhere from $5,000 to $375,000, lying around in unsecured areas. If a reel
must be left exposed to the public, strong consideration should be given to assign-
ing a security guard to watch over the reel. An occasional investment of $75 or
$100 to avoid theft of an expensive reel of cable, to say nothing of the distur-
bance to the job if the cable is gone when installers arrive to begin work in the
morning, is a wise investment
Exact terminating locations must be identified in advance. This obvious
though often overlooked step can lead to costly mistakes if forgotten. The cable
must be pulled all the way to where it will be terminated, not just into the room.
The designer should provide a fold-flat diagram (which results from folding out
the walls of the room as if they were the sides of a box hinged at the intersections
of the walls and the floor) for each terminating room as a part of the initial plan-
ning walkout.
ADEQUATE DUCT SPACE
Current industry practice, outside telephony, tends not to utilize available duct
space very efficiently. As a result, one often finds a 1/2-inch fiber cable as the only
cable in a 4-inch duct. As a matter of good design, cable should fill approxi-
mately 60 to 70 percent of the available duct space.
132
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION

Since it is difficult to pull cable into a duct that is already occupied, it is very
important to detail, on the print, where the different media will be pulled. Since
most fiber cables are 3/4-inch or smaller in diameter, for efficient use, the larger
3- or 4-inch diameter conduits should be subdivided with innerducts.
Innerduct is flexible, nonmetallic conduit that is pulled in multiples into the
main conduit. It is made of polyethylene and comes with a pull rope already
installed within it. Innerduct serves a threefold purpose:
Subdividing the main duct
Protecting the fiber cable
Reducing friction
The inside of the innerduct is designed to let the cable glide smoothly within
it. This is accomplished by the use of special coatings and by the physical proper-
ties of the inner wall. Corrugated innerduct is the most popular form because of
its flexibility. A 3-inch conduit can be subdivided with up to four 1-inch
innerducts; up to six 1-inch innerducts can be placed in a 4-inch conduit.
Innerduct not only allows the initial fiber installation to be effectively accom-
plished, but allows expansion capabilities to be built into the system. This can
provide great return on investment if there is any expectation of future expansion
of the fiber system.
INITIAL PLANNING WALKOUT
Prior to the start of cable pulling, a planning walkout should be performed by the
project engineer, the lead technician, and the project superintendent. The project
engineer, responsible for system design, will be well aware of the customer’s
needs. The lead technician, an experienced fiber installer who will not necessarily
be the one who will do the installation, has the responsibility to plan and to
answer as many questions as possible before the crew is on site. The superinten-
dent can provide general project information and needs to know as much as pos-
sible about the installer’s activities to coordinate with other trades and activities
in the vicinity of the installation.
The walkout should start at one termination site (Figure 12-1). This location
will be designated with a clearly stated name, such as “#12 Communication
Room.” A rough fold-flat sketch will identify the fiber terminal location and
locations of other major system components, as well as other relevant features in
the room. The floor and walls will be marked with a pencil to indicate approxi-
mate locations of terminations. Notes should be made on the sketch concerning
conduit type and size, as well as whether pull string or measurement/pull tape has
been used. Verification of whether multiple ducts are involved is requested from
the superintendent.
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION
133

Figure 12-1
Preplanning walkout sketch.
Identification should be made defining which conduits go where either by
visual inspection or by tugging on the pull tape. The path of the conduit should
then be walked, making note on the diagram of any pull boxes, manholes, or
other abnormalities. This process must be carried out for each run on the job.
The more information the engineer provides on the print, the faster the
installation will progress. Remember, the object of this planning walkout is to
prevent the entire pulling crew from being idle while the lead technician tries to
track down the engineer or superintendent for clarifications or additional infor-
mation.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. The most accurate method of measuring for conduit pulls is ___________
a. from a set of prints.
b. field measurements taken with a wheel.
c. measuring with a pull tape.
134
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION
1
2
3
4
5
1 Room Location for Terminations
2 Bends
3 Conduit Size
4 Manholes
5 Pull Locations

2. How much extra cable must be added to make a fusion splice in a man-
hole?
a. 30 feet
b. 1 percent
c. 30 feet for each side of the splice
d. 10 feet
3. Subdividing larger conduits with innerducts _____________
a. efficiently uses duct space.
b. allows for future expansion.
c. offers additional protection to the fiber optic cable.
d. all of the above
4. The purpose of a planning walkout is to _____________
a. get a rough idea of the installation.
b. measure the conduit run.
c. clarify all the final details.
d. none of the above
CHAPTER 12 — PLANNING THE INSTALLATION
135


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
13
FIBER OPTIC
CABLE PLANT
DOCUMENTATION
J I M  H AY E S
Documenting the fiber optic cable plant is a necessary part of the design and
installation process for the fiber optic network. Documenting the installation
properly as part of the planning process can save time and material in the instal-
lation and allow better planning for upgrading. During installation, it will speed
the cable pulling and installation since the routing and terminations are already
documented. After installation, the documentation can be completed with test
data for acceptance by the end user. If equipment is repositioned on a network, as
is always the case, proper documentation will allow easier rerouting to the proper
end points. And during troubleshooting, proper documentation is mandatory for
tracing links and finding faults.
The documentation process for fiber optics, however, is different from that
of most copper cable installations. Where a copper cable of Cat 3 or 5 type is gen-
erally used to connect a single link, fiber optic cables—especially backbone
cables—may contain many fibers connecting a number of different links that may
not even be going to the same place. Furthermore, copper cable may be tested
only for continuity while loss data will be required for most fiber optic cable
plants.
137

The fiber optic cable plant, therefore, must be documented as to the path of
every fiber, connection, and test. Data that should be kept include the following:
Cable: manufacturer, type, length
Splice and termination points (at distance markers)
Fiber: fiber type and size, splice and connection data, losses
Connections: types (splice or connectors and types), fibers connected, losses
Paths: where the link path goes in every cable
Most of this data can be kept in a database that stores component, connec-
tion, and test data. Long links may also have OTDR data that can be stored as
printouts or in special file formats for later viewing in case of problems. If the
OTDR data is stored digitally, a database of data files should be kept to allow
finding specific OTDR traces more easily.
CABLE PLANT RECORD KEEPING
Good cable plant record keeping can be used for many purposes.
Designing the Cable Plant
By starting with a simple graphic package showing the spatial relationship of the
interconnections, you can design the layout of the entire cable plant; assign cable,
fiber, and patch panel designations; and provide reports for each of the compo-
nents and quantity used. For every cable you should specify the type of cable,
installation method, number of fibers, types of fibers, and the length of the run.
Bidding the Installation Job
Good records and reports will give you all the information you need for estimat-
ing the total material content of the job and the length of cable runs. Individual
cable reports will give you the details on special requirements for installation
(direct burial, aerial, conduit, and so on) to help price labor costs and the total job.
Installing the Cable Plant
Records should provide the information you need to send materials to the proper
location, determine what needs to be installed where, and make the proper
interconnections. Patch panel printouts can be left taped inside the panel covers
to provide local documentation of proper connections for checking during
troubleshooting.
Testing the Cable Plant
After the cable plant is installed, keep test data on each individual fiber run. You
can test any link or end-to-end loss and store it as a permanent record associated
138
CHAPTER 13 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PLANT DOCUMENTATION

with that fiber link. You can compare the data if you retest at a later date or have
problems requiring troubleshooting or restoration. Note how the test was per-
formed and what instruments were used. Use a power meter and source to get
accurate end to end loss data and only use an OTDR if you need to verify splice
loss (requiring bidirectional OTDR measurements) or to insure no bending losses
were induced during installation.
Troubleshooting Cable Plant Problems
A well-documented cable plant will be much easier to troubleshoot. The docu-
mentation will tell you where cables go, what they are connected to, and how far
they run between points, making problem areas easier to find. Test data will indi-
cate any degradation over time that needs to be addressed.
Documenting the Cable Plant for Customer Acceptance
Most customers require documentation of the cable plant before acceptance.
Good record keeping from the beginning, including all the data on the cable plant
and final testing, will require only a copy as a report to the customer for accep-
tance. If customers wish to maintain their own cable plants, they can use the same
data for future reference.
THE DOCUMENTATION PROCESS
Before you start entering data, you should have a basic layout for the network
completed. A sketch may work for a small building network but a large campus
or metropolitan network will probably need a complex computer-aided design
(CAD) layout. The best way to set up the preliminary data is to use a facility
drawing showing the locations of all cables and connection points. Identify all 
the cables and closets/panels and then you are ready to transfer this data to a
database.
You must know where all the cables go in the network and what every fiber
will be connected to. You should know the specifications on every cable and
fiber: what types of fiber are being used, how many fibers, cable construction
type, estimated length, and installation technique (buried, aerial, plenum, riser,
etc.)
It will help to know what types of panels and closet hardware are being used,
and what end equipment (if any) is to be connected. If you are installing a big
campus cable plant with many dark (unused) fibers, some will probably be left
open at the panels, and that must be documented also. When designing a net-
work, it is a very good idea to have spare fibers and interconnection points in
panels for future expansion, rerouting for repair, or moving network equipment
(Figure 13-1).
CHAPTER 13 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PLANT DOCUMENTATION
139

Figure 13-1
Sample of a cable report format.
140
CHAPTER 13 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PLANT DOCUMENTATION
05/19/2000
Cable List Detailed Report
page 1
Cable ID: C001
Length: 1130 m
Fibers: 8
Type: MM 62.5
Mfg: NLC
Color: Orange
Notes: Pulled through 4 in PVC duct in steam line tunnels to Library.
8 fibers, 900 um buffer, color coded.
Cost Estimates:
Cable ____________________________________________________
Installation ________________________________________________
Termination _______________________________________________
(if included with cable)
Panel A
* Fiber ID *
Notes
Panel B
ADM01-01-0001
C001-0001
red
SCA01-01
ADM01-01-0002
C001-0002
orange
SCA01-02
ADM01-01-0003
C001-0003
yellow
SCA01-03
ADM01-01-0004
C001-0004
blue
SCA01-04
ADM01-01-0005
C001-0005
green
SCA01-05
ADM01-01-0006
C001-0006
violet
SCA01-06
ADM01-01-0007
C001-0007
black
SCA01-07
ADM01-01-0008
C001-0008
white
SCA01-08
PROTECTING RECORDS
Cable plant documentation records are very important. Keep several backup
copies of each document, whether it is stored in a computer or on paper, in dif-
ferent locations. In fact, keep several copies on disks and on paper in different
physical locations in case of disasters. If a copy is presented to the customer, the
installer should maintain his or her own records for future projects. Access to
modify records may be restricted using passwords if one wishes to stop unautho-
rized changes to the documentation.

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What data should be included with the documentation?
a. ________________
b. ________________
c. ________________
d. ________________
e. ________________
2. The first step in documenting a cable plant is _____________
a. a database.
b. a sketch.
c. test data.
d. OTDR traces.
CHAPTER 13 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PLANT DOCUMENTATION
141


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
14
ESTIMATING AND
BIDDING FIBER OPTIC
INSTALLATION
F.  D O U G L A S  E L L I O T T  A N D  
P A U L  R O S E N B E R G
THE ART OF ESTIMATING
In the beginning of this chapter we are concerned with the art of estimating,
which may include estimating a building’s communications system, LANs, or any
other similar project. We look at the tools, the skills, the experience, and the
background that the estimator needs to do the job. In this chapter we generalize
the procedures and use generic materials if required.
Anyone involved with or considering the art of estimating must realize from
the outset that there are certain skills that require proficiency before the job
should be attempted. If you do not have these skills and are not willing to develop
them, you could be heading for big problems. You may get away with a bluff on
the first several jobs, but eventually ineptitude will give you away.
143

SKILLS
Knowledge of Mathematics
You must have a good knowledge of mathematics. Let me qualify this statement
by saying that many a job has been lost by improperly adding a column of fig-
ures. Many jobs have been taken because a decimal point has been misplaced
somewhere along the line or figures have been transposed incorrectly. A quantity
may not have been properly calculated or extended into the estimate itself. When
the final figures are incorrect, you are in a costly mess.
Command of the English Language
You must have a good command of the English language and a phenomenal
knowledge of acronyms and abbreviations. Remember, you are probably not the
only person who will read your estimates. You might be called away on business
and someone else may have to complete your project. You will, in all probability,
have to hand over your calculations and computations to the project manager in
order to control the hours, check your labor units, material lists, and so on. If
your colleagues cannot understand your writing and/or mathematical figures on
the pages, how can they ever hope to work with them? There are hundreds of
acronyms and abbreviations associated with communications and fiber optics.
You must be fluent in them.
Imagination
You must have a vivid and skilled imagination. You have to be able to imagine or
visualize what the finished project or specific portions of that project will actually
look like. Imagination is an acquired skill and is developed with experience. If
you are mounting a distribution/patch panel on a wall in a telecom closet, you
must be able to visualize the finished item in order to do that job properly. Too
many people lack this ability and miss out on major components or labor units. It
is hard to express the amount of imagination that may be required for you to do
a proper and complete job, but please believe me, it is required. Those of us who
lack this ability should try drawing small detail sketches in order to ensure that
they have included all pertinent materials. This can also be an advantage if you
have the same type of repetitive installation on several floors of a building.
Understanding of On-Site Expenses
If you do not know the project and the industry very well, you cannot hope to
estimate it properly. If you are not aware of the procedures for installing connec-
tors, making splices, installing the cables (both copper and fiber), testing require-
ments and procedures, and all the other details of the installation, you cannot
estimate the job. You have to be aware of the different product lines out there,
144
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION

and how they are to be installed and protected. If you are not familiar with the
time needed and the care that must be exercised in the installation of these prod-
ucts, you cannot estimate the job. I find it very difficult to understand how a non-
tradesperson or a novice estimator in communications and fiber optics can
possibly hope to properly and completely quote a job and show a profit. If this
happens, then there must be a lot of blind luck and prayer involved.
Handwriting Skills
Another area that must be considered when you are estimating is your writing
skills. If your handwriting is like a doctor’s, print everything, as most estimators
do. The reason is simple: People must be able to read what is on the paper. This
is especially true in three or four months, or a year or two later, when you have
to go back over a project, buy materials, make final plans for the installation, and
schedule deliveries and workers.
TOOLS
I make sure that the materials and tools that I use when estimating are of the very
highest quality for reliability and consistency. Some of these items you may not
think of as tools, but they are the tools of the estimator’s trade.
I use a pencil for the simple reason that everyone makes mistakes; it is much
easier to erase pencil than ink.
Your adding machine or calculator should only be the type that can provide
you with printout or tape. Pocket calculators do not work. They have a very lim-
ited means of storing information, if any at all, and thus no means for you to
review or crosscheck your calculations.
Tape recorders come in very handy when going out on a site visit, or for that
matter when you think of something that would be of use later. Either writing the
thought down or recording it on tape saves it for future consideration. The site
visit can be a disaster without a tape recorder. When you talk into a tape recorder
on the site, the tour will all come back to you when you play back your notes.
Hopefully, you will not miss out on the important aspects of the project. Cer-
tainly you are still going to have to take measurements and so on, but a lot of the
detail can be saved very accurately on a tape recorder.
Another tool that comes in very handy is a camera. If you are working on an
existing building and you want to have a permanent record of some site details, a
camera will do the trick. On a new installation within an existing building, or
within a building that is being constructed from the ground up, a picture can be
worth a thousand words, and may show details that the human eye can miss. Be
sure that you ask permission to use a camera on any site—owners get very ner-
vous and upset if they think you are an industrial spy.
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
145

Estimating sheets can be as simple as a few lines on a piece of paper with a
heading, or as fancy as you want to get, with company logos and letterhead. Esti-
mating sheets are available from many stationery suppliers in a loose leaf pad
form (Figure 14-1). From left to right: the first column lists the item number; col-
umn two lists the quantity of the items; column three lists the name and short
description of item; column four lists the individual item cost; column five lists
cost of the individual items (col. 3) multiplied by the quantity of the item (col. 2).
Column six lists the labor cost per unit item, and column seven lists the labor cost
per unit (col. 6) multiplied by the quantity of the item (col. 2). The bottom line of
the page is for the dollar totals in columns 5 and 7.
Figure 14-2 shows a summary sheet or a recap sheet. It is exactly the same
type of calculation sheet, although the headings are different. Each individual page
of the estimate and the individual estimating group divisions (e.g., group 1 cable,
group 2 connectors, etc.) should be listed here. In the case of a smaller project, the
individual pages can sometimes be listed so that you can get a good overview of
the whole project. Column 7 can be used for factoring purposes—if the cable
installation listed on page one will be done from a ladder more than 5 feet and less
than 10 feet high, you may want to increase the labor cost 5 percent to cover this
problem. Most estimating manuals will list approximate factoring percentages.
Some people would rather use the computerized estimating programs on the
market today, and I find them very satisfactory. However, they do not replace the
estimator. The estimator still must work up the labor units and the proper
description, extension, and so on, of the job. The use of a computerized program,
although it may ease the pain slightly, is not the total answer. There is still a
tremendous amount of leg work that must be done in order to do a proper and
complete estimating job.
SITE VISIT
Just as skill in your particular job or being very competent with your trade is
important, so the site visit or project tour is every bit as important. The site visit
will give you insight into what may confront you when you eventually come onto
the job site. You may see obstructions to getting your equipment onto the site.
The whole job may have to be done from 12-foot ladders instead of rolling scaf-
fold. You will not know unless you look.
On a site visit it is necessary to take in and digest everything that you possi-
bly can. You are on the site to equip yourself with some background so that you
can properly and completely put together an accurate package for the estimate. A
site visit will show your actual equipment locations, routing for your conduits,
and proper elevations. It will allow you to apply the architectural drawings that
usually accompany the bid package. If the drawing package is incomplete, com-
plete it. Also, during site visits, be especially aware of construction in progress or
146
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION

Figure 14-1
Sample estimation sheet.
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
147
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
13
14
14
15
15
16
16
17
17
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
28
28
29
29
30
30
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
35
35
36
36
37
37
38
38
39
39
40
40
41
41
42
42
43
43
#
Prepared by
Approved by
Initials
Date
EXAMPLE 1 ELECTRIC LTD.
ANYWHERE U.S.A. 45678
UPS & DOWNS TOWERS PROJECT
CABLE REQUIRED
PDS
4/95
DAP
5/95
QTY.
DESCRIPTION
COST PER UNIT
LABOR
LABOR
UNIT
TOTAL
PER
TOTAL
COST
UNIT
COST
100'
6c DISTRIBUTION 248
248000
12/M
60000
CABLE
PAGE TOTALS
248000
60000
4
3
2
1

Figure 14-2
Sample summary or recap sheet.
148
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11
12
12
13
13
14
14
15
15
16
16
17
17
18
18
19
19
20
20
21
21
22
22
23
23
24
24
25
25
26
26
27
27
28
28
29
29
30
30
31
31
32
32
33
33
34
34
35
35
36
36
37
37
38
38
39
39
40
40
41
41
42
42
43
43
#
Prepared by
Approved by
Initials
Date
EXAMPLE 1 ELECTRIC LTD.
RECAP SHEET
UPS & DOWNS TOWERS PROJECT
PDS
4/95
DAP
5/95
PAGE
DESCRIPTION
MATERIAL
LABOR
TOTAL
FACTOR
COST
COST
COST
PERCENT
1
CABLE REQ’D
248000
60000
308000
5%
PAGE TOTALS
248000
60000
308000
4
3
2
1

planned changes that may affect your estimating. Changes in construction or
location of buildings or equipment, as well as changes in elevations, can cause big
changes in estimates.
FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATIONS—THIS IS REALITY
When we deal with a fiber optic communications project, we will be looking in
most cases at an existing office building or factory that is to be retrofitted and/or
upgraded in order to provide the customer with a state-of-the-art, high-speed
communications system that will satisfy needs now and well into the future.
What we have to do is to change the often unstructured wiring system into a
structured wiring system that will comply with federal, state, and local codes. We
may also have to deal with the Telecommunications Industry Association/
Electronics Industries Alliance (TIA/EIA) standards. We must calculate what we
are going to need in the way of hardware and the locations for it.
In most instances, the communications room, wiring or telecom closet (what-
ever you care to call it), in existing buildings is totally inadequate. It was proba-
bly inadequate when the building was being built 25 or 30 years earlier, but even
more so now. Many of the communications rooms were shared rooms. Not only
was the telephone equipment mounted there, but so was the lighting and power
transformer and electrical distribution panel. No wonder there is trouble with
interference in the communications systems!
Most users have a number of different types of data and voice cabling
already installed: thicknet and thinnet Ethernet coax, twinax for IBM systems,
bus and tag for mainframes, unshielded twisted pair (UTP), shielded twisted pair
(STP), and voice-grade wire. Much of that will not work with the high-speed
equipment that they are now purchasing. Thus, they are starting to look at and
go with fiber. They are looking at retrofitting in a big way. They want a system
that will be free from radio frequency interference (RFI) and electromagnetic
interference (EMI) interference. The only way to do this is with fiber optics. With
fiber optics, they have a good clean clear signal that they are making good use of.
Therefore, the project will probably be to remove all the existing copper cabling
that is used for communications and replace it with fiber optics.
A site visit to a plant such as that can be absolutely frightening. You would
have to be looking at routing. Can you use the existing conduits? What are the
temperature conditions? Are you are going to have high heat problems? What are
the dirt conditions? What about winter cold temperatures? In other words, what
are all of the contingencies that we may be dealing with? All of a sudden we have
a nightmare, or do we? That nightmare can make you a lot of money if you are
careful, good, observant, and have the skills to present a good proposal.
Good planning and proper reuse of the existing facilities can save the cus-
tomer money and make your bid much more competitive. Remember that you
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
149

can pull a lot more fiber optic cable (and have a lot more capacity) in a conduit
than you can UTP or coax. Thus proper distribution of the backbone/riser cable
will greatly reduce cost. Now take this idea, put it to paper, and work it up.
Make the customer an offer that he or she cannot refuse.
Treat estimating as a skilled art. Do not cut corners. Utilize the most up-to-
date materials, tools, and computer programs. Use every one of your skills at hand
to your advantage. Be informed and keep informed. Technology is changing as
you read this book. Set aside time to read and study your craft. Take pride in your
work and enjoy it. Do not simply endure your work or you will never be a success.
ESTIMATING PROCESS FOR OPTICAL FIBER INSTALLATIONS
The first step in estimating is to ascertain the overall requirements of the job. You
must get a clear picture in your mind of how this job will flow; and more impor-
tant, where will the money come from, and when. In addition, you must under-
stand the scope of the work you are quoting on, and exactly what will be
required of you. These are primary concerns, and are the first considerations in
any good estimate. In order to verify that all of these factors are considered, many
estimators use checklists that they review for every project. You should develop
your own.
The three-part estimating process that I recommend is fairly standard:
1. The takeoff
2. Writing up the estimate
3. Summarizing the estimate
The process of “taking off” the job is literally taking the information off the
plans and transferring it to separate sheets. The estimator interprets the graphic
symbols on the plans and translates them into words and numbers, which can
then be processed.
In writing up the estimate, the estimator transfers the takeoff information to
special sheets, assigns both material and labor prices to each item, and totals
these prices on each sheet.
In the summary, the estimator adds all the pricing sheets to give a total cost
for the material and labor for the project. Any other costs that will be required for
the project’s completion, overhead for the maintenance of the company’s internal
operations, and last, profit must also be included to determine a final bid price.
Every piece of material that will be used on the installation in question must
be itemized; each item must be assigned a material cost and a labor cost. You
then multiply these costs by the quantities and add them all up to arrive at a base
cost. From base cost, you add overhead, profit, and other job expenses to arrive
at a selling price. The differences between applying this process to optical fiber
cables and copper conductor cables are as follows.
150
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION

Fragility delays. Since optical fibers are vulnerable to damage, they must be
handled differently than copper cables. You must use higher labor units for
these cables than you might use for similar-sized copper cables. The estimat-
ing process can be handled in much the same way as other cables, but the
labor units that you use will need to be a bit higher (10–20%), to account for
the extra care. Because of this fragility (note that the cables are very tough,
often tougher than copper cables. The fibers, however, are very fragile, being
made of glass). The cables must attach to the pulling line differently (the
pulling tension can be applied to only one part of the cable, a layer called the
“strength member”), and cannot be pulled with too much tension. Pulling
too hard on an optical fiber cable will tend to either pull the layers apart or
damage the optical fibers.
Testing. Optical cables require quite a bit more testing than copper cables,
with the exception of Cat 5 UTP used in high-speed networks. The general
testing procedures that the cables require (including inspecting the cable
upon delivery) are included in the basic labor rates given in Table 14-1. In
addition to this, you should include extra testing time for each fiber installed.
Note that we are talking each and every fiber, not each cable. Since one cable
may contain hundreds of fibers, there is a very big difference in terms; make
sure that you account for every length of fiber.
The Takeoff
The process of taking off high-tech systems is essentially the same as the process
used for conventional estimating. By taking off, we mean the process of taking
information off a set of plans and/or specifications, and transferring it to estimate
sheets. This requires the interpretation of graphic symbols on the plans, and
transferring them into words and numbers that can be processed. Briefly, the
rules that apply to the takeoff process follow.
1. Review the symbol list. This is especially important for high-tech work.
High-tech systems are not standardized and therefore vary widely. Make
sure you know what the symbols you are looking at represent. This is
fundamental.
2. Review the specifications. Obviously it is necessary to read a project’s
specifications, but it is also important to review the specifications before
you begin your takeoff. Doing this may alert you to small details on the
plans that you might otherwise overlook.
3. Clearly and distinctly mark all items that have been counted. Again, this
is obvious, but a lot of people do this rather poorly. This must be done in
such a way that you can instantly ascertain what has been counted. This
means that you should color every counted item completely. Do not just
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
151

put a check mark next to something you counted; color it in so fully that
there will never be any room for question.
4. Always take off the most expensive items first. By taking off the most
expensive items first, you are assuring that you will have numerous addi-
tional looks through the plans before you are done with them. Very
often, you will find stray items that you missed on your first run through.
You want as many chances as possible to find all of the costly items. This
way, if you make a mistake, it will be less expensive.
5. Obtain quantities from other quantities whenever possible. For example,
when you take off conduit, you do not try to count every strap that will
be needed. Instead, you simply calculate how many feet of pipe will be
required and then include one strap for every 7–10 feet of pipe. We call
this obtaining a quantity from a quantity. Do it whenever you can. It will
save you good deal of time.
6. Do not rush. Cost estimating, by its very nature, is a slow, difficult
process. In order to do a good estimate, you must do a careful, efficient
takeoff. Do not waste any time, but definitely do not go so fast that you
miss things.
7. Maintain a good atmosphere. When performing estimates, it is very
important to remain free of interruptions and to work in a good environ-
ment. Spending hours counting funny symbols on large, crowded sheets
of paper is not particularly easy; make it as easy on yourself as you can.
8. Develop mental pictures of the project. As you take off a project, picture
yourself in the rooms, looking at the items you are taking off. Picture the
item you are taking off in its place, its surroundings, the things around it,
and how it connects to other items. If you get in the habit of doing this,
you will greatly increase your skill.
Labor Units
The labor units shown in Table 14-1 are necessarily average figures. They are
based on the following conditions:
1. An average worker
2. A maximum working height of 12 feet
3. A normal availability of workers
4. A reasonably accessible work area
5. Proper tools and equipment
6. A building not exceeding three stories
7. Normal weather conditions
152
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION

CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
153
Table 14-1
Fiber Optics Labor Units
Labor Units (Hours)
Labor Item
Normal
Difficult
Optical fiber cables, per foot:
1–4 fibers, in conduit
0.016
0.02
1–4 fibers, accessible locations
0.014
0.018
12–24 fibers, in conduit
0.02
0.025
12–24 fibers, accessible locations
0.018
0.023
48 fibers, in conduit
0.03
0.038
48 fibers, accessible locations
0.025
0.031
72 fibers, in conduit
0.04
0.05
72 fibers, accessible locations
0.032
0.04
144 fibers, in conduit
0.05
0.065
144 fibers, accessible locations
0.04
0.05
Hybrid cables:
1–4 fibers, in conduit
0.02
0.025
1–4 fibers, accessible locations
0.017
0.021
12–24 fibers, in conduit
0.024
0.03
12–24 fibers, accessible locations
0.022
0.028
Testing, per fiber
0.12
0.24
Splices, including prep and failures, trained workers:
fusion
0.30
0.45
mechanical
0.40
0.50
array splice, 12 fibers
1.00
1.30
Coupler (connector-connector)
0.15
0.25
Terminations, including prep and failures, trained workers:
polishing required
0.40
0.60
no-polish connectors
0.30
0.45
FDDI dual connector, including terminations
0.80
1.00
Miscellaneous:
cross-connect box, 144 fibers, not including splices
3.00
4.00
splice cabinet
2.00
2.50
splice case
1.80
2.25
breakout kit, 6 fibers
1.00
1.40
tie-wraps
0.01
0.02
wire markers
0.01
0.01

Any set of labor units must be tempered to the project to which it is applied.
It is a starting point, not the final word. Difficult situations typically require an
increase of 20 to 30 percent. Some very difficult installations may require even
more. Especially good working conditions or especially good workers may allow
discounts to the labor units of 10 to 20 percent, possibly more in some circum-
stances.
Charges
Training
Many high-tech installations require you to teach the owners or their representa-
tives to use the system. This is a difficulty peculiar to high-tech work, since you
do not have to spend time teaching building owners how to use conventional
electrical items, but you will certainly have to spend time teaching them how to
use a sound system. Not only that, you may have to supply operating instruc-
tions, teach a number of different people, and answer numerous questions over
the phone after the project is long over.
The question here is whether you include training charges in special labor or
include these costs as a separate job expense. This decision is essentially at the
discretion of the estimator. It is, however, usually best to charge general training
to job expenses, and to include incidental training in special labor.
If you come from a background in the electrical construction industry, make
sure that you accept these expenses as an integral part of your projects. Do not
avoid them. The people who are buying your systems need this training, and they
have a right to expect it. Include these costs in your estimates, and choose your
most patient workers to do the training.
Overhead
What percentage of overhead to assign to any type of electrical work (and how to
assign it) can be a hotly debated subject. Everyone seems to have his or her own
opinion. Whatever percentage of overhead you charge, consider raising it a bit
for high-tech projects. As we have already said, the purchasing process is far
more difficult for high-tech work than it is for other more established types of
work. In addition, there are a number of other factors that are more difficult for
high-tech work than for more traditional types of work.
Almost every factor we can identify argues for including more overhead
charges for high-tech work. Not necessarily a lot more, but certainly something
more. When we contract to do high-tech installations, we are agreeing to go
through uncharted, or at least partially uncharted, waters. This involves greater
risk. And if we do encounter additional risk, it is only sensible to make sure we
cover these risks. We do this by charging a little more for overhead and/or profit.
154
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. List the five skills that are important to estimating.
1. ____________________
2. ____________________
3. ____________________
4. ____________________
5. ____________________
2. The three standard parts of estimating are
1. ____________________.
2. ____________________.
3. ____________________.
3. What is the tallest building assumed by the labor units?
a. two stories
b. three stories
c. four stories
d. five stories
4. What is the normal labor unit for testing 12 fibers?
a. .12
b. 1.44
c. .44
d. .24
5. Labor units in difficult situations typically increase __________
a. 5–10 percent.
b. 10–20 percent.
c. 20–30 percent.
d. 40 percent or more.
CHAPTER 14 — ESTIMATING AND BIDDING FIBER OPTIC INSTALLATION
155


C
H
A
P
T
E
R
15
FIBER OPTIC
CABLE PULLING
T H O M A S  A .  D O O L E Y  A N D  
J E R A L D  R .  R O U N D S
(with hints from Northern Lights Cable)
Electrical wire installers know how to pull cable. The basic approach to pulling
fiber optic cable differs little from the techniques used to pull copper or alu-
minum. However, just as aluminum responds differently than copper when
pulled, fiber has its own idiosyncrasies. The focus of this chapter is as much on
what to avoid as on how to pull fiber optic cable (Figure 15-1).
AVOIDING DISASTER
The first step in pulling cable is to measure and cut the material. Inaccurate mea-
surements are a disaster in fiber cable installation. Splices are much more critical
with fiber than with metal cable because a minimum loss budget must be main-
tained and splices cause loss. Thus, assumptions and guess work are simply not
allowed.
The physical characteristics of fiber cable must always be borne in mind dur-
ing the installation process. The two characteristics that are particularly impor-
tant during the installation process are tensile stress (pulling load) and bending
radius.
157

Figure 15-1
Fiber optic cable is often installed in conduit for outside plant
applications.
The glass fiber within the cable is fragile, and although the cable has been
designed to protect the fiber, it is more easily damaged than metal cables and
requires greater care during the process of cable pulling. You simply cannot
afford to break fiber cable during the pulling process.
Damage to cable can come in many forms. The most common form of dam-
age, a broken fiber, is also the most difficult to detect. In addition to fracture,
fiber can be cracked from too much tension. As a result, no gorillas should be
allowed on the cable installation crew.
DESPOOLING CABLE
Although the optical cordage may outwardly resemble copper cordage, the two
are significantly different. A failure of optical cordage may occur when improper
methods of pulling and despooling are employed. Pulling the outer jacket will
cause a compression of the optical fiber and cause significant attenuation
increase. This condition once initiated is usually irreversible. One should also
avoid cable twist when despooling fiber optic cable to prevent stressing the fibers.
Longitudinal force on the jacket can cause temporary elongation and subse-
quent fiber compression. Therefore, cable should be reeled off the spool, not spun
over the edge of the spool. This will eliminate cable twist, which will make coil-
ing much easier (Figure 15-2).
158
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING

Figure 15-2
Despooling fiber optic cable.
When unreeling the cordage, tension should be applied only to the strength
member. The strength member and buffered fiber do not stretch. If the outer
jacket is used to unreel the cordage from the spool, the resulting shock tension on
the outer jacket will allow the jacket to stretch momentarily. The jacket will then
return to its normal state. Therefore, the fiber and strength member may be com-
pressed in the retraction of the outer jacket. This will cause macrobend attenua-
tion in the cable.
PULLING FORCE
The pulling force must be kept below a designated limit for the specific cable
being installed. This is usually 600 pounds for outside plant (OSP) cable and 300
pounds or less for other cables. The pulling force must also be kept uniform.
Most fiber cable cannot handle high impact loads, so the cable should not be
jerked. Included within the cable is a strength member, which is purposely placed
there to facilitate installation. This member, not the glass fiber, must always be
used when tension is to be placed on the cable.
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
159
Pull on Aramid Yarn
Right
Wrong

When using power equipment to pull OSP cable, tension monitoring equip-
ment or breakaway swivels must always be used. Power equipment must never be
used on inside fiber because the allowable pulling force is so small.
Testing
In order to avoid quality problems after installation, as well as to eliminate dis-
putes that could arise over responsibility for damaged cable, testing of cable prior
to installation is recommended. Preinstallation testing becomes particularly
important under certain circumstances, such as installation under especially diffi-
cult conditions, expensive cable being installed, or an unknown supplier or man-
ufacturer of the cable.
Preinstallation testing need not be complex or time-consuming. If the cable
shows no signs of damage, it can be tested with a continuity tracer. If all fibers
transmit light, it is highly likely to be good cable. If there is even a hint of possi-
ble damage to the cable, it must be tested or outright rejected.
Postinstallation testing of cable (preceding termination) is recommended if
any abnormal circumstances were encountered during the installation process.
Examples of such abnormal circumstances might include exceeding the allowable
pulling tension during the pull or sheath damage observed during or after the
pull. Any time there is a possibility of damaged cable, the sooner it is detected
and remedied the better.
BENDING FIBER TOO TIGHTLY
The second most common problem is bending the fiber on too tight a radius. The
bending radius is always important in a static condition. However, it becomes
even more important under tensile loading, because the tensile stresses due to
bending are added to those due to pulling. A minimum bending radius of 10
cable diameters must be maintained over long-term, static conditions.
When cable is placed under a tensile load while being pulled, a minimum of
20 cable diameters is recommended. It should be noted that a design in which a
cable is placed by hand into a tray allows a tighter radius than one where instal-
lation will be carried out by pulling the cable in.
INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER INSTALLATIONS
Another source of damage to cable during the installation process is interference
with other installations. Careful coordination must be carried out in order to give
maximum protection to the cable. This might mean that fiber cable should go in
first, with other cable placed carefully over the top to afford some protection to
the fiber cable in the event other contractors might later access the same tray.
160
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING

Figure 15-3
The first half of a multistage pull.
Probably more common is the situation where the fiber cable installer wants to be
the last person to place material in the duct, so that other installations of more
robust materials placed by craftspersons not sensitive to the fragile nature of fiber
cable do not damage the fiber cable.
Yet another potential source of damage to fiber cable is that caused by sharp
corners or protrusions, such as where conduit enters pull boxes and cabinets.
These are commonly found in the working environment of a construction project
and must be avoided or negated by the use of innerduct. If multiple layers of
installations are possible or potentially hazardous obstacles are in the path of the
cable, installing the fiber cable in corrugated innerduct may be a good idea. The
innerduct protects the fiber cable and its distinctive orange color helps others
notice it.
In circumstances where these types of damage are liable to occur, such as
with rough buss duct or conduit that must be field cut and fabricated, a little
investment in inspection prior to installation could save significantly in terms of
both time and money if obstacles can be detected and eliminated.
PROCEDURES FOR PULLING CABLE
As with any cable-pulling operation, set up the reel so cable pays off the top (see
Figure 15-2). Place the reel as close as possible to the conduit or innerduct open-
ing. Lubricant is recommended on all but the shortest of pulls. Be sure to use
lubricant appropriate for fiber optic cable.
For long runs, the operation must be accomplished in two or more stages (as
shown in Figures 15-3 and 15-4). A pull box or manhole is placed as close as pos-
sible to the middle of the run, or at reasonable pulling intervals along the run for
longer runs.
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
161
Kellems Grip
Swivel
Pull Rope

Figure 15-4
The second half of a multistage pull.
The pull is started at the middle pulling location and proceeds in both direc-
tions. A pulling eye should be attached to the cable’s strength member or a
Kellems grip (similar to the Chinese finger puzzle) should be placed on the end of
the cable and connected to the pull rope through a swivel. The first part of the
pull is then carefully made, pulling adequate spare cable beyond the end of the
run.
If more than two runs are required, enough cable is pulled each time to
enable reaching the full length of run on that side of the pulling location and the
spare cable is stored in figure eights on the ground.
Once the end of the run is reached in one direction, the process begins again
at the center of the run, pulling in the opposite direction. Sufficient cable is paid
off the reel and laid on the ground in figure eights to reach the other end of the
run. The cable is then pulled through successive pulling locations, storing the
excess cable in figure eights at each location. Remember to place the figure eights
in a safe area, well away from traffic.
Cable with aramid yarn as a strength member can be attached to a pulling
eye directly as shown in Figure 15-5. If attaching the Kellems grip to the cable,
first remove the last 2 feet of sheath, fiber, and antibend rod, leaving only the
Kevlar pulling yarn. Then, slide the grip onto the next 2 feet of sheathed cable.
Attach the pulling swivel to the Kellems grip loop and tie the leading 2 feet of
Kevlar to the pulling swivel. In this way, the pulling load is distributed between
the sheath and the Kevlar strength member. On cable using fiberglass, Kevlar, or
stainless steel embedded within the sheath, simply put the grip on the sheath. A
cutback is not necessary since this special sheath acts as the strength member. The
last step in the attachment process is to wrap the installed grip with vinyl tape,
starting on the cable and working up to, but not including, the swivel.
162
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
Adequate Cable Stored
on Ground in Figure
Eights to Complete Pull
Succeeding Pulling Location

Figure 15-5
Attaching pulling swivel to cable strength member.
Simplex and duplex cable should always be pulled using a pulling rope and
swivel whenever possible. Should it become necessary to continue to pull on the
jacket, a mandrel should be used (Figure 15-6). Using a 6-inch diameter mandrel,
wrap five turns. Tape or allow a finger to maintain tension on the first wrap from
the loose end. This will insure that force is transferred to the aramid yarn strength
member in the same way a ship’s capstan allows rope to be pulled with no attach-
ment to the capstan except friction.
Before beginning the pull, make sure you have not tied the cable in a knot or
looped any other cable. Start the cable into the innerduct or conduit slowly at
first to make sure that everything is going as planned. After the amount of cable
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
163
Pulling
Swivel
Separate Aramid Yarn
and Pass through Swivel
Eye in Opposite Directions
Knot Aramid Yarn
Tape

Figure 15-6
Using a mandrel for pulling cable.
that will be handled by the pullers at the other end of the run has entered the
duct, apply the lubricant. Stop the pull, make a quick funnel out of paper and
pour about 50 percent of the lubricant needed on the pull into the feed end of the
duct. Resume pulling, increasing pulling speed. Add the remainder of the lubri-
cant as needed. If the pulling crew has to handle lubricated cable, but does not
want to take the time to clean the cable off, latex gloves work great.
When pulling with rope, maximum speed through the duct should be about
3 feet per second, or 2 miles per hour. When mule tape is used, the speed can be
tripled. This is because at speeds higher than 3 feet per second, rope will cut
grooves in conduit bends, but mule tape will not.
Rack the cable after the entire pull is complete (Figure 15-7). Protect the
cable within a manhole or pull box with innerduct if the manhole or pull box is
congested or will be in the future. Also protect the cable if you will be pulling
164
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
Northern Lights Cable, Inc. Pulling Spool
5 Turns
Pull
Tape or Finger Tension

Figure 15-7
Racking cable in manholes.
through multiple manholes or pull boxes. Start racking at the center manhole or
pull box and work toward the ends. Use double-looped cable ties, cinched up
tight on OSP cable, but not tight enough to indent the sheath on indoor type
cable.
Place cable identification tags on cable or innerduct at every location that
humans could possibly visit in the future. This is important because of the relative
ease with which a fiber cable carrying thousands of customers can be cut by
someone who does not recognize fiber optic cable.
Cable tags should be plastic, about 2 inches by 3 inches, marked with indeli-
ble marker and should state the following information:
Fiber size, such as 62.5, 62.5/125
Where fiber is accessible on both ends, such as Term Room 4l0 to Term
Room 912
Who owns or is responsible for the fiber, such as Telecom System Depart-
ment
If lubricant dripping out of the conduit will be a safety or aesthetic problem,
seal the cable within the duct with a mechanical squeeze plug, such as the one
manufactured by Jack Moon Industries, or use a suitable canned spray foam. The
former is neat, quick, clean, removable, and expensive; the latter is not!
HOLDING CABLE FOR STRIPPING
When stripping the jacket and buffer materials from cord ends of very short pieces,
it is advisable to thread the cordage through the fingers to grip the inner buffer and
optical fiber. This method allows minimum force to be used during buffer stripping
without allowing the buffer in short cords to be pulled out (Figure 15-8).
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
165
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Lashing Points
Lashing Points
Lashing
Points

REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Fiber is pulled on the _____________
a. buffer.
b. strength member.
c. fiber.
d. binding tape.
2. The pulling force for outside plant cable is usually _____________
a. 300 pounds.
b. 400 pounds.
c. 500 pounds.
d. 600 pounds.
3. The minimum bending radius for cable being pulled is _____________
a. 30 times the cable diameter.
b. 20 times the cable diameter.
c. 10 times the cable diameter.
d. 5 times the cable diameter.
4. For long runs __________________
a. the cable should be spliced.
b. the pull should be split up into two or more stages.
c. greater force can be used.
d. a mandrel wrap should be used.
166
CHAPTER 15 — FIBER OPTIC CABLE PULLING
Fiber Strippers
Figure 15-8
Holding cable for stripping fiber.

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
16
FIBER OPTIC
RESTORATION
L A R R Y  J O H N S O N
Fiber optic technology has provided communications users with the ability to
transmit longer distances with increased amounts of information. This has paral-
leled the growth in communications provided by computers, fax machines, cellu-
lar services, and video using digital transmission systems. Fiber optics has been
used mostly in backbones due to its capability to handle vast amounts of infor-
mation, whether from city to city or file servers to users in campus applications.
As the growth of these industries increases, so does our reliance on the fiber
systems being used for the transmission. Telephone companies and other service
providers have routines and disciplines well established for restorations. Their
long spans in exposed aerial and direct buried applications make restoration
practices critical to the operation of their communications systems.
Local area networks (LANs) are unique in that they consist of intra- and
interbuilding links of relatively short distances when compared to the various
types of wide area and metropolitan networks using optical communications.
This requires different approaches and equipment to be responsive to emergency
restorations.
167

PROACTIVE PLANNING VERSUS REACTIVE RESTORATIONS
All networks start at the conceptual design stage. During this stage we must
establish a value to the type of posture we should take for providing for the phys-
ical plant and its protection. Since the establishment of the Fiber Distributed Data
Interface (FDDI) standard in the late 1980s, we have seen a serious effort to pro-
vide protection in both the network and physical routing of optical communica-
tions systems. Why? FDDI was designed as a backbone system operating at 100
Mb/s. With this large amount of data, users wanted reliability to assure that their
entire data systems would not fail in case of either node or cable failure. FDDI’s
counterrotating ring offered route redundancy, optical bypass switches for net-
work protection, and diagnostics for system management.
Today’s designers should learn from these lessons. Networks with high data
rates, critical reliability, security, and priority users should be designed for route
diversity. Route diversity means two specific different routes (not putting two
cables in the same duct). This, of course, can create a cost issue in both materi-
als and construction. For example, if a campus is built on a system of steam tun-
nels in a star topology, the expense would be high to create a physical ring. But
the tradeoffs between network reliability and cost must be made at the design
stage.
Types of Faults
Another issue to review in the design stage is the types of failures that have
occurred in the past. History repeats itself, even in network failures. Tables 16-1 and
16-2 show some of these failures.
A quick review of these tables allows us to identify certain areas and types of
faults.
A: Patch Panel Related
These failures occur around the patch panel. The cause could be improper dress-
ing of the jumpers and cables, improper keying of connectors, contamination of
the connection, or improper cable routing and localized damage.
B: System Related
Over- or underdriving the optical transmission still causes either total or inter-
mittent failure.
C: Installation Related
Improper bend radius, clamping of the cables, and improper rolls of the trans-
mit/receive fibers are common types of problems. Installations occurring around
previously installed fiber networks can also create failures due to lack of atten-
tion in dressing, termination, and cable routing.
168
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION
169
Table 16-1
Typical Cable System Faults
Fault
Cause
Equipment
Remedy
Bad connector
Dirt or damage
Microscope
Cleaning/
polishing/
retermination
Bad pigtail
Pigtail kinked
Visual fault locator
Straighten kink
Localized cable
Kinked cable
OTDR
Straighten kink
attenuation
Distributed increase
Defective cable
OTDR
Reduce stress/
in cable attenuation
or installation
replace
specifications
exceeded
Lossy splice
Increase in splice
OTDR
Open and redress
Loss due to
Visual fault locator
fiber stress in
closure
Fiber break
Cable damage
OTDR
Repair/replace
Visual fault locator
Table 16-2
Typical Causes of Failures in LANs
No.
Failure Location
Type of Failure
1
Broken fibers at connector joints
A
2
Broken fibers at patch panels
A
3
Cables damaged at patch panels
A
4
Fibers broken at patch panels
A
5
Cables cut in ceilings and walls
D
6
Cables cut through outside construction
D
7
Contaminated connections
A
8
Broken jumpers
A
9
Too much loss
B
10
Too little loss (overdriving the receiver)
B
11
Improper cable rolls
C
12
Miskeyed connectors
C
13
Transmission equipment failure
B
14
Power failure
B

D: Construction Related (Major and Minor)
Normally due to construction and work-related activities, this could be caused by
backhoes and other heavy construction equipment digging up cables. Cables can
be damaged in aerial plant due to improper installation techniques, falling
branches, automobile crashes, gunshots, and lightning. In LANs, cuts through
walls and ceilings, mistaken cutting of cables, improper clamping, and breaking
fibers at the connectors by improper handling or by accident are examples of
localized failures due to poor cable identification or lack of care by workers.
EQUIPMENT USED IN RESTORATION
1. Fiber optic cleaning kit. Many faults with optical systems are caused by
contamination of connectors, so simple cleaning will resolve these prob-
lems. Remember to keep connectors clean and capped when not in use.
(Resolves problem 7 [Table 16-2])
2. Optical inspection scope. Used to identify poor connector finishes and
surface contamination or damage. Magnification can be from 30 to 400
power. The microscope needs to have an interface to hold the connector
type securely for viewing. (Identifies problem 7 [Table 16-2])
3. Optical loss test set or test kit. Used for end-to-end loss tests. The set
consists of a stabilized light source and a calibrated power meter. The
instruments should match the operating wavelength, fiber type, and con-
nector of the transmission system. The power meter by itself is the essen-
tial go–no go instrument in fiber optic troubleshooting. This instrument
allows us to check power levels at the transmitter, receiver, and at any
connection point in a system to isolate whether the problem is with the
electro-optics (low transmitter power or proper receiver power indicat-
ing electronic problems) or the fiber optic cable plant (increased loss
beyond allowable margins). Using these instruments and good system
documentation, the user should be able to diagnose almost every net-
work fault. (Identifies power levels with problems 1–6, 8–11, and 13
[Table 16-2])
4. Visual tracers and fault locators. Inexpensive instruments that transmit
visible light through a fiber. The more powerful versions use red He, Ne,
or diode lasers operating in the visible spectrum and can locate breaks
though many types of jumpers and buffered fibers, as long as the buffer
or cable jacket is translucent. These instruments will not work on most
multifiber cables or black- or gray-jacketed single-fiber cables. White
light and red LED versions are also available but do not have the power
to locate internal breaks. (Identifies problems 1–3, 8, 11 [Table 16-2])
170
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

5. Optical Time Domain Reflectometer (OTDR). The instrument everyone
often considers first in restorations is the most application dependent. In
long-distance networks where most outages occur far away from the end
equipment, the OTDR is critical for a restoration posture. In the case of
LANs, most problems cannot easily be identified with the OTDR, since
its distance resolution makes most short cables impossible to view. In a
LAN, cable plants must be diagnosed through the use of the above men-
tioned types of equipment, unless one is dealing with a campus network
where cables are longer than 500 to 1,000 meters. Due to the high cost of
an OTDR, rental may be better than purchasing one.
IDENTIFYING THE PROBLEM
The first requirement for restoration is, of course, to identify the problem. To
guide you through that process, a flowchart is shown in Figure 16-1. First one
must determine if the problem is in the electronics or the fiber optic cable plant.
Using the power meter, unplug the connector at the receiver, measure the power
at the receiver, and compare it to the network specification. To measure the
receiver power, it is sometimes necessary to run equipment diagnostics at the
transmitter to output a test signal. If the power level is within specification, there
is most likely a problem with the transmission electronics. If this is the case, you
must call in the network specialists to diagnose the network problem.
If the receiver power is low, go to the transmitter and measure the power output
there, using a known good jumper cable and the power meter. If the power is low,
there is a transmitter problem that must be fixed. If the transmitter power is within
specification, there is too much loss in the cable plant. This must be diagnosed.
Diagnosing the cable plant can start with a visual continuity check with a
visual tracer or fault locator. If the cable plant has just been installed or rerouted
at patch panels, be certain that the correct connections have been made at every
patch panel. This requires starting at one end and tracing the fiber path through
every connection. Even if you do not find a misconnection, you will find where
the signal stops, thus identifying the segment of the cable plant with the problem.
Several problems can cause the faulty segment, including a cable cut or stress
causing loss, broken or damaged connectors, or a bad splice. If only one fiber is
affected and there are no splices in the cable, the problem is most likely a dam-
aged connector. Examining it visually for kinking of the cable or other damage,
or examining the end of the connector ferrule with the microscope may show the
fault. If the cable is short, like most LAN cables, a visual tracer or fault locator
can be used most effectively. The most effective tool is good cable plant records,
however, since cable cuts or damage caused by construction or erroneous cutting
can be found by following the cable route and looking for obvious damage.
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION
171

Figure 16-1
Problem identification flowchart. Courtesy The Light Brigade
172
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

If the cable is long (over 500 meters or 1,640 feet) or underground, an
OTDR may be necessary to find and diagnose the problem. But since the OTDR
has poor short-length resolution, it will not be useful in finding many LAN prob-
lems such as broken connectors on jumper cables or failures in short links. If you
are using an OTDR to find faults in multimode links, use the 850-nm range since
it has much higher resolution than the 1300-nm range and is thus more likely to
find problems.
RESTORING SERVICE
Once the fault and location have been identified, we need to restore the outage.
This sounds simple but can be complex. However, if the problem is with only one
fiber in the cable, switch to a spare fiber and replace the bad connector as time
permits. If immediate emergency restoration is necessary, consider these issues.
Basic Questions
1. Does the span have retrievable slack? If so, we can pull the slack back
and make one repair point.
2. Will it be easier, quicker, and/or less expensive to replace the section ver-
sus repairing the section?
3. Will we install connectors or use splices for the repair?
4. Either way we will need to protect the repair point(s) to prevent future
damage. This could mean adding closure(s), patch panel(s) or rerouting
of cable to other physical points.
5. Can the system handle the additional losses caused by the additional
connectors, splices, and fiber length?
6. If necessary, can we provide a drop cable over the ceiling, in the ceiling,
down the roof, and so on until we can make a permanent restoration?
WHAT ABOUT THOSE STORAGE LOOPS?
Networks and the buildings housing them must accommodate many adds, moves,
and changes over their life spans. Designers planning for these also resolve one of
the many headaches associated with LAN cable restorations. This is the issue of
retrievable slack versus nonretrievable slack.
Retrievable Slack
Cable spans designed with slack points allow for spare cable to be pulled together,
allowing for only one termination point. The use of quick mechanical splices or
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION
173

direct connectorization allows for restoration to take place with minimal losses.
Because most cables within the building are of the breakout or distribution styles,
these allow for easy retermination. The main issue is how to store the splice/con-
nection panel or miniclosure. These products provide strain relief of the cable and
physical protection of the splice or connectors.
Placement could be above the floor, wall mounted, or ceiling mounted. In
most of these situations aesthetics and size will be key factors. For many users,
security and access may need to be considered. The cable should be strain relieved
and prepared, leaving as much slack as possible for future entry and possible
rerouting for future changes. (Hopefully we can use this fiber and reroute for
future needs as well.)
EMERGENCY RESTORATION (WITH RETRIEVABLE SLACK)
The cable fault has been found and the spare has been pulled back to the failure
point. We must confirm that the cable break is where it appears to be. The use of
visual light sources should be used to check each fiber from both ends. (We
would not want to have a second break point 1 foot away and not cut it out.)
The site must be checked to find the best point and method to repair the fibers.
The cables may be pulled back to a ceiling, floor, post, or other location for physical
mounting. This location should be noted on your drawings and documented. The
panel should also be labeled and possibly secured. After the cables are repaired, the
fiber spans should be retested for loss using the optical loss test set.
Nonretrievable Slack
Let us take a serious look at our options. Will it be quicker to pull in a new cable or
segment? Should I install a new segment? Should I splice or connectorize and how
do I protect these? Without retrievable slack we must add a section of cable to the
span. This will require not only two termination points but also twice the labor and
material. We must also have a length of fiber equal to or greater than the amount
of fibers in the span. As you can see, the price for not leaving slack is both more
expensive and labor consuming. The process for the determinations is the same as
the retrievable slack, except now we have two points that need to be addressed.
FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION FOR SINGLEMODE NETWORKS
Networks involving singlemode fibers tend to be more critical and more difficult
to repair than their multimode counterparts. This is due to the higher speeds and
longer distances encountered. In addition, singlemode systems tend to be directly
buried, placed by aerial methods, and in longer conduit systems. These tech-
174
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

niques usually provide an optimum amount of protection for the optical cable.
However, when they fail it is normally catastrophic. Natural disasters, construc-
tion activities, and accidents cause most of these failures.
They cause greater outages affecting more users, more lost revenue, and are a
magnitude more complex to restore. This is why singlemode users tend to have a
restoration plan in place and use slack times to practice the plan.
Summary of Suggestions
1. Prioritize your fibers. Most networks have spare fibers. When your sys-
tem is down, get the priority fibers fixed first, then worry about the
spares.
2. Have spare connectors and a connectorization kit or mechanical splice
kit available.
3. Have a trained crew that knows how to terminate and test the fiber net-
work. Have emergency phone numbers available for access.
4. Have the proper test equipment and tooling for the job.
Planning for Restoration
The Basic Recommended Restoration Posture
All users of communications systems must have a basic posture to address what
would happen should a failure occur. Following are several recommendations.
1. All fiber routes should be properly documented for both optical perfor-
mance and physical routing.
2. This should include patch panel designations, signal type, and intercon-
nect routing information.
3. All transmitters and receivers should be documented to their optical
transmit and power levels. Receivers should be documented for both
minimum and maximum power levels.
4. All spans should be documented for optical loss. This would normally be
at both 850/1300 nm for multimode applications and 1310/1550 nm for
singlemode applications. The documentation should identify the fiber
size and manufacturer.
5. If OTDR tests have been performed, copies of the OTDR traces should
be included in the test reports.
6. If cable has sequential markings, the difference between the markings
tells us the actual cable length in meters or feet for each segment. This
should be documented.
7. Fibers should be identified and prioritized to allow for priority fibers to
be quickly restored.
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION
175

Restoration Planning
Imagine a system failure and having to restore a damaged optical cable. Let us
look at some of the issues that would need to be addressed.
1. How would we know of the problem?
2. Who is first advised of the outage?
3. Is there a technical team on call to respond?
4. Is this a dedicated route without backup or alternative routing? If yes,
this would require emergency restoration.
5. If not, this could be a planned restoration. Planned restorations allow for
more flexibility, providing better quality in restoration.
6. Do you have records including OTDR prints, optical power levels, up-to-
date “as built” drawings on all segments?
7. Do you have an emergency restoration program?
8. Do you have emergency restoration kits?
9. Have these been evaluated with your staff including management, engi-
neering, construction, and maintenance?
10. Are your customers prioritized? Are there any contracts and/or services that
could affect priorities (e.g., emergency services, government, military)?
11. Do you have prioritized fibers?
12. What is the time allowance for restoration?
13. Is this a restoration in which we will allow compromises on splice loss to
bring the system up and will resplice later when better prepared?
14. What is the maximum allowable splice loss for restorations?
15. Is there a vehicle available that can allow a team to work within it so that
they can work in a well-lit, dry environment with a power supply?
16. Are all necessary materials and equipment easily accessible by the team
en route to the outage?
17. How many splice and test sets do you have?
18. If using a fusion splicer, do you know the fiber types and settings for the
equipment?
19. What is the OTDR with the highest resolution?
What pulse width?
Wavelength?
Do you know the index of refraction of the fibers and manufacturers in
your system?
20. What type of communications will be used between OTDR operators
and splicers?
21. What is the limitation of this equipment?
22. What level of heavy equipment will be necessary?
23. How do you determine the location of a cable cut? Can you triangulate?
176
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

24. In the case of a single cut with retrievable slack, what equipment will be
used?
25. In the case of a cut without retrievable slack, what equipment will be
used?
Team A ______________________________________________________
Team B _______________________________________________________
Which team is quicker? _________________________________________
Which team has the most experience? _____________________________
26. In the case of massive cable failure, how many cables can you repair
simultaneously?
27. Can this restoration be done safely or will we be delayed?
28. Is there anything we can do about this?
29. Where is spare cable stored and how is it identified?
30. What else can go wrong?
31. Have we missed anything? Equipment? Environment? Staff? Tools?
Restoration (Miscellaneous Issues)
1. How do we keep the restoration plan and staff current?
2. Have you graded your staff on fiber optic restoration abilities?
3. Do you have annual/semiannual procedures for testing/evaluating exist-
ing dark fibers?
4. How are test reports filed?
5. Where are test reports filed?
6. What about updates?
7. Do these include locations where cable slack is stored?
8. Each cable segment should be evaluated for worst case failures. Has this
been done?
9. Do the emergency restoration kits (ERK)s include a bill of materials/
checklist of all tools and components and suppliers?
10. Do you have adequate amount of inventory and consumables? Are any
of these date coded?
11. Do you photograph/film your restorations? The use of film and/or pic-
tures provides a good learning and review tool. In the case of litigation
the pictures can be invaluable.
Postrestoration Recommendations
1. Redocument and retest your splices, spans, and segments.
2. Adjust your “as built” drawings. New vaults, closures, splices, and slack
cable points may need to be added or adjusted.
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION
177

3. Schedule and conduct a meeting to review all aspects of the restoration.
A) What happened? What were the cause and impacts?
B) What did we do well?
C) What did not work? (Technique, equipment, products, staff)
D) How can this be resolved?
E) How can we improve?
F) What needs to be done to rebuild kits and replenish inventory?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. A high loss splice is found with a(n) _____________
a. OTDR.
b. microscope.
c. visual fault locator.
d. cable identifier.
2. Faults can be generalized into four categories:
1. ____________________
2. ____________________
3. ____________________
4. ____________________
3. Poor connectors are found with a(n) __________, and are best remedied
by __________
a. visual fault locator, retermination.
b. visual fault locator, cleaning.
c. microscope, cleaning.
d. microscope, retermination.
4. The best was to find a break in an accessible LAN cable is with a(n)
_____________
a. OTDR.
b. plant records.
c. visual fault locator.
d. power meter.
5. If two fibers in a 12-fiber cable show high loss, while the other 10 show
low loss, the most likely cause is _____________
a. improper bend radius.
b. improper pulling method.
c. kinked cable.
d. dirty connectors.
178
CHAPTER 16 — FIBER OPTIC RESTORATION

C
H
A
P
T
E
R
17
FIBER OPTIC
TESTING
J I M  H AY E S
OVERVIEW
Testing fiber optic components and systems requires making several basic mea-
surements. The most common measurement parameters are shown in Table 17-1.
Optical power—required for measuring source power, receiver power, and loss
or attenuation—is the most important parameter and is required for almost every
fiber optic test. Backscatter and wavelength measurements are the next most
important, and bandwidth or dispersion are of lesser importance. Measurement
or inspection of geometrical parameters of fiber are essential for fiber manufac-
turers. And troubleshooting installed cables and networks is required.
Standard Test Procedures
Most test procedures for fiber optic component specifications have been stan-
dardized by national and international standards bodies, including the EIA in the
United States and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) or Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO) internationally. Procedures for
measuring absolute optical power, cable and connector loss, and the effects of
many environmental factors (such as temperature, pressure, flexing, etc.) are cov-
ered in these procedures.
179

In order to perform these tests, the basic fiber optic instruments are the fiber
optic power meter, test source, OTDR, optical spectrum analyzer, and an inspec-
tion microscope. These and some other specialized instruments are described
below.
Fiber Optic Instrumentation
Fiber Optic Power Meters
Fiber optic power meters (Figure 17-1) measure the average optical power ema-
nating from an optical fiber and are used for measuring power levels and, when
used with a compatible source, for loss testing. They typically consist of a solid
state detector (silicon [Si] for short wavelength systems, germanium [Ge] or
indium-gallium arsenide [InGaAs] for long wavelength systems), signal condi-
tioning circuitry and a digital display of power. To interface to the large variety
of fiber optic connectors in use, some form of removable connector adapter is
usually provided.
Power meters are calibrated to read in linear units (milliwatts, microwatts,
and nanowatts) and/or dB referenced to one milliwatt or one microwatt optical
power. Some meters offer a relative dB scale also, useful for laboratory loss mea-
surements. (Field measurements more often use adjustable sources set to a stan-
dard value to reduce confusion. See section entitled Fiber Optic Test Sources).
Power meters cover a very broad dynamic range, over 1 million to 1.
Although most fiber optic power and loss measurements are made in the range of
0 dBm to –50 dBm, some power meters offer much wider dynamic ranges. For
testing analog CATV systems or fiber amplifiers, special meters are needed with
extended high power ranges up to +20 dBm (100 mW).
180
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Table 17-1
Fiber Optic Testing Requirements
Test Parameter
Instrument
Optical power (source output, receiver 
Fiber optic power meter
signal level)
Attenuation or loss of fibers, cables, and 
Fiber optic power meter and source, test kit or
connectors
optical loss test set (OLTS)
Source wavelength*
Fiber optic spectrum analyzer
Backscatter (loss, length, fault location)
OTDR
Fault location
OTDR, visual cable fault locator
Bandwidth/dispersion* (modal and chromatic)
Bandwidth tester or simulation software
* Rarely tested in the field

Figure 17-1
Fiber optic power meters come in rugged, mini, and handheld
packages. Courtesy Fotec, Inc.
Fiber optic power meters have a typical measurement uncertainty of ±5%,
when calibrated to transfer standards provided by national standards laborato-
ries such as the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Sources of errors are the variability of coupling efficiency of the detector and con-
nector adapter, reflections off the shiny polished surfaces of connectors,
unknown source wavelengths (since the detectors are wavelength sensitive), non-
linearities in the electronic signal conditioning circuitry of the fiber optic power
meter, and detector noise at very low signal levels. Power meters with very small
detectors may have two problems that cause measurement errors. The light from
the fiber may overfill the detector or the detector may saturate at high power lev-
els. Since most of these factors affect all power meters, regardless of their sophis-
tication, expensive laboratory meters are hardly more accurate than the most
inexpensive handheld portable units.
Fiber Optic Test Sources
In order to make measurements of optical loss or attenuation in fibers, cables,
and connectors, one must have a standard signal source as well as a fiber optic
power meter. The source (Figure 17-2) must be chosen for compatibility with the
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
181

Figure 17-2
Fiber optic test sources. Courtesy Fotec, Inc.
type of fiber in use (singlemode or multimode, with the proper core diameter) and
the wavelength desired for performing the test. Most sources are either LEDs or
lasers of the types commonly used as transmitters in actual fiber optic systems,
making them representative of actual applications and enhancing the usefulness
of the testing.
Typical wavelengths of sources are 665 nm (plastic fiber), 850 nm (short
wavelength multimode glass fiber), and 1300 and 1550 nm (long wavelength
multimode and singlemode fiber). LEDs are typically used for testing multimode
fiber and lasers are used for singlemode fiber, except for the testing of short sin-
glemode jumper cables with LEDs. The broad spectral output of an LED has
higher attenuation in singlemode fiber than a laser, causing significant errors on
cables longer than about 5 kilometers. The source wavelength can be a critical
issue in making accurate loss measurements on longer cable runs, since attenua-
tion of the fiber is wavelength sensitive, especially at short wavelengths. Thus all
test sources should be calibrated for wavelength.
Adaptability to a variety of fiber optic connectors is important also, since
over 70 styles of connectors exist, although the types most commonly used are ST
182
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

and SC for multimode fiber and SC or FC for singlemode fiber. The new small
form factor connectors (LC, MT–RJ, VF–45) are also gaining in popularity.
Some LED sources use modular adapters such as power meters to allow adapta-
tion to various connector types. Lasers almost always have fixed connectors. If
the connector on the source is fixed, hybrid test jumpers with connectors com-
patible with the source on one end and the connector being tested on the other
must be used.
Optical Loss Test Sets/Test Kits
The optical loss test set (Figure 17-3) is an instrument formed by the combination
of a fiber optic power meter and source that is used to measure the loss of fiber,
connectors, and connectorized cables. Early versions of this instrument were
called attenuation meters. A test kit has a similar purpose, but is usually com-
prised of separate instruments and includes accessories to customize it for a spe-
cific application, such as testing a fiber optic LAN, telco, or CATV.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
183
Figure 17-3
An optical loss
test set can be separate
source and power meter (a) or
an integrated single instrument
(b). Courtesy Fotec, Inc
(a)
(b)

The combination optical loss test set (OLTS) instrument may be useful for
making measurements in a laboratory, but in the field, individual sources and
power meters are more often used, since the ends of the fiber and cable are usu-
ally separated by long distances, which would require two OLTSs, at double the
cost of one fiber optic power meter and source. And even in a laboratory envi-
ronment, several different source types may be needed, making the flexibility of a
separate source and meter a better choice.
Optical Time Domain Reflectometers
The OTDR (Figure 17-4) uses the phenomenon of fiber backscattering to charac-
terize fibers, find faults, and optimize splices. Since scattering is one of the pri-
mary loss factors in fiber (the other being absorption), the OTDR can send out
into the fiber a high-powered pulse and measure the light scattered back toward
the instrument. The pulse is attenuated on the outbound leg and the backscat-
tered light is attenuated on the return leg, so the returned signal is a function of
twice the fiber loss and the backscatter coefficient of the fiber.
If one assumes the backscatter coefficient is constant, the OTDR can be used
to measure loss as well as to locate fiber breaks, splices, and connectors. In addi-
184
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Figure 17-4a
Full featured OTDRs offer maximum range and flexibility.
Courtesy Tektronix

CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
185
Figure 17-4b
Mini OTDRs offer fewer features in much smaller
packages and at less cost. Courtesy Photon-Kinetics, Inc.
Figure 17-4c
Fault finders are single OTDRs for troubleshooting.
Courtesy Tektronix

tion, the OTDR gives a graphic display of the status of the fiber being tested. And
it offers another major advantage over the source/fiber optic power meter or
OLTS in that it requires access to only one end of the fiber.
OTDRs generally are used to test all outside plant installations, especially to
confirm the loss of splices between lengths of cables. The distance resolution of a
typical OTDR, however, is too long to see the typical patch cords used in most
cable plants, limiting their usefulness for premises cabling installations. Also, all
network specifications call for testing the cables with a source and power meter,
as that tests the cables exactly as they will be used in the application.
The uncertainty of the OTDR measurement is heavily dependent on the
backscatter coefficient, which is a function of intrinsic fiber scattering character-
istics, core diameter, and numerical aperture. It is the variation in backscatter
coefficient that causes many splices to show a “gain” instead of the actual loss.
Tests have shown that OTDR splice loss measurements may have an uncertainty
of up to 0.8 dB. OTDRs must also be matched to the fibers being tested in both
wavelength and fiber core diameter to provide accurate measurements. Thus
many OTDRs have modular sources to allow substituting a proper source for the
application.
While most OTDR applications involve finding faults in installed cables or
optimizing splices, they are very useful in inspecting fibers for manufacturing
faults. Development work on improving the short-range resolution of OTDRs for
LAN applications and new applications such as evaluating connector return loss
promise to enhance the usefulness of the instrument in the future.
OTDRs come in three basic versions. Full-size OTDRs offer the highest per-
formance and have a full complement of features such as data storage, but are
very big and high priced. Mini OTDRs provide the same types of measurements
as a full OTDR, but with fewer features to trim the size and cost. Fault finders
use the OTDR technique, but are greatly simplified to provide just the distance to
a fault, to make the instruments more affordable and easier to use.
Visual Cable Tracers and Fault Locators
Many of the problems in fiber optic networks are related to making proper con-
nections. Since the light used in systems is invisible, one cannot see the system
transmitter light. By injecting the light from a visible source, such as an LED or
incandescent light bulb, one can visually trace the fiber from transmitter to
receiver to insure correct orientation and also to check continuity. The simple
instruments that inject visible light are called visual fault locators (Figure 17-5).
If a powerful enough visible light, such as an HeNe or visible diode laser, is
injected into the fiber, high loss points can be made visible. Most applications
center around short cables such as those used in telco central offices to connect to
the fiber optic trunk cables. However, since visible light covers the range where
OTDRs are not useful, it is complementary to the OTDR in cable troubleshoot-
186
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

ing. This method will work on buffered fiber and even jacketed single-fiber cable
if the jacket is not opaque to the visible light. The yellow jacket of singlemode
fiber and orange of multimode fiber will usually pass the visible light. Most other
colors, especially black and gray, will not work with this technique, nor will most
multifiber cables. However, many cable breaks, macrobending losses caused by
kinks in the fiber, bad splices, and so on can be detected visually. Since the loss in
the fiber is quite high at visible wavelengths, on the order of 9 to 15 dB/km, this
instrument has a short range, typically 3 to 5 kilometers.
Fiber Identifiers
If one carefully bends a singlemode fiber enough to cause loss, the light that cou-
ples out can also be detected by a large area detector. A fiber identifier uses this
technique to detect a signal in the fiber at normal transmission wavelengths.
These instruments usually function as receivers, able to discriminate between no
signal, a high speed signal, and a 2 kHz tone. By specifically looking for a 2 kHz
“tone” from a test source coupled into the fiber, the instrument can identify a
specific fiber in a large multifiber cable, especially useful to speed up the splicing
or restoration process.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
187
Figure 17-5
A simple fiber tracer is a flashlight coupled to the fiber
optic cable. Courtesy Fotec, Inc.

Fiber identifiers can be used with both buffered fiber and jacketed single-
fiber cable. With buffered fiber, one must be very careful to not damage the fiber,
as any excess stress here could result in stress cracks in the fiber that could cause
a failure in the fiber anytime in the future.
Optical Continuous Wave Reflectometers
The optical continuous wave reflectometer (OCWR) was originally proposed as a
special purpose instrument to measure the optical return loss of singlemode con-
nectors installed on patch cords or jumpers. Unfortunately, its purpose became
muddled between conception and inception. As actual instruments came on the
market, they had much higher measurement resolution than appropriate for the
measurement uncertainty (0.01 dB resolution versus 1 dB uncertainty), leading to
much confusion on the part of users as to why measurements were not repro-
ducible. In addition, several instruments were touted as a way to measure the
optical return loss of an installed cable plant, obviously in ignorance of the fact
that they would also be integrating the backscatter of the fiber with any reflec-
tions from connectors or splices. Since the measurement of return loss from a
connector can be made equally well with any power meter, laser source, and cal-
ibrated coupler, and an OTDR is the only way to test installed cable plants for
return loss, the OCWR has little use in fiber optic testing.
Visual Inspection with Microscopes
Cleaved fiber ends prepared for splicing and polished connector ferrules require
visual inspection to find possible defects. This is accomplished using a micro-
scope with a stage modified to hold the fiber or connector in the field of view
(Figure 17-6). Fiber optic inspection microscopes vary in magnification from 30
to 800 power, with 30 to 100 power being the most widely used range. Cleaved
fibers are usually viewed from the side, to see breakover and lip. Connectors are
viewed end-on or at a small angle to find polishing defects such as scratches (Fig-
ure 17-7).
Fiber Optic Talksets
Although technically not a measuring instrument, fiber optic talksets are some-
times used for fiber optic installation and testing. They transmit voice over fiber
optic cables already installed, allowing technicians splicing or testing the fiber to
communicate effectively. Talksets are especially useful when walkie-talkies and
cellular telephones are not available, such as in remote locations where splicing is
being done, or in buildings where radio waves will not penetrate.
Attenuators
Attenuators are used to simulate the loss of long fiber runs for testing link margin
in network simulation in the laboratory or self-testing links in a loopback config-
188
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
189
Figure 17-6
Microscopes allow
inspection of connectors for polish
quality, cleanliness, and faults.
Courtesy Fotec, Inc.
Figure 17-7
Connector faults are easily seen through a microscope. Courtesy
Buehler LTD
TYPICAL 3
MICRON FINISH AT 200X
TYPICAL 1
MICRON FINISH AT 200X
TYPICAL 0.3
MICRON FINISH AT 200X
CRACKED AND
CHIPPED FINISH AT 200X
PLUCKED
FINISH AT 200X
CRACKED AND
PLUCKED FINISH AT 200X

uration. In margin testing, variable attenuators are used to increase loss until the
system has a high bit error rate. For loopback testing, an attenuator is used
between a single piece of the equipment’s transmitter and receiver to test for
operation under maximum specified fiber loss. If systems work in loopback test-
ing, they should work with a proper cable plant. Thus, many manufacturers of
network equipment specify a loopback test as a diagnostic/troubleshooting pro-
cedure.
Attenuators can be made by gap loss, or a physical separation of the ends of
the fibers, inducing bending losses or inserting calibrated optical filters. Both
variable and fixed attenuators are available, but variable attenuators are usually
used for testing. Fixed attenuators may be inserted in the system cables where dis-
tances in the fiber optic link are too short and excess power at the receiver causes
transmission problems.
Test Jumper Cables and Bulkhead Splice Adapters
In order to test cables using the FOTP-171 insertion loss test, one needs to estab-
lish test conditions. This requires launch jumper cables to connect the test source
to the cable under test and receive cables to connect the fiber optic power meter.
For accurate measurements, the launch and receive cables must be made with
fiber and connectors matching the cables to be tested. To provide reliable mea-
surements, launch and receive cables must be in good condition. They can easily
be tested against each other to insure their performance. Bulkhead splices are
used to connect the cables under test to the launch and receive cables. Only the
highest performance bulkhead splices should be used, and their condition
checked regularly, since they are vitally important in obtaining low loss connec-
tions.
OPTICAL POWER
The most basic fiber optic measurement is optical power from the end of a fiber.
This measurement is the basis for loss measurements as well as the power from a
source or at a receiver. Although optical power meters are the primary measure-
ment instrument, OLTSs and OTDRs also measure power differences in testing
loss. EIA standard test FOTP-95 covers the measurement of optical power.
Optical power is based on the heating power of the light, and some instru-
ments actually measure the heat when light is absorbed in a detector. While this
may work for high-powered lasers, these detectors are not sensitive enough for
the power levels typical for fiber optic communication systems. Table 17-2 shows
typical power levels in fiber optic systems.
Optical power meters typically use semiconductor detectors since they are
extremely sensitive to light in the wavelengths common to fiber optics (Table 17-3).
Most fiber optic power meters are available with a choice of three different detec-
190
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

tors, silicon (Si), Germanium (Ge), or Indium-Gallium-Arsenide (InGaAs). Silicon
photodiodes are sensitive to light in the range of 400 to 1000 nm and germanium
and indium-gallium-arsenide photodiodes are sensitive to light in the range of
800 to 1600 nm.
Calibration
Calibrating fiber optic power measurement equipment requires setting up a refer-
ence standard traceable to national standards laboratories such as the NIST.
Fiber optic power meters have an uncertainty of calibration of about ±5%, com-
pared to NIST primary standards. Limitations in the uncertainty are the inherent
inconsistencies in optical coupling, about 1 percent at every transfer, and slight
variations in wavelength calibration. NIST is working continuously with instru-
ment manufacturers and private calibration labs to try to reduce the uncertainty
of these calibrations.
NIST offers fiber optic power calibration services at 850-nm, 1300-nm, and
1550-nm wavelengths, so most fiber optic power meters offer calibrations at
those wavelengths. Fiber optic networks may work at slightly different wave-
lengths than those calibration wavelengths. For example multimode LED net-
works use LEDs that are referred to as 1300 nm but have broad spectral outputs,
and singlemode networks use lasers referred to as 1310-nm wavelength but 
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
191
Table 17-2
Optical Power Levels of Fiber Optic Communication Systems
Network Type
Wavelength (nm)
Power Range (dBm)
Power Range (W)
Telecom
1310, 1550
+3 to –45
50 nW to 2mW
Datacom
665, 790, 850,
–10 to –30
1 to 100uW
1300
CATV
1310, 1550
+10 to –6
250uW to 10mW
Table 17-3
Characteristics of Detectors Used in Fiber Optic Power Meters
Detector Type
Wavelength Range (nm)
Power Range (dBm)
Comments
Silicon
400–1100
+10 to –70
Germanium
800–1600
+10 to –60
–70 with small area
detectors, +30 with
attenuator windows
Indium-
800–1600
+10 to –70
Small area detectors may
Gallium-
overload at high power
Arsenide
(>.0 dBm)

actually vary between 1290 and 1330 nm. Since the difference in calibration
between 1300 and 1310 nm is insignificant and the actual devices vary from that
wavelength significantly, measurements are made only to those calibration wave-
lengths. Networks using 790-nm transmitters are usually tested at 850-nm cali-
bration, and plastic optical fiber is tested with meters calibrated at 650 nm
traceable to other NIST optical power standards.
Recalibration of instruments should be done annually; however, experience
has shown that the accuracy of meters rarely changes significantly during that
period, as long as the electronics of the meter do not fail. Unfortunately, the cali-
bration of fiber optic power meters requires considerable investment in capital
equipment and continual updating of the transfer standards, so very few private
calibration labs exist today. Most meters must be returned to the original manu-
facturer for calibration.
Instrument Resolution versus Measurement Uncertainty
The uncertainty of optical power measurements is about 0.2 dB (5 percent). Loss
measurements are likely to have uncertainties of 0.5 dB or more, and optical
return loss measurements have about 1 dB uncertainty. Instruments with read-
outs with a resolution of 0.01 dB are generally only appropriate for laboratory
measurements of very low losses such as connectors or splices under 1 dB or for
monitoring small changes in loss of power over environmental changes.
Field instruments are better when the instrument resolution is limited to 0.1
dB, since the readings will be less likely to be unstable when being read and more
indicative of the measurement uncertainty. This is especially important since field
personnel are usually not as well trained in the nuances of measurement uncer-
tainty.
OPTICAL FIBER TESTING
The installer rarely tests fiber or cable before it is installed and terminated except
to perform a continuity test before installation to insure no damage has been
done to the cable during shipment to the work site. Manufacturers of fiber and
cable have already tested the fibers thoroughly and usually provide extensive test
data along with the cable.
Continuity Testing
Continuity testing is the most fundamental fiber optic test. It is usually performed
with a visible light source, which can be an incandescent light bulb, HeNe laser at
633 nm, or a LED or diode laser at 650 nm, readily seen by the eye. HeNe laser
instruments are usually tuned to an output power level of just less than 1 mW,
making them Class II lasers, which do not have enough power to harm the eye,
192
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Figure 17-8
Fiber attenuation by cutback method.
but do have enough power to be seen easily over about 4 kilometers of fiber, and
even find fiber microbends or breaks by viewing the light shining from the break
through the yellow or orange jacket used on most single fiber cables.
Testing Fiber Attenuation
Measuring the fiber attenuation coefficient requires transmitting light of a known
wavelength through the fiber and measuring the changes over distance. The con-
ventional method, known as the cutback method (Figure 17-8), involves coupling
fiber to the source and measuring the power out of the far end. The fiber is then
cut near the source and power measured again. By knowing the power at the
source and end of the fiber and the length of the fiber, its attenuation coefficient
can be determined by calculating:
(Pend – Psource) (dB)
attenuation coefficient (dB) = ————————
length(km)
An alternative method of testing fiber, which may be easier in field measure-
ments, involves attaching a fiber pigtail to the source that has a connector on one
end and a temporary splice on the other end, similar to the loss measurement of
terminated cables. This method introduces more uncertainty in the measurement
because of the loss of the splice coupled to the fiber under test, since it may not be
easy to accurately calibrate the output power of the pigtail. The best method is to
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
193
Source
–3.1
Power
Meter
Fiber to Test
Modal Conditioning
Cutback to Here

use a bare fiber adapter on the power meter to measure the output of the bare
fiber, then attach the splice. Alternately, have the splice attached on the pigtail
and couple a large core fiber to the pigtail with the splice and measure the power.
The large core fiber will minimize losses in the splice for accurate calibration.
Sources for Loss Measurements
For loss measurements the source can be a fixed-wavelength LED or laser,
whichever is appropriate to the fiber being tested. Most multimode fiber systems
use LED sources, whereas singlemode fiber systems use laser sources. Thus, test-
ing each of these fibers should be done with the appropriate source. Lasers gener-
ally should not be used with multimode fiber, since coherent sources such as
lasers have high measurement uncertainties in multimode fiber caused by modal
noise. Networks like gigabit Ethernet are too fast for LED sources, so they use
lasers and special launch conditions to reduce modal noise. The cable may show
significantly lower loss with a laser source than an LED due to different modal
conditions. In this circumstance, testing with a source similar to a system source
will give more accurate results.
LEDs can be used to test short singlemode cables. However, the wide spectral
width of LEDs sometimes overlaps the singlemode fiber cutoff wavelength (the
lowest wavelength where the fiber supports only one mode) at lower wavelengths
and the 1400-nm hydroxide radical (/OH+): absorption band at the upper wave-
lengths, creating errors in loss measurements on longer singlemode cables (over
about 5 km).
Modal Effects on Attenuation
In order to test multimode fiber optic cables accurately and reproducibly, it is
necessary to understand modal distribution, mode control, and attenuation cor-
rection factors. Modal distribution in multimode fiber is very important to mea-
surement reproducibility and accuracy. For most field tests, using a source similar
to the system source will minimize errors.
Mode Conditioners
There are three basic “gadgets” to condition the modal distribution in multimode
fibers (Figure 17-9): mode strippers that remove unwanted cladding mode light,
mode scramblers that mix modes to equalize power in all the modes, and mode
filters that remove the higher order modes to simulate equilibrium modal distrib-
ution (EMD) or steady state conditions. These devices have been described in
detail in many articles on testing but are not commonly used in field measure-
ments today, due to the standardization of most link components.
194
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Figure 17-9
Mode conditioners for multimode graded-index fibers.
Modal Effects in Testing Singlemode Fiber
Testing singlemode fiber is easy compared to multimode fiber. Singlemode fiber,
as the name says, only supports one mode of transmission for wavelengths
greater than the cutoff wavelength of the fiber. Thus, most problems associated
with mode power distribution are no longer a factor. However, it takes a short
distance for singlemode fiber to really be singlemode, since several modes may be
supported for a short distance after connectors, splices, or sources. Singlemode
fibers shorter than 10 meters may have several modes. To insure short cables
have only one mode of propagation, one can use a simple mode filter made from
a 4- to-6 inch loop of the cable.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
195
Fiber
Buffer
Mode Stripper
Mode Scrambler
Index-Matching Material
Splice
Splice
Graded Index
Step Index
Graded Index
Mode Filter
Fiber
Mandrel

Bending Losses
Fiber and cable are subject to additional losses as a result of stress. In fact, fiber
makes a very good stress sensor. However, this is an additional source of uncer-
tainty when making attenuation measurements. It is mandatory to minimize
stress and/or stress changes on the fiber when making measurements. If the fiber
or cable is spooled, it will have higher loss when spooled tightly. It may be advis-
able to unspool it and respool with less tension. Unspooled fiber should be care-
fully placed on a bench and taped down to prevent movement. Above all, be
careful about how connectorized fiber is placed. Dangling fibers that stress the
back of the connector will have significant losses.
Transmission versus OTDR Tests
So far, we have only discussed testing attenuation by transmission of light from a
source, but one can also imply fiber losses by backscattered light from a source
using an OTDR.
OTDRs are widely used for testing fiber optic cables. Among the common
uses are measuring the length of fibers, and finding faults in fibers, breaks in
cables, attenuation of fibers, and losses in splices and connectors. They are also
used to optimize splices by monitoring splice loss. One of their biggest advan-
tages is that they produce a picture (called a trace) of the cable being tested.
Although OTDRs are unquestionably useful for all these tasks, they have error
mechanisms that are potentially large, troublesome, and not widely understood.
OTDR Operation
The OTDR (Figure 17-10) uses the lost light scattered in the fiber that is directed
back to the source for its operation. It couples a pulse from a high-powered laser
source into the fiber through a directional coupler. As the pulse of light passes
through the fiber, a small fraction of the light is scattered back toward the source.
As it returns to the OTDR, it is directed by the coupler to a very sensitive
receiver. The OTDR display (Figure 17-11) shows the intensity of the returned
signal in dB as a function of time, converted into distance using the average veloc-
ity of light in the glass fiber.
To understand how the OTDR allows measurement, consider what happens
to the light pulse it transmits. As it goes down the fiber, the pulse actually “fills”
the core of the fiber with light for a distance equal to the pulse width transmitted
by the OTDR. In a typical fiber, each nanosecond of pulse width equals about 8
inches (200 mm). Throughout that pulse, light is being scattered, so the longer
the pulse width in time, the greater the pulse length in the fiber, the greater will be
the amount of backscattered light, in direct proportion to the pulse width. The
intensity of the pulse is diminished by the attenuation of the fiber as it proceeds
196
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Figure 17-10
An OTDR block diagram.
Figure 17-11
OTDR display.
down the fiber, a portion of the pulse’s power is scattered back to the OTDR and
it is again diminished by the attenuation of the fiber as it returns up the fiber to
the OTDR. Thus, the intensity of the signal seen by the OTDR at any point in
time is a function of the position of the light pulse in the fiber.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
197
Laser
Coupler
Receiver
Boxcar
Averager
Fiber to
Test
Display
Laser Pulse
Splice
Back Reflection
End of Fiber
Distance
dB
Connector

By looking at the reduction in returned signal over time, one can calculate the
attenuation coefficient of the fiber being tested. Since the pulse travels out and
back, the attenuation of the fiber diminishes the signal in both directions, and the
transit time from pulse out to return is twice the one-way travel time. So both the
intensity and distance scales must be divided by two to allow for the round-trip
path of the light.
If the fiber has a splice or connector, the signal will be diminished as the pulse
passes it, so the OTDR sees a reduction in power, indicating the light loss of the
joined fibers. If the splice or connector reflects light (see optical return loss), the
OTDR will show the reflection as a spike above the backscattered signal. The
OTDR can be calibrated to use this spike to measure optical return loss.
The end of the fiber will show as a deterioration of the backscatter signal into
noise if it is within the dynamic range of the OTDR. If the end of the fiber is
cleaved or polished, one will also see a spike above the backscatter trace. This
allows one to measure the total length of the fiber being tested.
In order to enhance the signal to noise ratio of the received signal, the OTDR
sends out many pulses and averages the returned signals. And to get to longer dis-
tances, the power in the transmitted pulse is increased by widening the pulse
width. The longer pulse width fills a longer distance in the fiber as noted earlier.
This longer pulse width masks all details within the length of the pulse, increasing
the minimum distance between features resolvable with the OTDR.
OTDR Measurement Uncertainties
With the OTDR, one can measure loss and distance. To use them effectively, it is
necessary to understand their measurement limitations. The OTDR’s distance
resolution is limited by the transmitted pulse width. As the OTDR sends out its
pulse, crosstalk in the coupler inside the instrument and reflections from the first
connector will saturate the receiver. The receiver will take some time to recover,
causing a nonlinearity in the baseline of the display. It may take 100 to 1,000
meters before the receiver recovers. It is common to use a long fiber cable called
a pulse suppresser between the OTDR and the cables being tested to allow the
receiver to recover completely.
The OTDR also is limited in its ability to resolve two closely spaced features
by the pulse width. Long distance OTDRs may have a minimum resolution of
250 to 500 meters, while short range OTDRs can resolve features 5 to 10 meters
apart. This limitation makes it difficult to find problems inside a building, where
distances are short. A visual fault locator is generally used to assist the OTDR in
this situation.
When measuring distance, the OTDR has two major sources of error not
associated with the instrument itself: the velocity of the light pulse in the fiber and
the amount of fiber in the cable. The velocity of the pulse down the fiber is a
198
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
199
function of the average index of refraction of the glass. While this is fairly constant
for most fiber types, it can vary by a few percent. When making cable, it is neces-
sary to have some excess fiber in the cable, to allow the cable to stretch when
pulled without stressing the fiber. This excess fiber is usually 1 to 2 percent. Since
the OTDR measures the length of the fiber, not the cable, it is necessary to sub-
tract 1 to 2 percent from the measured length to get the likely cable length. This is
very important if one is using the OTDR to find a fault in an installed cable, to
keep from looking too far away from the OTDR to find the problem. This vari-
able adds up to 10 to 20 meters per kilometer, therefore it is not ignorable.
When making loss measurements, two major questions arise with OTDR
measurement anomalies: why OTDR measurements differ from an OLTS, which
tests the fiber in the same configuration in which it is used, and why measure-
ments from OTDRs vary so much when measured in opposite directions on the
same splice. And why one direction sometimes shows a gain, not a loss.
In order to understand the problem, it is necessary to consider again how
OTDRs work (Figure 17-12). They send a powerful laser pulse down the fiber,
which suffers attenuation as it proceeds. At every point on the fiber, part of the
light is scattered back up the fiber. The backscattered light is then attenuated by
the fiber again, until it returns to the OTDR and is measured.
Note that three factors affect the measured signal: attenuation outbound,
scattering, and attenuation inbound.
It is commonly assumed that the backscatter coefficient is a constant, and
therefore the OTDR can be calibrated to read attenuation. The backscatter coef-
ficient is, in fact, a function of the core diameter of the fiber (or mode field diam-
eter in singlemode fiber) and the material composition of the fiber (which
determines attenuation). Thus, a fiber with either higher attenuation or larger
core size will produce a larger backscatter signal.
Accurate OTDR attenuation measurements depend on having a constant
backscatter coefficient. Unfortunately, this often is not the case. Fibers with
tapers in core size are common, or variations in diameter as the result of varia-
tions in pulling speed as the fiber is being made. A small change in diameter (1
percent) causes a larger change in cross-sectional area that directly affects the
scattering coefficient and can cause a large change in attenuation (on the order of
0.1 dB). Thus, fiber attenuation measured by OTDRs may be nonlinear along the
fiber and produce significantly different losses in opposite directions.
The first indication of OTDR problems for most users occurs when looking
at a splice and a gain is seen at the splice. Common sense tells us that passive
fibers and splices cannot create light, so another phenomenon must be at work.
In fact, a “gainer” is an indication of the difference of backscatter coefficients in
the two fibers being spliced.
If an OTDR is used to measure the loss of a splice and the two fibers are
identical, the loss will be correct, since the scattering coefficient is the same for

200
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Backscatter
Test Pulse
Fiber A
Backscatter
Test Pulse
Fiber B
Loss
Actual Splice Loss
}
(a)
(b) Fiber A = Fiber B
Actual
}
Variation Caused by
Difference in Scattering
Coefficient
}
Actual Splice Loss
}
Variation Caused by Difference
in Scattering Coefficient
}
(c) Loss A > Loss B
(d) Loss A < Loss B (“Gainer”)
Splice
Figure 17-12
OTDR loss measurement uncertainty.

both fibers. This is exactly what you see when breaking and splicing the same
fiber, the normal way OTDRs are demonstrated.
If the receiving fiber has a lower backscatter coefficient than the fiber before
the splice, the amount of light sent back to the OTDR will decrease after the
splice, causing the OTDR to indicate a larger splice loss than actual.
If one looks at this splice in the opposite direction, the effect will be reversed.
The amount of backscattered light will be larger after the splice and the loss
shown on the OTDR will be less than the actual splice loss. If this increase is
larger than the loss in the splice, the OTDR will show a gain at the splice, an
obvious error. As many as one-third of all splices will show a gain in one direc-
tion.
The usual recommendation is to test with the OTDR in both directions and
average the reading, which has been shown to give measurements accurate to
about 0.01 dB. But this negates the most useful feature of the OTDR, the ability
to work from only one end of the fiber. And all network specifications call for
loss testing with a source and meter, which must be done also.
Bandwidth Testing
Fiber’s information transmission capacity is limited by two separate components
of dispersion: modal and chromatic. Modal dispersion occurs in step-index mul-
timode fiber where the paths of different modes are of varying lengths. Modal
dispersion also comes from the fact that the index profile of graded-index (GI)
multimode fiber is not perfect.
The second factor in fiber bandwidth is chromatic dispersion. Remember, a
prism spreads out the spectrum of incident light, since the light travels at different
speeds according to its color and is therefore refracted at different angles. The
usual way of stating this is the index of refraction of the glass is wavelength
dependent. Thus, a carefully manufactured graded-index multimode fiber can
only be optimized for a single wavelength, usually near 1300 nm, and light of
other colors will suffer from chromatic dispersion. Even light in the same mode
will be dispersed if it is of different wavelengths.
Chromatic dispersion is a bigger problem with LEDs, which have broad spec-
tral outputs, unlike lasers that concentrate most of their light in a narrow spectral
range. Chromatic dispersion occurs with LEDs because much of the power is
away from the zero dispersion wavelength of the fiber. High speed systems such
as FDDI, based on broad output surface emitter LEDs, suffer such intense chro-
matic dispersion that transmission over only 2 to 3 km of 62.5/125 fiber can be
risky.
Modal dispersion is the most commonly tested bandwidth factor. Testing is
done by using a narrow spectral width laser source and high-speed receiver to
determine dynamic characteristics. Testing can be done by sweeping the frequency
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
201

of a sine wave and looking for attenuation in the pulse peak height, which leads to
a specification of bandwidth at the 3 dB loss point, that is, pulse height is 0.5 the
value at low frequency. The alternate method is to measure degradation of pulse
risetime.
Chromatic dispersion requires comparing pulse transit times or phase shift as
a function of wavelength. Thus, sources of several wavelengths are used and vari-
ations in time allow calculating dispersion as a function of wavelength. Although
it seems that this could be done with a broad spectral width source such as an
LED, the removal of the effects of the spectral characteristics of the LED is very
complicated mathematically and every LED is unique in its spectral characteris-
tics, making calibration of test equipment very difficult.
Since all this test equipment must work in the GHz range, it is very expen-
sive. Fortunately, fiber bandwidth characteristics have been very well modeled
and the characteristics calculated with precision comparable to actual measure-
ments. There have been at least two models described in detail and one available
commercially. The one available commercially (Fotec’s Cable Characterizer) cal-
culates bandwidth for multimode fibers based on inputs of fiber modal band-
width and length and source wavelength and spectral width.
Using the models one can easily determine if the installed fiber is adequate
for higher-speed networks such as FDDI. They can help designers design net-
works with adequate bandwidth for high-speed networks without spending too
much on overspecified fiber, and provide a way for the installer or end user to
certify cable plants for FDDI and other high-speed networks.
CONNECTOR AND SPLICE LOSS TESTING
Connector loss is the major cause of loss in short fiber optic cable plant runs,
making it a very important measurement. Most cable testing is done after the
connectors are installed, so the loss includes the connectors. Splice testing is more
complicated. Expensive fusion splicers estimate the splice loss themselves, and the
data is quite reliable. Splice testing is generally done with an OTDR in both direc-
tions and averaged, but the cost and difficulty of splice testing is such that it usu-
ally is not done unless the splice quality is suspected from the total end-to-end
loss of the cable.
Connectors and splices are tested by the manufacturer to establish a typical
loss that can be expected by the experienced user. However, the actual loss of a
connector or splice is primarily a function of the installation process, not the
component itself. The connector itself is made very precisely, so the loss is deter-
mined by how well it is assembled and polished. Splice loss also depends on the
skill of the installer, although much less so than on the connector, since polishing
202
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Figure 17-13
Connector insertion loss test.
is not needed. Large variations in loss from the manufacturer’s specifications for
loss may mean that the installer needs to improve either the installation process
or the test process.
In order to establish a typical loss for connectors or splices, it is necessary to
test them in a standardized fashion to allow for comparisons among various con-
nectors. Measurements of connector or splice losses are performed by measuring
the transmitted power of a short length of cable and then inserting a connector
pair or splice into the fiber (Figure 17-13). This test (designated FOTP-34 by the
EIA) can be used for both multimode and singlemode fiber, but the results for
multimode fiber are dependent on mode power distribution.
FOTP-34 has three options in modal distribution: (1) EMD or steady state,
(2) fully filled, and (3) any other conditions as long as they are specified. Besides
mode power distribution factors, the uncertainty of the measured loss is a combi-
nation of inherent fiber geometry variations, installed connector characteristics,
and the effects of the splice bushing used to align the two connectors.
This test is repeated hundreds or thousands of times by each connector man-
ufacturer to produce data that is quoted as an average value for the connector.
This shows the repeatability of their connector design, a critical factor in figuring
margins for installations using many connectors. Thus, loss is not the only crite-
rion for a good connector—it must be repeatable, so its average loss can be used
for these margin calculations with some degree of confidence.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
203
Source
–3.1
Power
Meter
Fiber to Test
Modal Conditioning
Insert Connector

Figure 17-14
Inspecting connection with microscope.
Inspecting Connectors
Inspecting connectors in operating fiber optic links can be very dangerous if high
power levels are present, for instance from a laser source. Whenever inspecting
connectors in an installed or operating system, always check the connector with a
power meter to ensure no power is present. 
Visual inspection of the end surface of a connector with a microscope is one
of the best ways to determine the quality of the termination procedure and diag-
nose problems. A well-made connector will have a smooth, polished, scratch-free
finish, and the fiber will not show any signs of cracks or pistoning (where the
fiber is either protruding from the end of the ferrule or pulling back into it).
The proper magnification for viewing connectors can be 30 to 400 power.
Lower magnification, typical with a jeweler’s loupe or pocket magnifier, will not
provide adequate resolution for judging the finish on the connector. Too high a
magnification tends to make small, ignorable faults look worse than they really
are. A better solution is to use medium magnification, but inspect the connector
three ways: viewing directly at the end of the polished surface with side lighting,
viewing directly with side lighting and light transmitted through the core, and
viewing at an angle with lighting from the opposite angle (Figure 17-14).
204
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Light Bulb
Microscope Lens
Connector(s)
Light Bulb
Microscope Lens
Connector
Direct View with Core
Illumination
Angle View

Viewing directly with side lighting allows one to determine if the ferrule hole
is of the proper size, the fiber is centered in the hole, and a proper amount of
adhesive has been applied. Only the largest scratches will be visible this way,
however. Adding light transmitted through the core will make cracks in the end
of the fiber, caused by pressure or heat during the polish process, visible.
Viewing the end of the connector at an angle, while lighting it from the oppo-
site side at approximately the same angle, will allow the best inspection for the
quality of polish and possible scratches. The shadowing effect of angular viewing
enhances the contrast of scratches against the mirror-smooth polished surface of
the glass.
One needs to be careful in inspecting connectors, however. The tendency is
to be overly critical, especially at high magnification. Only defects over the fiber
core are a problem. Chipping of the glass around the outside of the cladding is
not unusual and will have no effect on the ability of the connector to couple light
in the core. Likewise, scratches only on the cladding will not cause any loss
problems.
An alternative way of viewing connector end faces is an interferometer. The
interferometer uses a special technique to show a profile of the end of the con-
nector that can determine its flatness or proper curvature for physical contact
(PC) connectors. Interferometers are important tools to use for critical connectors
such as PC singlemode types, but their size and cost limit their use to manufac-
turing facilities.
Optical Return Loss in Connectors
If you have ever looked at a fiber optic connector on an OTDR, you are familiar
with the characteristic spike that shows where the connector is. That spike is a
measure of the back reflection of optical return loss (ORL) of the connector, or
the amount of light that is reflected back up the fiber by light reflecting off the
interface of the polished end surface of the connector and air. It is called fresnel
reflection and is caused by the light going through the change in index of refrac-
tion at the interface between the fiber (n = 1.5) and air (n = 1).
For most systems, that return spike is just one component of the connector’s
loss, representing about 0.3 dB loss (two air/glass interfaces at 4 percent reflec-
tion each), the minimum loss for noncontacting connectors without index-match-
ing fluid. But in high bit-rate singlemode systems, that reflection can be a major
source of bit error-rate problems. The reflected light interferes with the laser
diode chip, causes mode-hopping, and can be a source of noise. Minimizing the
light reflected back into the laser is necessary to get maximum performance out
of high bit-rate laser systems, especially the analog modulation (AM) modulated
CATV systems.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
205

State-of-the-art connectors will have a return loss of about 40 to 60 dB. Mea-
suring this back reflection can be done in the field with most of today’s OTDRs
or using a source and power meter per standard test procedure EIA FOTP-107 in
the manufacturing process. Generally, ORL is not measured in the field.
Connectorized Cable Testing
After connectors are added to a cable, testing must include the loss of the fiber in
the cable plus the loss of the connectors. This is the test that is most often per-
formed in the field after cable installation and termination. On very short cable
assemblies (up to 10 m long), the loss of the connectors will be the only relevant
loss, while fiber will contribute to the overall losses in longer cable assemblies. In
an installed cable plant, one must test the entire cable from end to end, including
every component in it, such as splices, couplers, and connectors intermediate
patch panels.
In testing connectorized cables, one uses a source with a launch cable attached
to calibrate the power being launched into the cable under test and a meter to
measure the loss. This test, FOTP-171, was developed along the lines of FOTP-34
for connectors (Figure 17-15). One begins by attaching to the source a launch
cable made from the same size fiber and connector type as the cables to be tested.
The power from the end of this launch cable is measured by a power meter to cal-
ibrate the launch power for the test. Then the cable to test is attached and power
measured at the end again. One can calculate the loss incurred in the connectors
mating to the launch cable and in the fiber in the cable itself.
206
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Figure 17-15
Basic fiber optic cable loss test.
Source
–3.1
Power
Meter
Cable to Test
Launch
Cable

Since this only measures the loss in the connector mated to the launch cable,
one can add a second cable at the power meter end, called a receive cable, so the
cable to test is between the launch and receive cables. Then one measures the loss
at both connectors and in everything in between. This is commonly called a dou-
ble-ended loss test (Figure 17-16).
To obtain accurate loss measurements, it is important to calibrate the
launched power from the test source correctly. There have been two interpreta-
tions of the calibration of the output of the source in this test. One interpretation
(the incorrect one) is that one attaches the launch cable to the source and the
receive cable to the meter. The two are then mated and this becomes the “0 dB”
reference. The second method only attaches the launch cable to the source and
measures the power from the launch cable with the power meter.
With the first method, usually called the “two-cable reference,” one has two
new measurement uncertainties. First, this method underestimates the loss of the
cable plant by the loss of one connection, since that is zeroed out in the calibra-
tion process. Secondly, if one has a bad connector on one or both of the test
cables, it is hidden by the calibration, since even if the two connectors have a loss
of 10 dB, it is not seen by the calibration method used. This can lead to large
measurement errors, where losses measured will be higher than actual losses.
In the correct “single-cable” method, the launch power from the cable
attached to the source is measured directly by the power meter. This also allows
one to measure both connectors on the test cable, since power is referenced to the
output power of the launch connector. In addition, one can test the mating quality
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
207
Figure 17-16
Double-ended cable loss test.
Source
–3.1
Power
Meter
Cable to Test
Launch
Cable
Receive Cable

of the test cables’ connectors by attaching the receive jumper to the meter and then
measuring the loss of the connection between the launch and receive jumpers. If
this loss is high, one knows there is a problem with the test connectors that must
be fixed before actual cable loss measurements should be made.
Obviously, the second method is the proper method. Both methods are
detailed in OFSTP-14, the extension of FOTP-171 to include installed cable plants,
which also discusses the problems associated with mode power distribution. Also,
the loss specifications for the cable plant in all network specifications are written to
require that the single-cable launch power calibration method be used.
Finding Bad Connectors
If a test shows a jumper cable to have high loss, there are several ways to find the
problem. If you have a microscope, inspect the connectors for obvious defects
such as scratches, cracks, or surface contamination. If they look okay, clean them
before retesting. Retest the launch cable to make certain it is good. Then retest the
jumper cable with the single-ended method, using only a launch cable. Test the cable
in both directions. The cable should have higher loss when tested with the bad
connector attached to the launch cable, since the large area detector of the power
meter will not be affected as much by the typical loss factors of connectors.
Measuring Installed Splice Loss
Most fusion splicers have built-in equipment to inject and detect light transmitted
through the splice being made for estimating splice loss. These machines do not
require any other means of measuring splice loss. However, for other splice types,
it may be desirable to measure splice loss directly.
An OTDR can be used to measure splice loss, but its measurement uncer-
tainty caused by the different characteristics of the two different fibers used make
it more of a relative loss measurement than an absolute loss value. However, if
knowing the absolute loss of a splice is necessary, measure it with an OTDR in
both directions and average the results.
One can also measure the loss of a splice using a technique similar to the
FOTP-171 test for connectors. In order to measure the output to the launch fiber
(the one connected to the transmitter or test source), one must use a bare fiber
adapter on the power meter. After cleaving the fiber, measure the power with the
meter and use that as a reference. Once the fiber has been spliced, measuring the
loss, including the loss of the length of cable spliced on, can be done at the far end
of the fiber being spliced, which may be miles away. Since many splices are usu-
ally done at once, moving the power meter to the remote location each time is
impractical, so one needs another person with a calibrated meter at the remote
location to measure the power and report back the reading to allow calculation
of the loss.
208
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Mode Power Distribution Effects on Loss in Multimode Fiber Cables
The biggest factor in the uncertainty of multimode cable loss tests is the mode
power distribution caused by the test source. When testing a simple 1 m cable
assembly, variations in sources can cause 0.3 to 1 dB variations in measured loss.
The effect is similar to the effect on fiber loss discussed earlier, since the concen-
tration of light in the lower order modes as a result of EMD or mode filtering will
minimize the effects of gap, offset, and angularity on mating loss by effectively
reducing the fiber core size and numerical aperture.
Although one can make mode scramblers and filters to control mode power
distribution when testing in the laboratory, it is more difficult to use these in the
field. The best way to get reliable measurements is to insure the test source uses a
source similar to a system source, not a controlled or restricted launch power dis-
tribution. An alternative technique is to use a special mode conditioning cable
between the source and launch cable that induces the proper mode power distri-
bution. This can be done with a step-index fiber with a restricted numerical aper-
ture. Experiments with such a cable used between the source have been shown to
greatly reduce the variations in mode power distributions between sources. This
technique works well with both lab tests of connector loss and field tests of loss
in the installed cable plant.
Choosing a Launch Cable for Testing
Obviously, the quality of the launch cable will affect measurements of loss in cable
assemblies tested against it. Good connectors with proper polish are obviously
needed, but experiments have shown that one cannot improve measurements by
specifying tighter specifications on the fiber and connectors. If the fiber is closer to
nominal specifications and the connector ferrule is tightly toleranced, one should
expect more repeatable measurements, but there are so many variables in the ter-
mination process that specifying special parts does not lead to better measure-
ments. Therefore, it is recommended that launch cables be chosen for low loss, but
not specified with tighter tolerances in the fiber or connector characteristics.
It is much more important to handle the test cables carefully and inspect the
end surfaces of the ferrules in a microscope for dirt and wear or scratches regu-
larly. Remember, the splice bushing used in testing wears out also. Do not use
splice bushings with molded plastic alignment sleeves for testing as some wear
fast and contaminate the ends of connectors. Use only adapters with metal or
ceramic alignment sleeves for test purposes.
Losses from Mismatched Fibers
Fiber mismatches occur for two reasons: the occasional need to interconnect two
dissimilar fibers and production variances in fibers of the same nominal dimen-
sions. With two multimode fibers in use today (62.5 and 50 micron cores) and
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
209

two others that have been used occasionally in the past, connecting dissimilar
fibers or using systems designed for one fiber or another is sometimes necessary.
Some system manufacturers provide guidelines on using various fibers; some do
not. If you connect a smaller fiber to a larger one, the coupling losses will be min-
imal, often only the fresnel loss (about 0.3 dB). But connecting larger fibers to
smaller ones results in substantial losses, not only due to the smaller core size, but
also the smaller NA of most small-core fibers.
In the Table 17-4, we show the losses incurred in connecting mismatched
fibers. The range of values results from the variability of modal conditions. If the
transmitting fiber is overfilled or nearer the source, the loss will be higher. If the
fiber is near steady state conditions, the loss will be nearer the lower value.
If you are connecting fiber directly to a source, the variation in power will be
approximately the same as for fiber mismatch, except that replacing the smaller
fiber with a larger fiber will result in a gain in power roughly equal to the loss in
power in coupling from the larger fiber to the smaller one.
Whenever you use a different (and often unspecified) fiber with a system, be
aware of differences in fiber bandwidths also. A system may work on paper, with
enough power available, but the fiber could have insufficient bandwidth.
TESTING THE INSTALLED FIBER OPTIC CABLE PLANT
The process of testing any fiber optic cable plant during and after installation
includes all the procedures covered so far. To thoroughly test the cable plant, one
needs to perform three tests—before installation, on each installed segment, and
complete end-to-end loss. Practical testing, however, usually means continuity
testing each cable before installation to insure there has been no damage to the
cable in transit and each segment as it is terminated. Then the entire cable run is
tested for end-to-end loss.
One should test the cable on the reel for continuity before installing it to
insure no damage was done in shipment from the manufacturer to the job site.
Since the cost of installation usually is high, often higher than the cost of materi-
als, it only makes sense to insure that one does not install bad cable. It is gener-
ally sufficient just to test continuity, since most fiber is installed without
210
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Table 17.4
Mismatched Fiber Connection Losses (Excess Loss in dB)
Transmitting Fiber
Receiving Fiber
62.5/125
85/125
100/140
50/125
0.9–1.6
3.0–4.6
4.7–9
62.5/125
—
0.9
2.1–4.1
85/125
—
—
0.9–1.4

Figure 17-17
OFSTP-14 cable plant loss test as required in network
specifications.
connectors and then terminated in place, and connectors are the most likely prob-
lem to be uncovered by testing for loss. After installation and termination, each
segment of the cable plant should be tested individually as it is installed, to insure
each connector and cable is good. Finally, each end-to-end run (from equipment
placed on the cable plant to equipment) should be tested as a final check.
Testing the complete cable plant is done in accordance with another standard
test procedure, OFSTP-14 (Figure 17-17). This procedure covers the peculiarities
of multimode fiber in detail. In fact, it was written for multimode cables to cover
the problems of controlling mode power distribution, but the same procedures
apply for singlemode fiber, less the concerns expressed for mode power distribu-
tion errors.
For multimode fibers, testing is now usually done at both 850 and 1300 nm,
using LED sources. This will prove the performance of the cable for every data-
com system, including FDDI and ESCON, and meet the requirements of all net-
work vendors. For singlemode fiber cables, testing is usually done at 1300 nm,
but 1550 nm is sometimes required also. The 1550-nm testing will show that the
cable can support wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) at 1310 and 1550
nm for future service expansion. In addition, 1550-nm testing can show micro-
bending losses that will not be obvious at 1310 nm, since the fibers are much
more sensitive to bending losses at 1550 nm.
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
211
Light
Source
Optical Power
Measurement
Equipment
P1
Test Jumper 1
Light
Source
Optical Power
Measurement
Equipment
P2
Cable Plant
Test Jumper 1
Test Jumper 2
A
B
Reference Power Measurement for Method B
Cable Plant Loss Measurement

If cable plant end-to-end loss exceeds total allowable loss, the best solution is
to retest each segment of the cable plant separately, checking suspect cables each
way, since the most likely problem is a single bad connector or splice. If the cable
plant is long enough, an OTDR may be used to find the problem. Bad connectors
must then be repolished or replaced to get the loss within acceptable ranges.
What about OTDR Testing?
Once upon a time, OTDRs were used for all testing of installed cable plants. In
fact, printouts or pictures of the OTDR traces were kept on record for every fiber
in every cable. The power meter and source (or OLTS) have replaced the OTDR
for most final qualification testing, since the direct loss test gives a more reliable
test of the end-to-end loss than does an OTDR (see OTDR discussion above).
However, the OTDR may need to be used to find bad splices or ORL prob-
lems in connectors and splices in a singlemode cable plant. Only with an OTDR
can ORL problems be located for correction. Typical back reflection test sets
only give a total amount of backscatter or return loss, not the effects of individ-
ual components, which is necessary to locate and fix the problem.
The OTDR can also be used to find bad connectors or splices in a high loss
cable plant, if the OTDR has high enough resolution to see short, individual cable
assemblies. However, if the cables are too short or the splices too near the end of
the fiber (as is often the case in pigtails spliced onto singlemode fiber cables), the
only way to localize the problem is to use a visual fault locator, preferably a high-
powered HeNe laser type, which can shine through the jacket of typical yellow or
orange polyvinyl chloride- (PVC) jacketed single-fiber cables. This method of
fault location is easiest if single-fiber cables use yellow or orange jackets that are
more translucent to the laser light.
Handling and Cleaning Procedures
Connectors and cables should be handled with care. Do not bend cables too
tightly, especially near the connectors, as sharp bends can break the fibers. Do
not drop the connectors, as they can be damaged by a blow to the optical face.
Do not pull hard on the connectors themselves, as this may break the fiber in the
backshell of the connector or cause pistoning if the bond between the fiber and
the connector ferrule is broken.
COUPLERS AND SWITCHES
Some networks use passive couplers or switches to redirect the fiber path. These
devices must be tested for loss just as is any other component, although each pos-
sible light path needs testing individually. Multimode components will be sensitive
to mode power distribution and need to be tested carefully to get accurate results.
212
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

Fiber Optic Couplers
Couplers split or combine light in fibers. They may be simple splitters or 2 × 2
couplers, or up to 64 × 64 ports star couplers. Most are made by fusing fibers
under high temperatures, which causes light to split or combine in appropriate
ratios. Relevant specifications for couplers are the coupling ratios of each port or
the consistency across all the ports, crosstalk, and the excess loss caused by the
fusing. Excess loss is the difference between the sum of all the outputs and the
sum of all the inputs. When used in laser-based systems, couplers may need test-
ing for optical return loss and also for wavelength dependence.
Thus, testing couplers involves coupling a test source to each input port in
turn and measuring all the outputs for consistency, then summing all the output
powers and subtracting that number from the input power to calculate excess
loss. Connectorized couplers are tested like connectorized cables, using a launch
cable, whereas couplers with bare fibers must use a cutback method or a pigtail
and temporary splice to couple the launch source.
Singlemode couplers have another characteristic that must be considered:
They are very wavelength sensitive. Most couplers are optimized at one wave-
length unless they are specially designed for both 1310- and 1550-nm operation.
Some are even built to be wavelength division multiplexers, coupling light from
1310- and 1550-nm lasers into separate output ports. Therefore, sources for test-
ing couplers must be accurately characterized for wavelength to minimize mea-
surement uncertainty.
Fiber Optic Switches
Switches transfer light from one fiber to another. As with couplers, switch testing
involves measuring the loss in the switch by measuring the input from a source
and the appropriate output for each switch position. In multimode components,
mode power distribution can cause variation in switch losses or coupling ratios.
FIBER OPTIC DATALINKS
Fiber optic transmission systems all work similarly; they contain a transmitter
that takes an electrical input and converts it to an optical output from a laser
diode or LED. The light from the transmitter is coupled into the fiber with a
connector and is transmitted through the fiber optic cable plant. The light is ulti-
mately coupled to a receiver where a detector converts the light into an electrical
signal, which is then conditioned properly for use by the receiving equipment.
Most networks or datalinks will be bidirectional and full duplex, transmitting
and receiving simultaneously. They will have two links as shown in Figure 17-
18, operating in opposite directions. Just as with copper wire or radio transmis-
sion, the performance of the fiber optic data link can be determined by how well
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
213

the reconverted electrical signal out of the receiver matches the input to the
transmitter.
The ability of any fiber optic system to transmit data ultimately depends on
the optical power at the receiver as shown in Figure 17-19, which shows the
datalink bit-error rate as a function of optical power at the receiver. Either too lit-
tle or too much power will cause high bit-error rates. Too much power, and the
receiver amplifier saturates, too little and noise becomes a problem. This receiver
power depends on two basic factors: how much power is launched into the fiber
by the transmitter and how much is lost by attenuation in the optical fiber cable
that connects the transmitter and receiver.
Datalink testing is done with a power meter that measures the optical power
first at the receiver and then at the transmitter (with its power coupled into a
known good test cable, usually one of the launch cables used for testing the cable
plant) as shown in Figure 17-20.
What Goes Wrong on Fiber Optic Installations?
In installing and testing fiber optic networks, the first problem routinely encoun-
tered is incorrect fiber optic connections. A fiber optic link consists of two fibers,
transmitting in opposite directions, to provide full duplex communications. It is
214
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
Figure 17-18
Typical fiber optic link.
Transmitter
Source
Driver
Input
LED or Laser
Receiver
Output
Photodiode
Preamp/Trigger
Connectors
Cables

not uncommon for the transmit and receive fibers to be switched. A visual fiber
tracer will make it easy to verify the proper connections quickly. The visual tracer
can trace the fiber through the cables, patch panels, and other components to the
far end.
If the fibers are connected correctly but the network still does not work, the
next thing to check is the receiver power level. If the receiver power level is within
specification, the problem is likely in the network electronics. If the receiver
power is low, test the transmitter power to see if it is within specifications. If
transmitter power is adequate, the cable plant is the problem.
Test the complete cable plant—including all individual jumper or trunk
cables—for loss, using a power meter and source and the double-ended method
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
215
Figure 17-19
Bit-error rate (BER) performance of fiber optic systems.
BER
Received Optical Power
Operating
Range
Max
Min
Min
Max
Figure 17-20
Troubleshooting a fiber optic link.
Transmitter Power
Cable Plant Loss
Receiver Power

described in the section on testing the installed cable plant. Use the double-ended
method, since system margin specifications include the loss of connectors on both
ends of the fiber. If the end-to-end (transmitter to receiver) loss measurement for
a given fiber is within the network margin specification, the data should be
recorded for future reference.
If the loss is too low, notation should be made that that fiber will probably
need an inline attenuator to reduce receiver power to acceptable levels. If the loss
is too high, it will be necessary to retest each link of the complete cable run to
find the bad link.
Possible causes of high end-to-end link loss are bad connectors, bad splice
bushings in patch panels, cables bent too tightly around corners, broken fibers in
cables, or even bad launch or receive cables or instruments. There are only two
ways to find the problem: testing each segment of the cable individually to find
the problem and issuing an OTDR if the lengths are long enough for viewing
with the limited resolution of the OTDR.
Do not use an OTDR for measuring end-to-end loss. It will not accurately
measure actual link loss as seen by the actual transmitters and receivers of the
fiber optic link. As normally used, the OTDR will not count the end connectors’
loss. The OTDR uses a laser with very restricted mode power distribution, which
minimizes the loss of the fiber and the intermediate connectors. Finally, the dif-
ference in backscattering coefficients of various fibers leads to imprecise connec-
tor loss measurements.
Surviving with Fiber Optics
Once the installation is complete, the cable plant tested, the network equipment
running smoothly, what is likely to go wrong in a fiber optic network? Fortu-
nately, not much. One of the biggest selling points for fiber optics has been its
reliability. But there are potential problems that can be addressed by the end user.
With the cable plant, the biggest problem is what the telcos call “backhoe
fade,” where someone mistakenly cuts or breaks the cable. Although this most
often happens when an underground cable is dug up, it can happen when an elec-
trician is working on cables inside a building. Outdoors, the best defense is to
mark where cables are buried and bury a marker tape above the cable that will, it
is hoped, be dug up first. Inside buildings, using orange or yellow jacket cable
instead of black or gray will make the fiber cable more visible and distinctive.
Outside cable faults are best found by using an OTDR to localize the fault, then
having personnel scout the area looking for obvious damage. Inside buildings, the
short distances make OTDRs unusable, so a visual fault locator is necessary.
Another problem is breaking the cable just behind the connectors in patch panels.
216
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

This is a difficult fault to find, but a visual fault locator is often the best way.
Unless the jumper cables are quite long, an OTDR will not help at all.
Within the fiber optic link, the most likely component to fail is the LED or laser
transmitter, since it is the most highly stressed component in the link. Lasers are
feedback stabilized to maintain a constant output power, so they tend to fail all at
once. LEDs will drop in power output as they age, but the timeframe is quite long,
100,000 to 1 million hours. If there is no power at the receiver the next place to
check should be the transmitter LED or laser, just to isolate the problem to either the
transmitter or the cable plant. Receivers are low-stressed devices and highly reliable,
but the electronics behind them can fail. If there is receiver power but no communi-
cations, a loopback test to see if the receiver is working is the best test of its status.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. _____________ is the most important parameter and is required for
almost all fiber optic tests.
a. Attenuation
b. Backscatter
c. Optical power
d. Receiver power
2. Match the items on the left with related phrases on the right.
____ Power meter
a. detects a 2kH “tone”
____ OTDR
b. detects poor splices or cable breaks in 
____ Fiber identifier
short lengths of fiber
____ Visible fault locator
c. measures optical power
____ Microscope
d. detects faults in long lengths of fiber
____ Attenuator
e. introduces a measured loss into the link
f. detects scratches and polishing defects
in connectors
3. Optical fiber is sometimes tested for _____________ before it is installed.
a. back reflection
b. splice loss
c. continuity
d. return loss
4. 0 dBm is equal to _____________
a. 1 mW.
b. –30 dBµ.
c. both a and b
d. neither a nor b
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING
217

5. When testing for loss, the launch cable must be compatible with the 
_____________
a. source wave length.
b. cable type.
c. fiber type (62.5, 50, SM).
d. length of the cable.
6. An OTDR uses _____________ to characterize fibers and find faults.
a. absorption
b. attenuation
c. backscattering
d. LEDs
7. One advantage an OTDR has over a power meter and source is
_____________
a. lower price.
b. more accurate attenuation reading.
c. it requires access to only one end of the fiber.
d. no measurement uncertainty.
8. To detect splice loss in a 1.5 km yellow-jacketed SM fiber a
_____________ is used.
a. OLTS
b. OTDR
c. Visual fault locator
d. OCWR
9. Using the accompanying trace, identify the following:
1. splice _______
2. initial pulse _______
3. connector _______
4. end of fiber _______
5. back reflections _______
6. gain _______
Distance
dB
E
A
D
B
C
218
CHAPTER 17 — FIBER OPTIC TESTING

A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
A
GLOSSARY OF
FIBER OPTIC TERMS
Absorption: That portion of fiber optic attenuation that is the result of conver-
sion of optical power to heat.
Analog: Signals that are continually changing, as opposed to being digitally
encoded.
Attenuation: The reduction in optical power as it passes along a fiber, usually
expressed in decibels (dB). See Optical loss.
Attenuation coefficient: Characteristic of the attenuation of an optical fiber per
unit length, in dB/km.
Attenuator: A device that reduces signal power in a fiber optic link by inducing
loss.
Average power: The average over time of a modulated signal.
Back reflection, optical return loss: Light reflected from the cleaved or polished
end of a fiber caused by the difference of refractive indices of air and glass.
Expressed in dB relative to incident power.
Backscattering: The scattering of light in a fiber back toward the source, used to
make OTDR measurements.
Bandwidth: The range of signal frequencies or bit rate within which a fiber optic
component, link, or network will operate.
Bending loss, microbending loss: Loss in fiber caused by stress on the fiber bent
around a restrictive radius.
219

Bit: An electrical or optical pulse that carries information.
Bit-error rate (BER): The fraction of data bits transmitted that are received in
error.
Buffer: A protective coating applied directly on the fiber.
Cable: One or more fibers enclosed in protective coverings and strength mem-
bers.
Cable plant, fiber optic: The combination of fiber optic cable sections, connec-
tors, and splices forming the optical path between two terminal devices.
CATV: An abbreviation for community antenna television or cable TV.
Chromatic dispersion: The temporal spreading of a pulse in an optical wave-
guide caused by the wavelength dependence of the velocities of light.
Cladding: The lower refractive index optical coating over the core of the fiber
that traps light into the core.
Connector: A device that provides for a demountable connection between two
fibers or a fiber and an active device and provides protection for the fiber.
Core: The center of the optical fiber through which light is transmitted.
Coupler: An optical device that splits or combines light from more than one
fiber.
Cutback method: A technique for measuring the loss of bare fiber by measuring
the optical power transmitted through a long length then cutting back to the
source and measuring the initial coupled power.
Cutoff wavelength: The wavelength beyond which singlemode fiber only supports
one mode of propagation.
dB: Optical power referenced to 1 microwatt.
dBm: Optical power referenced to 1 milliwatt.
Decibel (dB): A unit of measurement of optical power that indicates relative
power on a logarithmic scale, sometimes called dBr. dB = 10 log (power ratio)
Detector: A photodiode that converts optical signals to electrical signals.
Digital: Signals encoded into discrete bits.
Dispersion: The temporal spreading of a pulse in an optical waveguide. May be
caused by modal or chromatic effects.
Edge-emitting diode (E-LED): A LED that emits from the edge of the semicon-
ductor chip, producing higher power and narrower spectral width.
End finish: The quality of the end surface of a fiber prepared for splicing or ter-
minated in a connector.
Equilibrium modal distribution (EMD): Steady state modal distribution in multi-
mode fiber, achieved some distance from the source, where the relative
power in the modes becomes stable with increasing distance.
ESCON: IBM™ standard for connecting peripherals to a computer over fiber
optics. Acronym for enterprise system connection.
Excess loss: The amount of light lost in a coupler beyond that inherent in the
splitting to multiple output fibers.
220
APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY OF FIBER OPTIC TERMS

Fiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI): 100 Mb/s ring architecture data net-
work.
Ferrule: A precision tube that holds a fiber for alignment for interconnection or
termination. A ferrule may be part of a connector or mechanical splice.
Fiber identifier: A device that clamps onto a fiber and couples light from the fiber
by bending, to identify the fiber and detect high-speed traffic of an operating
link or a 2 kHz tone injected by a test source.
Fiber optics: Light transmission through flexible transmissive fibers for commu-
nications or lighting.
Fiber tracer: An instrument that couples visible light into the fiber to allow visual
checking of continuity and tracing for correct connections.
FO: Common abbreviation for fiber optic.
Fresnel reflection, back reflection, optical return loss: Light reflected from the
cleaved or polished end of a fiber caused by the difference of refractive
indices of air and glass. Typically 4 percent of the incident light.
Fusion splicer: An instrument that splices fibers by fusing or welding them, typi-
cally by electrical arc.
Graded index (GI): A type of multimode fiber that uses a graded profile of
refractive index in the core material to correct for dispersion.
Index matching fluid: A liquid used of refractive index similar to glass used to
match the materials at the ends of two fibers to reduce loss and back reflection.
Index profile: The refractive index of a fiber as a function of cross section.
Index of refraction: A measure of the speed of light in a material.
Insertion loss: The loss caused by the insertion of a component such as a splice or
connector in an optical fiber.
Jacket: The protective outer coating of the cable.
Jumper cable: A short single-fiber cable with connectors on both ends used for
interconnecting other cables or testing.
Laser diode (ILD): A semiconductor device that emits high-powered, coherent
light when stimulated by an electrical current. Used in transmitters for single-
mode fiber links.
Launch cable: A known good fiber optic jumper cable attached to a source and
calibrated for output power used for loss testing. This cable must be made of
fiber and connectors of a matching type to the cables to be tested.
Light-emitting diode (LED): A semiconductor device that emits light when stim-
ulated by an electrical current. Used in transmitters for multimode fiber links.
Link, fiber optic: A combination of transmitter, receiver, and fiber optic cable
connecting them capable of transmitting data. May be analog or digital.
Long wavelength: A commonly used term for light in the 1300 and 1550 nm
ranges.
Loss budget: The amount of power lost in the link. Often used in terms of the
maximum amount of loss that can be tolerated by a given link.
APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY OF FIBER OPTIC TERMS
221

Loss, optical: The amount of optical power lost as light is transmitted through
fiber, splices, couplers, and the like.
Margin: The additional amount of loss that can be tolerated in a link.
Mechanical splice: A semipermanent connection between two fibers made with
an alignment device and index matching fluid or adhesive.
Micron (m): A unit of measure, 10–6 m, used to measure wavelength of light.
Microscope, fiber optic inspection: A microscope used to inspect the end surface
of a connector for flaws or contamination or a fiber for cleave quality.
Modal dispersion: The temporal spreading of a pulse in an optical waveguide
caused by modal effects.
Mode: A single electromagnetic field pattern that travels in fiber.
Mode field diameter: A measure of the core size in singlemode fiber.
Mode filter: A device that removes optical power in higher-order modes in fiber.
Mode scrambler: A device that mixes optical power in fiber to achieve equal
power distribution in all modes.
Mode stripper: A device that removes light in the cladding of an optical fiber.
Multimode fiber: A fiber with core diameter much larger than the wavelength of
light transmitted that allows many modes of light to propagate. Commonly
used with LED sources for lower-speed, short-distance links.
Nanometer (nm): A unit of measure, 10–9 m, used to measure the wavelength of
light.
Network: A system of cables, hardware, and equipment used for communica-
tions.
Numerical aperture (NA): A measure of the light acceptance angle of the fiber.
Optical amplifier: A device that amplifies light without converting it to an elec-
trical signal.
Optical fiber: An optical waveguide, comprised of a light-carrying core and
cladding that traps light in the core.
Optical loss test set (OLTS): A measurement instrument for optical loss that in-
cludes both a meter and source.
Optical power: The amount of radiant energy per unit time, expressed in linear
units of Watts or on a logarithmic scale, in dBm (where 0 dB = 1 mW) or dB
(where 0 dB = 1 W).
Optical return loss, back reflection: Light reflected from the cleaved or polished
end of a fiber caused by the difference of refractive indices of air and glass.
Typically 4 percent of the incident light. Expressed in dB relative to incident
power.
Optical switch: A device that routes an optical signal from one or more input
ports to one or more output ports.
Optical time domain reflectometer (OTDR): An instrument that uses backscat-
tered light to find faults in optical fiber and infer loss.
222
APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY OF FIBER OPTIC TERMS

Overfilled launch: A condition for launching light into the fiber where the
incoming light has a spot size and NA larger than accepted by the fiber, fill-
ing all modes in the fiber.
Photodiode: A semiconductor that converts light to an electrical signal, used in
fiber optic receivers.
Pigtail: A short length of fiber attached to a fiber optic component such as a laser
or coupler.
Plastic-clad silica (PCS) fiber: A fiber made with a glass core and plastic cladding.
Plastic optical fiber (POF): An optical fiber made of plastic.
Power budget: The difference (in dB) between the transmitted optical power (in
dBm) and the receiver sensitivity (in dBm).
Power meter, fiber optic: An instrument that measures optical power emanating
from the end of a fiber.
Preform: The large diameter glass rod from which fiber is drawn.
Receive cable: A known good fiber optic jumper cable attached to a power meter
used for loss testing. This cable must be made of fiber and connectors of a
matching type to the cables to be tested.
Receiver: A device containing a photodiode and signal conditioning circuitry
that converts light to an electrical signal in fiber optic links.
Refractive index: A property of optical materials that relates to the velocity of
light in the material.
Repeater, regenerator: A device that receives a fiber optic signal and regenerates
it for retransmission, used in very long fiber optic links.
Scattering: The change of direction of light after striking small particles that
causes loss in optical fibers.
Short wavelength: A commonly used term for light in the 665, 790, and 850 nm
ranges.
Singlemode fiber: A fiber with a small core, only a few times the wavelength of
light transmitted, that allows only one mode of light to propagate. Com-
monly used with laser sources for high-speed, long-distance links.
Source: A laser diode or LED used to inject an optical signal into fiber.
Splice, fusion or mechanical: A device that provides for a connection between
two fibers, typically intended to be permanent.
Splitting ratio: The distribution of power among the output fibers of a coupler.
Steady state modal distribution: Equilibrium modal distribution (EMD) in multi-
mode fiber, achieved some distance from the source, where the relative
power in the modes becomes stable with increasing distance.
Step-index fiber: A multimode fiber where the core is all the same index of
refraction.
Surface emitter LED: A LED that emits light perpendicular to the semiconductor
chip. Most LEDs used in datacommunications are surface emitters.
APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY OF FIBER OPTIC TERMS
223

Talkset, fiber optic: A communication device that allows conversation over
unused fibers.
Termination: Preparation of the end of a fiber to allow connection to another
fiber or an active device, sometimes also called “connectorization”.
Test cable: A short single-fiber jumper cable with connectors on both ends used
for testing. This cable must be made of fiber and connectors of a matching
type to the cables to be tested.
Test kit: A kit of fiber optic instruments, typically including a power meter,
source, and test accessories, used for measuring loss and power.
Test source: A laser diode or LED used to inject an optical signal into fiber for
testing loss of the fiber or other components.
Total internal reflection: Confinement of light into the core of a fiber by the
reflection off the core-cladding boundary.
Transmitter: A device that includes a LED or laser source and signal condition-
ing electronics used to inject a signal into fiber.
Visual fault locator: A device that couples visible light into the fiber to allow
visual tracing and testing of continuity. Some are bright enough to allow
finding breaks in fiber through the cable jacket.
Watts: A linear measure of optical power, usually expressed in milliwatts (mW),
microwatts (µW), or nanowatts (nW).
Wavelength: A measure of the color of light, usually expressed in nanometers
(nm) or microns (µm).
Wavelength division multiplexing (WDM): A technique of sending signals of sev-
eral different wavelengths of light into the fiber simultaneously.
Working margin: The difference (in dB) between the power budget and the loss
budget (i.e., the excess power margin).
224
APPENDIX A — GLOSSARY OF FIBER OPTIC TERMS

A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
B
FIBER OPTIC
STANDARDS
Widespread use of any technology depends on the existence of acceptable stan-
dards. Standards must include primary measurement standards, component stan-
dards, network standards, standard test methods, and calibration standards. In
fiber optics, this means standardized specifications for fiber, cables, connectors,
and splices and test procedures for fibers, cables, connectors, and splices under
many varying environmental conditions. Primary and transfer standards for opti-
cal power, attenuation, bandwidth, and the physical characteristics of fiber are
also required.
These standards are developed by various groups working together, all of
which are listed with contact information in Appendix C. Network standards
come from American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC), International Organization for Standardization (IOS), Telcordia (formerly
Bellcore), and other groups worldwide. The component and testing standards
come from some of these same groups, as well as from the Electronic Industries
Alliance (EIA) in the United States and internationally from the ISO and IEC, and
other groups worldwide. Primary and transfer standards are developed by
national standards laboratories such as National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), formerly the National Bureau of Standards which exist in almost
225

all countries to regulate all measurement standards. International cooperation is
available to ensure worldwide conformance to all absolute standards.
We must also discuss “de facto” standards, those generally accepted stan-
dards for components and systems that are widely accepted in the marketplace.
In fact, we want to discuss all of those and their status in today’s fiber optic sys-
tems.
DE FACTO STANDARDS COME FIRST
In any fast developing technology such as fiber optics, there is always resistance
to the development of standards. Critics say standards stifle technology develop-
ment. Some critics object because it is not their standard that is proposed, and in
some cases, nobody really knows what standards are best because the technology
is still under development. Given these circumstances, users must choose the best
solutions for their problems and forge ahead. In fiber optics, those who have
gone ahead and committed heavily to the technology or who have marketing
strength have established many of today’s standards.
In telecom systems, there are many types of systems but all are operating on
singlemode fiber at 1310 or 1550-nm wavelengths. Bit rates of 1.544 Mbits/S up
to 2.5 Gbits/S are already in operation, with wavelength division multiplexing
(WDM) giving much higher rates. Today, Synchronous Optical Network
(SONET) in the United States or Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) in the rest
of the world is the network protocol of choice. That appears to be changing as
the effect of the Internet drives everyone to Internet protocol (IP) networks.
In datacom systems (the generic category that includes datalinks and local
area networks [LANs]), the situation is reaching consensus. Four multimode
fibers have been used in datacom systems: 50/125, 62.5/125, 85/125, and
100/140 (core/clad in microns), but 62.5/125 fiber has been dominant. It origi-
nally was chosen as the preferred fiber for Fiber Distributed Data Interface
(FDDI) and Enterprise System Connection (ESCON), became adopted by all ver-
sions of Ethernet, and the U.S. government is using 62.5/125 exclusively in offices
(FED STD 1070). Connectors have usually been ST style, but the EIA/TIA 568
Standard calls for the SC. The new small form factor (SFF) connectors are now
the multimode connector of choice for the networking equipment manufacturers,
as they offer higher density connections and reduce electronics cost.
While short wavelength light-emitting diode (LED) (820-850 nm) systems
have been most popular for Ethernet at 10 MB/s, the higher bit rates of faster
systems are requiring 1300-nm LEDs due to the limiting effects of chromatic dis-
persion in the fiber. The development of low-cost 850-nm vertical cavity surface-
emitting lasers (VCSELS) operating with multimode fiber has made Gigabit
Ethernet possible using lower-cost components, enhancing fiber optics as a net-
working technology.
226
APPENDIX B — FIBER OPTIC STANDARDS

INDUSTRY STANDARDS ACTIVITIES
In light of these de facto standards, many groups are working to develop stan-
dards that are acceptable throughout the industry.
Primary Standards
The keeper of primary standards in the United States is the Department of Com-
merce, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Although some
optical standards work is done at Gaithersburg, Maryland, fiber optic and laser
activity is centered at Boulder, Colorado. Today, NIST is actively working with
all standards bodies to determine the primary reference standards needed and to
provide for them. With fiber optics applications, their concern has been with
fiber measurements, such as attenuation and bandwidth, mode field diameter for
singlemode fiber, and optical power measurements.
NIST standards are in place for fiber attenuation and optical power measure-
ments, the most important measurement in fiber optics. Since all other measure-
ments require measuring power, several years ago NIST ran a “round-robin” that
showed up to 3 dB differences (50 percent) in power measurements among par-
ticipants. An optical power calibration program at NIST has resulted in reliable
transfer standards at 850 nm, 1300 nm and 1550 nm. Using new transfer stan-
dards, measurements of better than 5 percent accuracy should be easily obtained.
Component and Testing Standards
Several groups are looking at fiber optic testing standards, but the most active by
far is the EIA in the United States and the ISO worldwide. EIA FO-6 and FO-2
committees meet at least twice a year to discuss technical issues and review
progress on the writing of standards test procedures and component specifica-
tions. At the current time, there are over 100 EIA fiber optic test procedures
(FOTPs) in process or published and many component specifications are being
prepared. The EIA should be contacted for an up-to-date list of currently pub-
lished standards as well as those in process.
In addition to being a standards-writing body, the FO-6 and FO-2 commit-
tees are a forum for the discussion of technical issues, relevant to the FOTPs
being prepared, and are sometimes scenes of heated debate over these issues. But
real progress is being made in defining relevant tests for fiber optic component
and system performance.
Within the United States, Bell Communications Research (Bellcore), the spin-
off research and development organization for the divested Regional Bell Operat-
ing companies (RBOCs), was commissioned to set standards for its RBOCs by
issuing technical advisories (TAs) on subjects of mutual interest. Bellcore was
sold to a commercial company and renamed Telcordia, thus its impact on future
standards is unknown.
APPENDIX B — FIBER OPTIC STANDARDS
227

Internationally, almost every country has its own standards bodies, but most
work through ISO and the IEC to produce mutually acceptable standards. The
IEC work is at least as large in scope as the EIA.
System Standards
Most early fiber optic systems were compatible with some electrical standards,
such as T-3, RS-232, and so forth, but each manufacturer used its own protocol
on the optical part of the network. As a result, there was little compatibility in
fiber optic systems. Even in telephony, fiber optic links developed as adapters for
standard T-carrier systems, so each manufacturer used its own protocol. Bellcore
developed SONET standards and CCITT did SDH to provide a standard proto-
col for telephony.
Work is now done by ANSI and IEEE on developing standard systems for
computer networks. The ANSI FDDI (X3T9.5 committee) is a high bit-rate sys-
tem for computer networks that has reached commercial reality. Another ANSI
committee (X3T9.3) is working on the even faster Fibre Channel specification for
GB/s data communications. The IEEE standards include a token-ring LAN
(802.5), metropolitan area LAN (802.6), and fiber versions of all varieties of Eth-
ernet (802.3). From the vendor front, ESCON was developed by IBM to connect
mainframes to peripherals and has been adopted by the entire IBM-compatible
mainframe industry. Asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) is a fiber or copper-
based LAN using protocol borrowed from the telephony technology developed as
part of SONET and was developed into a LAN technology by an industry group
advocating its use. So network standards may be developed by any number of
groups who will then control the issues of compatibility and interoperability.
Standards change continuously. To keep informed on the current status of
fiber optic standards, contact the standards bodies involved for latest information.
228
APPENDIX B — FIBER OPTIC STANDARDS

A
P
P
E
N
D
I
X
C
RESOURCE GUIDE
TO FIBER OPTICS
To assist you in getting started, we have compiled a list of resources that will help
you to obtain the basic information needed.
The Fiber Optic Association is a professional society for all of those involved
in fiber optics. They develop training and certification programs.
The Fiber Optic Association, Inc.
Box 230851
Boston, MA 02123-0851
617-469-2FOA
www.TheFOA.org
Textbooks: These are good, basic textbooks on fiber optic technology, recom-
mended for beginners but still good references for the knowledgeable user.
Hayes & Rosenberg, Data, Voice and Video Cabling, Delmar
Jeff Hecht, Understanding Fiber Optics, Howard W. Sams Books
J. Refi, Fiber Optic Cable, A Lightguide, ABC Teletraining
Martin Weik, Fiber Optic Standard Dictionary, Van Nostrand Reinhold
229

Application Notes: These companies have extensive libraries of applications liter-
ature. Contact them for a current list of notes available.
Belden (Box 1980, Richmond, IN 47375, 317-983-5200),
Corning (Corning, NY 14831, 607-974-4411),
Fotec (151 Mystic Ave., Medford, MA 02155, 1-800-537-8254, 1-781-396-
6155, fax 1-781-396-6395. www.fotec.com)
Sourcebooks/Directories: These are compiled lists of vendors and their products,
especially good for locating sources of supply for fiber optic components.
Fiberoptic Product News Buying Guide (Gordon Publications, 13 Emery Ave,
Randolph, NJ 07869, 201-361-9060)
The Fiber Optic Yellow Pages (IGI, 214 Harvard Ave., Boston, MA 02134, 617-
232-3111)
KMI Directory of Worldwide Fiber Optic Suppliers (KMI, 31 Bridge St. New-
port, RI 02840, 401-849-6771)
Laser Focus Buyer’s Guide (Penwell Publications, Ten Tara Blvd., Nashua, NH
03062, 603-891-0123)
Lightwave Buyer’s Guide (Penwell Publications, above)
Photonics Handbook (Laurin Publishing, Berkshire Common, Pittsfield, MA
01202, 413-499-0514)
Magazines: These are periodical magazines on fiber optics, carrying technical
articles and industry news.
Cabling Standards Update, 1989A Santa Rita Rd., Pleasanton, CA 94566 (925-
846-9900)
Fiberoptic Product News (Gordon Publications, above)
Lightwave (Penwell Publications, above)
Tradeshows:
ECOC (Ecole Polytechnic Federale, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland, 41-21-693-
3338)
Interopto(OITDA, Toranamon 1-Chome Mori Bldg. 1-19-5 Toranamon,
Minato-Ku, Tokyo 105, Japan, 81-3-3508-2091)
O-E/Lase (SPIE, Box 10, Bellingham, WA, 206-676-3290)
OFC/OFS (Optical Society of America, 1816 Jefferson Pl. NW, Washington, DC
20036, 202-223-8130)
230
APPENDIX C — RESOURCE GUIDE TO FIBER OPTICS

Standards Groups:
International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
1, rue de Varembé
Case postale 56
CH-1211 Genèva 20
Switzerland
Telephone +41 22 749 0111
Fax +41 22 733 3430
E-mail central@iso.ch
Web http://www.iso.ch
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
3, rue de Varembé
P.O. Box 131
CH - 1211 Genèva 20
Switzerland
Telephone +41 22 919 0211
Fax +41 22 919 0300
E-mail info@iec.ch
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
11 West 42nd Street
New York, NY 10036
Telephone 212-642-4900
Fax 212.398.0023
Web http://web.ansi.org
Telcordia Technologies (formerly Bellcore)
445 South Street.
Morristown, NJ 07962
Telephone (973) 829-2000
Web http://www.bellcore.com
Electronic Industries Alliance/Telecommunications Industry Association
(EIA/TIA)
2500 Wilson Blvd.
Arlington, VA 22201
Telephone 703-907-7500
Web http://www.eia.org
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
IEEE Corporate Office
3 Park Avenue, 17th Floor
APPENDIX C — RESOURCE GUIDE TO FIBER OPTICS
231

New York, NY 10016-5997 USA
Telephone 212- 419 -7900
Fax 212 -752 -4929
Web http://www.ieee.org
Most standards can be purchased from:
Global Engineering Documents
15 Inverness Way East
Englewood, CO, 80112 USA
E-Mail global@ihs.com
Telephone +1-800-854-7179 (US)
Telephone +1-303-397-7956 (outside the US)
Fax +1-303-397-2740
Web http://global.ihs.com/
232
APPENDIX C — RESOURCE GUIDE TO FIBER OPTICS

ACRONYMS
233
AM
Analog modulation
ANSI
American National Standards Institute
APC
Angled physical contact
ATM
Asynchronous transfer mode
BWDP
Bandwidth-distance product
CAD
Computer aided design
CATV
Community antenna television
CEV
Controlled environment vault
CFC
?
CSL
?
CW
Carrier wave
DSL
Digital subscriber loop
DWDM
Dense wavelength division multiplexing
EIA
Electronic Industries Alliance
EMD
Equilibrium modal distribution
EMI
Electromagnetic interference
ENG
Electronic news gathering
ERK
Emergency restoration kit
ESCON
Enterprise System Connection
FDDI
Fiber Distributed Data Interface
FOTP
Fiber optic test procedures
FTTC
Fiber to the curb
FTTH
Fiber to the home
HIPPI
High performance parallel interface
IC
Intermediate cross-connect
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission

IEE
Institution of Electrical Engineers
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers
InGaAs
Indium-gallium-arsenide
InGaAsP
Indium-gallium-arsenide–phosphate
IP
Internet protocol
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
LAN
Local area network
LED
Light-emitting diode
MC
Main cross-connect
MCVD
Modified chemical vapor deposition
MDF
Main distribution frame
NA
Numerical aperture
NEC
National Electronic Code
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology
nm
Nanometer
OCWR
Optical continuous wave reflectometer
OFC
Optical fiber conductive
OFCP
Optical fiber conductive plenum-rated
OFCR
Optical fiber conductive riser-rated
OFN
Optical fiber nonconductive
OFNP
Optical fiber nonconductive plenum-rated
OFNR
Optical fiber nonconductive riser-rated
OGW
Optical ground wire
OH+
Hydroxide radical
OLTS
Optical loss test set
OPGW
Optical power ground wire
ORL
Optical return loss
OSP
Outside plant
OTDR
Optical time domain reflectometer
OVD
Outside vapor deposition
PC
Physical contact
PCS
Personal communications systems
PVC
Polyvinyl chloride
RBOC
Regional Bell Operating Companies
RFI
Radio frequency interference
RFP
Request for proposal
RT
Room temperature
SDH
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy
SFF
Small form factor
SONET
Synchronous Optical Network
STL
Standard Telecommunications Laboratories
234
ACRONYMS

STP
Shielded twisted pair
TA
Technical advisory
TC
Telecom closet
telco
Telephone company
TIA
Telecommunications Industry Association
UL
Underwriters Laboratories
UTP
Unshielded twisted pair
VAD
Vapor axial deposition
WDM
Wavelength division multiplexing
ACRONYMS
235

