
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by any
information storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of the copyright
owner unless such copying is expressly permitted by federal copyright law.
ISBN 0-934-3SO-36-8
Published by TRADERS PRESS, INC.
The material contained herein is not to be taken as advice to buy or to sell specific securities.
The information presented is based on sources we believe to be reliable and has been carefully
checked for completeness and accuracy but cannot be guaranteed.
TRADERS PRESS
I N C O R P O R A T E D
PO BOX 6206
Greenville, SC 29606
Books and Gifts
for Investors and Traders
800-927-8222
Fax 864-298-0221
Tradersprs@aol.com
HTTT://Traderspress.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
Introduction
Clues from the Cosmos
Harmonic and Vibratory Numbers
Geometric Characteristics of a Price Chart
The Primary Patterns
Classical Chart Patterns Using Ratios and Proportion
The "Butterfly" Pattern
The Opening Price
Entry Techniques
Appendices
Additional Readings

Books and Gifts
for Investors and Traders
Publishers of:
Commodity Spreads: A Historical Chart Perspective (Dobson)
The Trading Rule That Can Make You Rich* (Dohson)
Viewpoints of a Commodity Trader (Longstreet)
Commodities: A Chart Anthology (Dobson)
Profitable Grain Trading (Ainsworth)
A Complete Guide to Trading Profits (Paris)
Traders Guide to Technical Analysis (Hardy)
The Professional Commodity Trader (Kroll)
Jesse Livermore: Speculator-King (Sarnoff)
Understanding Fibonacci Numbers (Dobson)
Wall Street Ventures & Adventures through Forty Years (Wyckoff)
Winning Market Systems (Appel)
How to Trade in Stocks (Livermore)
Stock Market Trading Systems (Appel & Hitschler)
Study Helps in Point and Figure Technique (Wheelan)
Commodity Spreads: Analysis, Selection and Trading Techniques (Smith)
Comparison of Twelve Technical Trading Systems (Lukac, Brorsen, & Irvvin)
Day Trading with Short Term Price Patterns and Opening Range Breakout (Crabel)
Understanding Bollinger Bands (Dobson)
Chart Reading for Professional Traders (Jenkins)
Geometry of Stock Market Profits (Jenkins)
Please write or call for our current catalog describing these and many other books and gifts of interes
investors and traders.
1-800-927-8222 
FAX 864-298-0221
Tradersprs@aol.com
HTTI'://Traderspress.com

This book
is dedicated to Benida.
You are the reason I am still here to
enjoy all of my friends and family. Everyone
deserves to have someone love them this much in a lifetime.


PREFACE
Over the past 20 years the use and misuse of
the Fibonacci Summation Series proliferated
to the point that commentators on the nation's
TV business channels now present them-
selves as resident experts. 1 lay no claim to
being an expert. However, my studies always
included an extensive examination of Fi-
bonacci numbers. My pragmatic position on
anything I learned is that it I could not use
what I was studying to help in trading, then I
was not interested in pursuing it any further.
If this material stimulates your interest in the
subject, then introducing you to it will be
worthwhile. A word of caution, this material
is based on the probabilities of trading. The
art of trading is one of risk management.
Amos Hosteller, one of the founders of Com-
modity Corporation in Princeton, New Jer-
sey, used to say, "take care of losses and the
profits will take care of themselves." 1 refer
to this quote a lot because it is very impor-
tant!
The pattern recognition methodology illus-
trated in the text will be of interest to anyone
who ever traded using technical charts. I can
say with confidence there arc very few who
researched patterns to the extent I have. Some
of the references date back to the early 1900's.
Each of these patterns is based on ratio and
proportion. A technical chart is nothing more
than a road map with a price and time axis.
These patterns repeat with a great deal of
regularity. My best students have been air-
line pilots. They seem to approach trading
like they approach flying, following a flight
plan. The similarities to trading are numer-
ous.
Finally, one of my goals in writing this book
is to expose you to the subject of ancient ge-
ometry. Fibonacci numbers are an integral
part of the numbers that make up the subject
of ancient geometry. It will be of interest to
some of you that many of these sacred ratios
trace their origin to the cosmos. 1 will not
spend a significant amount of time relating
my experiences in astro-harmonics research.
The subject is too vast for me to consider.
More importantly, it is not necessary for prof-
itable trading.


INTRODUCTION
Leonardo de Pisa de Fibonacci
and Beyond
On the eastern seaboard about an hour's drive
from Florence, Italy lies the town of Pisa. It
was here that Fibonacci was born. He was a
thirteenth century mathematician who prima-
rily worked for the royal families of Italy. The
work for which he is most famous is the
Libre Abaci (Book of Calculations). 
His
award for this work was the present day
equivalent of the Nobel Peace Prize. Fi-
bonacci was largely responsible for the use
of arithmetic numbers versus Roman numer-
als. Before Fibonacci, the number 30 was
written XXX. After his Libre Abaci, it was
written 30.
Legend describes his journey to Egypt as one
of great discoveries. He went to Egypt to
study the mathematical relationships con-
tained in the pyramids.
Those of you who really want to study the
math contained in the pyramids should read
Peter Thompkin's book The Secret of the
Great Pyramids. It is not my intention to ex-
plore all of the geometry in the pyramids, only
the Fibonacci Summation series. Fibonacci
found this series when he studied the Great
Pyramid at Giza. The series is the sum of the
two previous numbers 0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13,
21, 34, 55, 89, 144 to infinity. Dividing one
number by the next after the eighth sequence
yields 21/ 34= .618. This just happens to be
the relationship of the height of the Great
Pyramid to 1/2 its base. This additive series of
numbers is based on the equation
Phi + 1 = Phi squared
(0 + 1 = 02).
Base = 2.00
Half Base = 1.00
Height = .618
Slope = 1.618
Diagonal = 1.902 V(2.618+1)


What Fibonacci did for me was to open my
eyes! These are the relationships that are
constantly in the market. I first started
using Fibonacci numbers in 1974 at the
urging of John Hill, Sr. of the Commodity
Research Institute of Hendersonville North
Carolina. I read all of lilliott's papers and
his correspondence with Charles Collins.
Years later, Frost and Prechter wrote the
book Elliott Wave Theory, which explained
the wave structure and the use of Fibonacci
numbers. It concerned me that not all the
waves were .382, .500, .618, 1.618. It was
not until 1988 that I began using the square
root numbers of the Fibonacci series SQ(.618)
= .786 and SQ(1.618) = 1.27. Armed with
these two square root relationships, the
wave structure can be more easily ex-
plained. Bryce Gi1more's first book,
Geometry of Markets brought the ratios to
the public's attention. The Elliott Wave
Newsletter never used these ratios. I used
to fax information to them on the square
root numbers, but they never responded.
Robert Miner of the Dynamic Traders
Croup in Tucson, Arizona, uses all of the
harmonic ratios. It is my opinion that his
newsletter and technical work is the best in
our business. If you don't have the time to
do the work, Robert Miner, one of the best
technicians on this planet, will do it for you
at a small monthly cost. This reminds me
of one of my favorite quotes from my
friend and fellow trader, Jim Twentyman
"Defy Human Nature—Do the work your-
self."
What this book is going to do is illustrate
how to use the Fibonacci ratios, their
square roots, and their reciprocals to deter-
mine the structure of wave vibrations. Of
all the books I have in my library, none of
the Elliott Wave material covers this impor-
tant concept. I am going to keep it as
simple as possible. If you can glean only
one or two concepts or patterns, then this
material will not have been written in vain.
I can promise you this much. II you study
the ratios and patterns shown here, you will
realize that markets have a definite pattern
hidden within their chaos. Sorting through
this chaos can enlighten you. The goal here
is not to try to predict the future or even to
know what is going to happen next. No one
knows that! (Well, there is One who knows,
but He doesn't trade.) It is not necessary to
know what is going to happen in 5 days.
What is necessary is to determine how
much risk and profit potential is available
in the next 5 days. Probability is the name
of the game. Risk control is of tantamount
importance. Winners think in terms of how
much they can lose. Losers focus on how
much they can win. "Take care of your
losses and the profits will take care of
themselves." —A.B.H.
By end of the book, I hope you see the
correlation of geometric patterns to the
ratios and proportions illustrated. It is going
to be as simple as I can make it for you.
Should you want more elaborate reading
material it will be listed in the bibliography.

The material here has proved exciting to
me and my fellow traders who also sub-
scribe to this approach to the market. In my
opinion, it answers the question "can there
he order in I he chaos of the market?" I
wish I had known this much about the
market 20 years ago!
One more thought about the square root
number from the golden mean. These num-
bers were first revealed in William Garrett's
incredible book The Torque Analysis of
Stock Market Cycles. This is hands down
the best book on cycles I ever read. There
were only 200 copies sold in 1972. The
remainder were destroyed by Prentice Hall
due to lack of interest. The book has re-
cently been republished by Ruff Publishing
(509-448-6739). An excellent choice for
every library.
There are a lot of charts in this book. I
know of no other way to illustrate these
concepts. Charts were selected from all
areas, from commodities to the Dow Jones
Stocks. Several different time frames were
Selected because these patterns are found in
all time frames.
Do not be disappointed if you do not see
the traditional Elliott Wave pattern labeling.
It is not neccesary when you use short term
pattern recognition. What is important is
the ratio and proportion of each wave,
frankly, I never felt too comfortable about
exactly identifying the precise Elliott Wave
count. This was brought to my attention
most vividly several years ago at my trad-
ing house in Pismo Beach, California.
Bryce Gilmore and Robert Miner were
discussing T-Bonds. They both came up
with different Elliott Wave counts. They
humbly admitted that they were both right!
And these are two of the best technicians I
have ever met. Bryce introduced the techni-
cian to the true geometry of the market,
with his software program and book, Wave
Trader . I count him as one of my very
good friends and 1 will always be indebted
to him. Although Elliott Wave devotees
may cringe at this thought, you need not be
overly concerned with wave labeling, but
the square roots and their reciprocals can
go a long way to analyse a wave in the true
Elliott sense.
Usually, when I write about a subject. 1
include the works of other authors. 1
thought about doing this for a long time but
decided to leave the matter alone. There are
great many technicians all over the world
who could and should be mentioned here.
There are even more private traders of
equal or greater skill that no one ever hears
about. It is out of respect for these un-
known artists that I will refrain from men-
tioning names. I would have left someone
out anyway and if it would have been a
friend of mine-—well, you know the feel-
ing!
The material presented here is not to be
considered as a trading system. It cannot
stand alone. It is an approach to trading the
markets. Judgement and discipline are
necessary. And if they can be mastered, the
trader has the potential for financial free-
dom. True freedom can only come with
discipline.

A CLUE FROM THE COSMOS
In the summer of 1986, my good friend and
mentor, Dr. Ruth Miller sent me a note. 'The
note stated that October soybean oil would
go off the board at 14 cents/lb and begin a
huge bull market. I posted the note to my
trading monitor and forgot about it until
October. After October soybean oil went off
the board near the exact price she pre-
dicted, I gave her a call. She still lived in
Indiana and had a soybean and corn farm-
ing operation. Her husband was my first
soybean hedge account when I was a bro-
ker at Drexel Burnham. During our phone
conversations, Ruth revealed to me that she
had unearthed (pardon the pun) some in-
credibly accurate cycles. She said that they
were based on planetary movements. Her
excitement caused me to be on the next
plane to Indiana for a two week tutorial that
would change my life forever. Two weeks
with her is comparable to a parish priest
having the same time with the Pope. Here
are just some of the things that came out of
that two week stunt at her farm.
1. Astrocycles Newsletter was formed. It
appeared in more than 22 foreign coun
tries and every state in the union. Five of
the G7 countries subscribed.
2. Three books on financial astrology were
written over the next six years.
a) Astro-Cycles - The Traders
Viewpoint
b) Planetary Harmonics of
Speculative Markets
c) Harmonic Vibrations
3. One hundred and fifty traders came to
Pismo Beach, California to learn what
methodology I used. Most of them are
still in contact with me.
4. I gave lectures to thousands of traders in
the United States and 8 foreign coun
tries.
5. FNN (now CNBC) invited me regularly
as a guest to discuss the planetary cycles
in the newsletter.
6. The Pesavento Index was developed at
Dr. Miller's urging. It is now a daily part
of the Commodity Traders Almanac pub-
lished by Frank Tauscher of Tulsa.
Oklahoma
The index rates each day by the number
of planetary cycles occurring exactly on
that date. The average is eight cycles per
day. When there are three or less, mar-
kets have a strong tendency to change
trends. The same is true when there are
13 or more.
I studied a great many approaches to the
market over the past thirty years and this

ary trader W.D. Gann was an avid propo-
nent of astrology, as was Bernard Baruch.
Baruch's comment that "millionaires don't
use astrology, hid billionaires do" always
fascinated me. He employed his own full
time astrologer/astronomer, Evangeline
Adams. What really drew me closer to the
subject were some of my earlier readings.
Both Albert Einstein and Isaac Newton
were both avid astrologers/astronomers.
Once, at a very important meeting, Newton
was debating the subject with Johann
Kepler, the father of modern physics. After
a heated exchange Newton remarked "the
difference between us, dear sir, is that it is
quite apparent that I have studied the sub-
ject matter extensively and you have not!"
The first cycle Ruth revealed to me was the
Venus-Uranus cycle. She knew I had stud-
ied Fibonacci extensively and my interest
was guaranteed. Venus takes 255 days to
circle the earth and pass through the 360°
aspects with Uranus. If you divide 255 by
365 the result is approximately .618 of a
year. Since this was the golden mean, I
became very excited.
Each year there arc 12 or more hard aspects
of Venus and Uranus. A hard aspect is one
of 30° or multiples thereof:
Fortunately, I had stock market data going
back to 1896. All I needed to do was get the
Venus-Uranus aspects for all the years from
1896 to 1986. Those 90 years gave me
more than 1000 samples of the Venus-
Uranus aspects. Jim Twentyman, my good
friend and fellow trader at Commodity
Corporation, helped me with this study
under Ruth's watchful eye.
The research on the Venus-Uranus aspect
yielded excellent results. It now has more
than 100 years of data and the statistics
have held up. The accuracy of timing 3 to 8
day moves in the stock market is truly
amazing. Stocks seemed to be pulled
upward or downward by this cycle into the
date of the aspect.
PLANETARY ASPECTS USED IN TRANSITS

The Commodity Traders Almanac lists these aspects as they occur throughout each year.

Astrology is a big business throughout the
world. Many people plan their lives around
it. Most religions banned astrology as a
science at the Council of Constantinople in
552 A.D. This is why although Vatican
vaults contain the finest astrological material
ever written, they are inaccessible to the
public. My interest in astrology was purely
pragmatic. I was searching for the "Holy
Grail" of trading. What I did find were
several tools that work far above average.
But 1 do believe the markets are vibrating to
the tune played by the planets. My reason
for this is based on the work of Donald
Bradley. Bradley wrote a book Stock
Market Predictions in 1947. The book was
based on forecasting the stock market one
year in advance by weighting each of the
planets (cycles). Bradley's model is right
about 70% of the time in showing the trend
of the market for the entire year. This
includes some amazing predictions such as
the market fall of October 19, 1987, and the
big upmove following the attack of Iraq in
) 
1990. The January 1994 stock market surge
performed perfectly to the Bradley model.
The remarkable part of the model is that it
can be completed years in advance and it
uses the weighting of the planets as its sole
data source. I know of no other technical
system that can or will do that.
I know these patterns with ratios and pro-
portion quite well and how their source is in
the cosmos. I perform very little astrologi-
cal research at this time. These patterns
allow you to put probabilities in your
favor and control risk easily. That is
what the trader needs at his fingertips.

Harmonic and Vibratory Numbers
I included the section on Harmonic and
Vibratory numbers early in this book so the
reader will begin to think in terms of repeti-
tions and swings.
Reluctance to share some of their most
precious trading secrets is probably inher-
ent in all traders. I am no exception. What
you will observe in this chapter is, in my
opinion, one of the best kept secrets in
technical analysis. These harmonic, or
vibratory numbers as I refer to them, can be
incredibly useful for profit projection and
stop placement. Every commodity, stock, or
speculative instrument has its own vibra-
tory number. It is as natural as each ele-
ment on a chemical chart having its own
number. Traders who specialize in trading
one speculative vehicle use these numbers
all the time. They don't know why, except
that they repeat day after day. The next few
pages and charts will describe these num-
bers and illustrate their usage. Make no
mistake about this section: it could be one
of the most effective tools you can use as a
trader.
My first interest in these harmonic or vibra-
tory numbers occurred in 1979 while I was
operating the commodity department for
Drexel Burnham Lambert in southern
California. Jim Twentyman was working
with me and occupied the adjoining office.
A small window was located between the
offices so we could talk without using the
phone. Jim had just moved from Conti
Commodities where he was a very success-
ful broker/trader. He was now helping me
manage my C.T.A. firm, A.V.M. Associ-
ates. Jim purchased a Wang computer in
1977 to do research on cycles and numbers.
He also took a two year sabbatical to study
the works of the legendary trader W.D.
Gann.
I had access to the library of the Investment
Center Bookstore in West Los Angeles.
This library had the finest collection of
books I had ever seen. Any book I ever
heard about was there, including rare astro-
logical books and old technical books from
the 1920s and 1930s. Once you go through
this vintage material you will realize there
is not a lot that is new to technical analysis.
Most assuredly there are new concepts and
ideas, but most material can be traced back
to earlier traders. I think you will agree that
the concept of harmonic or vibratory num-
bers fits into the "new idea" bracket.
The easiest way to describe why harmonic
numbers work the way they do is to use an
analogy. Suppose you were to drop a rock
into a pool of water. Once the rock hits the
water, waves will vibrate from the center of
impact until the thrust of the rock hitting
the water dissipates. There are four things
that will determine the consistency and

duration of the waves: 1) The height from
which the rock was dropped; 2) The weight
of the rock; 3) The depth of the water. (Sec
illustration below.)
Markets react to thrust in much the same way.
Typically, anew announcement or scheduled
economic report will cause this thrust in the
speculative markets. Currently, the financial
markets respond to Gross Domestic Product,
employment data, both the Producer Price In-
dex and Consumer Price Index, plus many
others. Veteran traders remember vividly how
the Money Supply numbers of M1 and M2
would shock the markets each week. Now
you must search to find these economic num-
bers. Soon a new leader of economic funda-
mentals will emerge and the current leaders
will take their place in the history books.
Jim Twentyman has an obsession with cor-
rect data. Me has the best data I have ever
seen. It is flawless! What Jim and I did was
to categorize all the price swings over a five
minute bar chart in all major commodities.
The S&P data was done in 1985. We entered
each of these into the Wang computer by
hand. The computer would then search for
values of the price swing and report the fre-
quency distribution of each price swing.
When the distribution is skewed you would
get a Poisson distribution and your first hint
of a harmonic or vibratory number. It was then
apparent that the only way you could prove
this theory was to look at thousands of charts
to see if the premise was valid. We tested the
idea and found it statistically accurate and
quite useful in technical analysis.
Technicians will agree that chart analysis is
tantamount to reading a road map. There is
an X axis and a Y axis. Chartists depict the X
axis for time and the Y axis for price. Once
the coordinates are found, you know the ex-
act spot where price and time meet. This in-
formation is not going to tell you what will
happen next. Nothing can do that! What it does
tell you is that a pattern may be completed at
that time. The neural network I am using does
just that; and harmonic numbers help with
this estimation. It has categorized these pat-
terns in time and price. As a trader, I must
decide when to enter and exit the market. This
is what trading is all about. I then ask myself
two questions: 1) Is the pattern and ratio sig-
nal present? and 2) Can I afford to take the
risk? If the answer to both of these questions
is "yes," then I must take the trade. No one


S&P 
The S&P 500 has a total of five
harmonic numbers—three primary and two
secondary numbers. Secondary harmonic
numbers are important in strongly trending
markets. Primary harmonic numbers are:
270, 350, 540. Secondary harmonic num-
bers are: 170, 110.
Treasury Bonds 
Treasury Bonds have
a harmonic number of 20. When Treasury
Bonds exceed 20 ticks they will most often
proceed to 40 ticks. In strongly trending
markets multiples of the tick harmonic
should be expected (i.e., 2 x 20, 3 x 20,
4 x 20).
Silver 
The harmonic numbers for Silver
are 18 cents and 36 cents. The second
harmonic is 12 cents.
Wheat 
The harmonic numbers in Wheat
are 17 cents and 11 cents. Multiples of 17
and 11 will appear in strongly trending
markets.
Soybeans 
The harmonic numbers in
Soybeans are 18 cents and 36 cents.
Gold 
The harmonic numbers in Gold
are $ 17 and $ 11.
Swiss Franc and Deutschemark 
The
harmonic numbers for the Swiss Franc and
Deutschemark are 27 and 54 points. The
Swiss Franc has a secondary harmonic
number of 81 points (27 + 54).
Crude Oil 
The harmonic numbers for
Crude Oil are 44 and 88 points.
Dow Jones Industrials 
The Dow
Jones Industrials have a total of three har-
monic numbers: two primary (35 and 105)
and one secondary (70).



















The Geometric Characteristics of a Price Chart
Technicians use price charts to interpret what the next move is most likely to be. Let us
consider the following:
A price chart is a square

Geometric Principles
(by Bryce Gilmore)
Philosophical Geometry
Ancient philosophers taught pupils the arts
of SACRED GEOMETRY in order to
develop their faculty of INTUITION.
Geometry attempts to recapture the orderly
movement from an infinite formlessness to
an endless interconnected array of forms,
and in recreating this mysterious passage
from ONE to TWO, it renders it symboli-
cally viable.
The practice of Sacred Geometry is one of
the essential techniques of self-develop-
ment.
Geometry deals with pure form, and philo-
sophical geometry reenacts the unfolding of
each form out of the preceding one.
The Canon of Proportion
The binding natural law of mathematics as
we know it today ORIGINATES from the
COSMOS. It was not invented by man, just
revealed to him through his study of the
Planets.
The Seventh wonder of the ancient world,
the Great Pyramid of Giza, holds within its
structure all the math "secrets" we need to
know.
The pyramid is a graphic representation of
the Earth and Moon and their combined
movements around the Sun. The pyramid
demonstrates the binding relationships
between the SQUARE, CIRCLE and the
GOLDEN MEAN.
Modern day scientific studies have (among
other things) confirmed the measurements
of the Moon and the Earth.
The radius of the Moon is 1090 miles and
the radius of the Earth is 3960 miles. A
combined total of 5040 miles (Plato's mysti-
cal number and in calendar days equal to
720 weeks, 2 times 360, 3 times 240, 4
times 180, 5 times 144, and 8 times 90).
A square encompassing a circle represent-
ing the Earth has four sides, each equal to
the diameter of the Earth, i.e., 3920 by 2 or
7920 miles. The perimeter of this square
calculates to 31680 miles (4 times 7920, 44
times 720, 88 times 360, 132 times 240,
176 times 180, 220 times 144, and 352
times 90).

If the Moon and the Earth were placed side
by side, the distance between the two cen-
ters would be equal to the sum of the radii,
i.e., 3920 plus 1080, which equals 5040
miles. A circle drawn using the combined
radii of 5040 would have a circumference of
2 Pi R or 2 x 22/7 x 5040, which equals
31680.
The relationship of the circle's circumfer-
ence to the square's perimeter is
1.000:1.000.
This geometric exercise is known as squar-
ing the circle. Pi is the Pythagorean measure
of 22/7 used to calculate the dimensions in a
circle or sphere. In decimal form Pi is the
irrational number 3.14159.
The radius of the circle 5040 (1080 + 3960)
as a factor of the Earth's radius is equal to
5040:3960 or 1.2727:1.000. And 1.272 is
mathematically the square root of 1.618.
Squaring the Circle
A hypotenuse calculation for a right-angled
triangle using the 5040 radius of the above
circle and half the side of the above square,
i.e., the radius of the Earth 3960, would give
the following result.
Using the Pythagorean theorem, i.e., the
length of the hypotenuse in a right triangle
(90 degree triangle) will be equal to the
square root of the sum of the squares of the
other two sides.
Hypotenuse = square root [(5040 x 5040) +
(3960 x 3960)] = 6409 miles.
If we call the base of the triangle the Earth's
radius, i.e., 3960, then the hypotenuse
6409.6 as a ratio of the base 3960 is
6409:3960 or 1.618:1.000.

The irrational number 1.272 is the square
root of 1.618, i.e., 1.272 =
It can be demonstrated by this exercise
where the designers of the Great Pyramid of
Giza procured their measurements. It can
also be seen that the irrational numbers of
0= 1.618 and PHI = 3.14159 are related.
1/4 is the harmonic ratio from the square
and 1.618 is the Golden Mean.
Expanding a square by the ratio of its diagonal produces the Harmonic Ratio Series.
1.000 
1.4142 
2.000 
2.828
The inverse ratio relationships are:
0.354 
0.500 
0.707 
1.000
Harmonic Ratios from the Square
The Diagonal of the Square
(Root 2 = 1.4142)
The square is bounded by four equal sides at
right angles to each other.
Using the Pythagorean theorem we can cal-
culate the diagonal length. This number will
always maintain the same relationship to any
side of the square (1.4142:1).
A square with sides equal to 1.000 has a
diagonal of: 
which is
1.4142.
The diagonal of any square relates as
1.4142:1.000 with its side.

THE PRIMARY PATTERN
This section discusses the primary patterns
I use in trading. Many of my students ask
me why I share this information. It is quite
simple and has a two part answer. First, all
of these patterns were found by someone
else over the past 70 years. Second, every
trader has his own time frame that he likes
to trade, so the chance of a self-fulling
trade expectation is very remote.
One very important difference will emerge
from this section on pattern recognition.
That difference is that all of the patterns
discussed will be illustrated using the math-
ematical ratios of ancient geometry, of
which the Fibonacci Summation series is a
part. What I tried to do is show how you
can use only four numbers of the
Fibonacci Summation series to mathemati-
cally identify these patterns. I always
thought that the mathematical relationship
of these price swings is what the originators
of these patterns failed to bring up. This is
especially true for the Elliott Wave theoreti-
cians. I studied the Elliott Wave principle
extensively from 1974 to 1978.I thought
his tenets on wave patterns were more like
guidelines than immutable laws. To this
day, if you get 12 Elliott Wave theorists in a
room you will end up with 24 or more
interpretations of the price action. There is
nothing wrong with that. It is just another
way of showing that no one knows what is
going to happen next in the markets. More
importantly it also reiterates that it is not
necessary to know what is going to happen
next. What is necessary is to know the risk
on the trade. Since we are dealing with
mathematical relationships, the control of
risk can be quantified easily.
I spent the better part of 30 years looking at
these patterns. My sources originated from
Don Mack at the Investment Center in
Santa Monica, California and John Hill at
the Commodity Research Institute in
Hendersonville, North Carolina. I do not
think I overlooked anyone who ever de-
scribed a price pattern. There are two books
that I highly recommend:
1. Profits in the Stock Market by H.M.
Gartley (1935). This was Gartley's Stock
Market course in the 1930's. It cost $1500
which was equivalent to 3 Ford automo-
biles at the time. On pages 200 to 250 most
of the patterns ever discussed are found.
More trading systems were rediscovered
and sold from this book than any other
book. This includes: The Tubbs Stock
Market Course, The Trident Strategy, The
Reversal Point Wave, and many others. The
book is more than 700 pages and comes
with huge wall charts illustrating the action
of the stock market in the 1920's and 30's.
It can be purchased for under $100 from
Traders Press in Greenville, SC, 800-927-
8222.

2. Torque Analysis of Slock Market Cycles
by William Garrett (1971). This book is a
true gem. It was the first book ever written
that explores the mathematical and geo-
metrical relationships of price patterns and
how they relate to the numbers of ancient
geometry. Garrett's book came out at about
the same time as another book on cycles.
James Hurst's The Profit Magic of Slock
Transaction Timing. Hurst's book was less
expensive and much easier to read. But the
content of Garrett's book held the key to
many answers about cycles and Fibonacci
numbers. Only 200 copies of Garrett's book
were ever sold. Prentice Hall destroyed the
remainder of copies due to the need for
warehouse space.
If you spend some time looking through my
bibliography, you will see that a great num-
ber of authors are covered. I always felt that
each of them contributed to the science of
technical studies.
Patterns 1 and 2 were first described by
H. M. Gartley in Profits in the Stock Mar-
ket on page 249. It is the basic pattern in
the theory of parallel channels.
PRACTICAL USE OF TREND LINES
From this one page in Gartley's book, two
of the most famous trading systems were
The Ten Basic Patterns

sold. The first was the Tubbs Stock Market
course ($1500 in the 1950's) and The
Trident Strategy ($3000 in 1970's).
The Gartley "222" Pattern
This is one of the best patterns I ever
found. I named it the Gartley "222" pattern
because it is on page 222 in Gartley's book.
He spent more time describing this pattern
than all the others. This pattern shows why
it is not necessary to pick a top or bottom—
just wait for the first "222" pattern follow-
ing the top or bottom. The real beauty of
this pattern is that it contains an AB=CD
pattern within it. This allows the trader to
calculate ratio and proportions of various
price waves in order to determine the risk
on the trade. If the day trader can learn only
this pattern he will do very well. It is worth
noting that when the "222" pattern fails
market moves beyond point X) a major
continuation move is in progress.
Patterns 5 and 6 are reaction patterns. The
move from point 1 can be 38%
50%
61%
70.7%
78%
100% (double
top or
bottom)
The only time I use the 38% retracement
level to find a trade entry is when the move
from X to 1 is one of tremendous thrust (3
to 5 times normal trading range bars). The
market will give you strong clues as to
what it will do next if you watch the
retracements in new moves. If it reacts only
38% on the first reaction swing, then a high
probability exists that the next swing or two
will also be 38% reactions.

Patterns 7 and 8 are extension patterns. It
was this pattern that changed my approach
to trading. As I was trading from
Switzerland, where I had spoken to a group
of Swiss bankers, almost every trade I put
on over the last several days had been
stopped out on a penetration of point X. In
my hotel room, I was calculating why my
stop was right at the high/low of the day. I
had placed my stop right at the 1.27 move
of X to 1. It was upon hitting the square
root button on my calculator that I first
began to see the importance of the 1.27
ratio
A good rule of thumb is to wait for a candle-
stick pattern such as a doji or hammer
(pg.118) when point A is reached. Remem-
ber that this pattern is an extension pattern
and there are no guarantees that the swing
cannot go much higher.
Patterns 9 and 10 are the most difficult to
find on daily charts. They are found more
frequently on intraday charts (5 min., 30
min., etc.). William Dunnigan described this
pattern in Dunnigan's One-Way Method and
the Dunnigan Thrust Method. The three
drive pattern should be very esthetic to the
eyes of the trader. It should jump out at
you. If you find that you are forcing the
pattern to fit three drives, it is probably not
correct.
The most important thing to keep in mind is
symmetry. The waves should be symmetri-
cal in price and time.
Note: Linda Bradford Raschke refers to this
pattern as her Three Little Indians in her
book, Street Smarts.

The diagram above is an example only. It
shows the number of periods could be 3 to
13. The price swing could also be 1.618.
1. Price swing from A to B will be equal to
CD 60% of the time. The other 40% of
the time CD will be 1.27 or 1.618 of AB.
2. The BC price swing will be .618 or .786
of the AB move. In very strongly trend-
ing markets the BC swing will only be at
the .382 retracement.
3. If the AB swing is very strong, it will
give a good clue as to what to expect on
the BC move.
4. The time bars from point A to B should
be equal to the CD time bars about 60%
of the time. The other 40% of the time
these time periods will expand to 1.27 or
1.618 of AB.
5. Should the CD price swing have a price
gap or a very wide range bar, the trader
should interpret this as a sign of extreme
strength and expect to see price expan-
sions of 1.27 or 1.618.
Characteristics of Patterns
PATTERN #1




1. Price swing from A to B will be equal to
CD 60% of the time. The other 40% of
the time CD will be 1.27 or 1.618 of AB.
2. The BC swing will be .618 or .786 of the
AB move. In very strongly trending
markets the BC swing will only be at the
.382 retracement.
3. If the AB swing is very strong, it will
give a good clue what to expect on
the BC move.
4. The time bars from point A to B should
be equal to the CD time bars about 60%
of the time. The other 40% of the time
these time periods will expand to 1.27 or
1.618 of AB.
5. Should the CD price swing have a price
gap or a very wide range bar, the trader
should interpret this as a sign of extreme
strength and expect to see price expan-
sions of 1.27 or 1.618.
PATTERN #2





PATTERN #3
BULLISH
GARTLEY "222"
1. The swing down from point A will termi-
nate at point D. This will be at the .618
or .786 retracements 75% of the time.
The other 25% of the time, the
retracements will be .382, .500 or .707.
2. There must be an AB = CD pattern ob-
served in the move from A to D.
3. The BC move will be .618 or .786 of AB.
In strongly trending markets expect a
.382 or .500 retracement.
4. Analyze the time frames from point X to
A and A to D. These time frames will
also be in ratio and proportion. For ex-
ample, the number of time bars up from
point X to A is equal to 17 bars. The time
bars from A to D equal 11. Seventeen is
approximately 1.618 of 11.
5. There will be a few instances where the
AB = CD move will give a price objec-
tive at point X. This will be a true double
bottom formation.
6. If point X is exceeded the trend will
continue to move down to at least 1.27
or 1.618 of the X to A move.








PATTERN #4
BEARISH
GARTLEY "222"
1. The swing up from point A will termi-
nate at point D. This will be at the .618
or .786 retracements 75% of the time.
The other 25% of the time, the
retracements will be .382, .500 or .707.
2. There must be an AB = CD pattern ob-
served in the move from A to D.
3. The BC move will be .618 or .786 of
AB. In strongly trending markets expect
a .382 or .500 retracement.
4. Analyze the time frames from point X to
A and A to D. These time frames will
also be in ratio and proportion. For ex-
ample, the number of time bars down
from point X to A is equal to 17 bars.
The number of bars from A to D is 11.
5. There will be a few instances where the
AB = CD move will give a price objec-
tive at point X. This will be a true double
top formation.
6. If point X is exceeded the trend will
continue to move up to at least 1.27 or
1.618 of the X to A move.





PATTERN #5
1. The time frame between point X and
point A will be between 5 and 13 time
bars (i.e., 5 min., 30 min., or daily). On
rare instances 21 time bars. These are
Fibonacci numbers.
2. There are no swing patterns present
between points 1 and A.
3. When the move from X to 1 is very
explosive, the pullback to point A may
only retrace to 38.2% or 50% IX.
4. If the price difference between the .618
and .786 retracement is greater than the
trader is willing to risk, the trader should
wait for further confirmation (i.e., a
change in momentum or candlestick
pattern: doji, hammer). In the S&P 500,
for example, if the difference between the
•618 and .786 numbers is greater than
1.70 points, I will wait for further confir-
mation to enter the trade.
5. Time periods, the next swing will usually
be dramatic to the downside. If the time
frame down from point 1 to A is longer
than 8 periods, the ensuing pullback will
most likely be less dramatic.
6. The trader will never know which of the
retracement numbers the market is going
to reach. It is the trader's decision to
determine how much risk is in the trade.
7. This pattern forces you to trade with the
short term trend. You are not trying to
pick a top or bottom.
8. After entry, once prices move 61.8% in
the direction of the trend, the protective
stop should be moved to point A. This
gives a risk free trade.
9. The minimum price objective should be
the same distance from point A to 1.




PATTERN #6
1. The time frame between point X and A
will be between 5 and 13 time bars (i.e.,
5 min., 30, or daily). On rare instances
21 time bars.
2. There are usually no swing patterns
present between points 1 and A.
3. When the move from X to 1 is very
explosive, the pullback to point A may
only retrace to 38.2% or 50% of IX.
4. If the price difference between the .618
and .786 retracement is greater than the
trader is willing to risk, the trader should
wait for further confirmation (i.e, change
in momentum or candlestick pattern; doji
or hammer). In the S&P 500, for ex-
ample, if the difference between the .618
and .786 is greater than 170 points I will
wait for further confirmation to enter the
trade.
5. The time bars between points X and A
give a strong clue to the next swing.
When the distance from point A is very
short, 3 to 5 time periods, the next swing
will be explosive to the upside. If the
time frame down from point 1 to A is
longer than 8 periods, the ensuing rally
will most likely not be as strong.
6. The trader will never know which of the
retracement numbers the market is going
to reach. It is the trader's decision to
determine how much risk is in the trade.
7. This pattern forces you to trade with the
short term trend. You are not trying to
pick a top or bottom.
8. After entry, once prices move 61.8% in
the direction of the trend, the protective
stop should be moved to point A. This
gives a risk free trade.
9. The minimum price objective should be
the same distance as point X to 1.


PATTERN #7
1. The time frame between X and point A
will be between 5 and 13 time bars (i.e.,
5 min., 30 min., daily). On rare occa-
sions 21 time bars.
2. This is a reversal or extension pattern.
Expect prices to reverse at point A.
3. If the dollar amount between the 1.27
price and 1.618 price is too great, the
trader should wait for more confirmation
(i.e., doji or hammer or another indica
tor) of an exhaustion move.
4. The thrust down from 1 to A will give a
good clue what to expect. If prices
get to the 1.27 within 5 bars or less
prices will most probably extend to the
1.618.
5. There should be no price swings between
point 1 and point A. If there is a price
swing Pattern #6 becomes a Gartley
222 pattern.
6. This is a very important pattern when
day trading because point X is often the
opening price of the day.
7. When prices react in the direction of the
trade, the protective stop should be
raised to break even.
8. Profit objective should be the total dis-
tance between points 1 and A.




PATTERN #8
1. The time frame between X and point A
will be 5 and 13 time bars (i.e., 5 min.,
30 min., daily). On rare occasions 21
time bars.
2. This is a reversal or extension pattern.
Expect prices to reverse at point A.
3. If the dollar amount between the 1.27
price and 1.618 price is too great, the
trader should wait for more confirmation
(i.e., doji or hammer or another indica-
tor) of an exhaustion move.
4. The thrust up from 1 to A will give a
good clue what to expect. If prices
get to the 1.27 within 5 bars or less
prices will most probably extend to the
1.618.
5. There should be no price swings between
point 1 and point A. If there is a price
swing, Pattern #6 becomes a Gartley
"222" pattern.
6. This is a very important pattern when
day trading because point X is often the
opening price of the day.
7. When prices react in the direction of the
trade, the protective stop should be
raised to break even.
8. Profit objective should be the total dis-
tance between points 1 and A.





PATTERN #9
THREE DRIVES TO A TOP
1. The pattern should be easily identified. If
you have to force the numbers, it is prob-
ably not this pattern.
2. Symmetry is the key to this pattern.
Points 2 and 3 should be 1.27 or 1.618
price expansions of the A and C swings.
3. The time frames from point A to 2 and C
to 3 should be symmetrical.
4. If there is a big price gap in this pattern
at any time it is a sign that the 3 drive
pattern is wrong and the trader should
wait for further confirmation that a top is
in progress.
5. Price swings A and C will usually be at
the .618 or .786 retracement of the pre-
vious swing. When the market is a verti-
cal (blow off) pattern, these retracements
will only be .382.
6. Three drives to a top is a rare pattern.
After you start to see this patttern, it will
be much easier to interpret. Don't search
for the pattern, it should jump out at you
as you study the chart.




PATTERN #10
THREE DRIVES TO A BOTTOM
1. The pattern should easily be identified. If
you have to force the numbers, it is prob-
ably not this pattern.
2. Symmetry is the key to this pattern.
Points 2 and 3 should be 1.27 or 1.618
price expansions of the A and C swings.
3. The time frames from point A to 2 and C
to 3 should be symmetrical.
4. If there is a big price gap in this pattern
at any time it is a sign that the 3 drive
pattern is wrong and the trader should
wait for further confirmation that a bot-
tom is in progress.
5. Price swings A and C will usually be at
the .618 or .786 retracement of the previ-
ous swing. When the market is in a free
fall (exhaustion) these retracements
will only be .382.
6. Three drives to a bottom is a rare pattern.
After you start to see this pattern, it will
be much easier to interpret. Don't search
for the pattern, it should jump out at you
as you study the chart.



A word of caution:
When the three drives pattern fails, it often leads
to a huge continuation move in the direction of the trend.
Notice how perfect this
three drives to a bottom has setup.

CLASSICAL CHART PATTERNS USING
RATIO AND PROPORTION
Those of you who follow the standard trading pattern discussed in technical analysis may
find this section interesting. I have selected the four more common patterns traders en-
counter. If the trader will analyze the pattern using the ratios discussed in this book, it
will most probably be enlightening besides increasing probabilitites of a profitable trade.
1. Head and Shoulders Pattern (Bottoms and Tops)
2. Double Bottoms and Tops
3. Symmetrical Triangles (Broadening Tops and Bottoms)
4. Dynamite Triangles











BONUS PATTERN
THE BUTTERFLY
Bryce Gilmore and I discovered this pattern
while we were running analysis routines on
his Wave Trader Software. It is a very power-
ful pattern and is seen at significant tops and
bottoms only. The "Butterfly" beauty lies in
its symmetry. It is my second favorite pattern.
(First is Gartley "222").
When several of my close friends reviewed
this book for me they suggested that I omit
the Butterfly pattern. I already knew my re-
sponse to the suggestion. I firmly believe that
you can give the trading public the Holy Grail
and they still won't grasp the principle. The
reasons for this are probably related to a gen-
eral level of skepticism and inability to actu-
ally do the work involved. This pattern is far
removed from any Holy Graill Find a few on
your own and make your own judgement. I
know you will find the time well spent.
CHARACTERISTICS OF
THE"BUTTERFLY"PATTERN
1. It is formed by the connecting of two
triangles.
2. An AB = CD pattern is present in the
extension move.
3. The extension move can be either 1.27 or
1.618. Any move beyond 1.618 negates
this pattern. Should this occur, a very
strong continuation move is in progress.
4. It is found only at significant tops and
bottoms.
5. The time bar relationship usually is in
ratio and proportion to the price bar.
6. It is correct more than 80% of the time.
7. The retracement moves inside the
butterfly will usually contain .618 and
.786 moves.





THE OPENING PRICE
I first met John Hill of the Commodity
Research Institute in Hcndersonville, North
Carolina in late 1974 or early 1975. At that
time, I was recovering from a tremendous
loss in cattle, soybean oil and soybean meal.
I was long many contracts during the 1974
October break. I started with nothing, but ran
it up to a great deal of money. I then realized
that I had the ability to make that kind of
money. However, I neglected to realize that
I confused success with a bull market and I
was unprepared when the bear market finally
came.
During these last 14 years, John and I re-
mained good friends and shared numerous
good trading ideas. In 1982 I went to John's
ranch in Hendersonville and spent two weeks
with him looking at various ways to trade
the markets. One of the best discoveries we
made was a computer study which revealed
to us the principle called Trading in the Di-
rection of the Opening Price. We worked
two solid weeks in several different markets,
relating the opening price to the price action
of that day. It is one of the most amazing
discoveries I used as a technical indicator
in trading commodities.
Several years later, Earl Haddady of the
Haddady-Sibbett Corporation published the
same statistics in a book called The Impor-
tance of the Opening Price. We heartily rec-
ommend this book to anyone interested in
trading commodities and especially to those
involved in day trading. It puts a tremendous
advantage on your side when you're trading
in the direction of the opening price.
The principle behind the importance of the
opening price probably stems from the fact
that the markets arc open only six hours a
day. That leaves 18 hours for decision mak-
ing to occur. When you consider the fact that
the foreign markets are open in Hong Kong,
Tokyo, Singapore, Sidney, London and Am-
sterdam, you get an even greater flavor of
what occurs during the 18 hours when our
markets are closed. It is my opinion that de-
cisions are made during the 18 hours that af-
fect the opening of our market. I realize that
most of the volume is not done on the open-
ing— it is done during the complete day. How-
ever, to explain how the opening price is so
significant, one must remember that these
people have been making thought decisions
and analytical decisions during the past 18
hours in order to come up with strategies for
the following days.
The Opening Price Principle is this: the
opening price will be at or near the high or
low of that day 85-90 percent of the time. In
other words, the price at the opening will be
either within 10 percent either the high or the
low of the day on that particular day. There
are two ways that you can prove this prin-
ciple to yourself. First, take a commodity chart

like Commodity Perspective or Futures
Charts, something that shows the opening
price which would be the small left-hand bar
on the daily bar chart—not the closing price,
but the left-hand side which is the opening
price. Take a red pencil and draw a little circle
around the opening price. Continue that
through the life of the contract. Set the chart
down and you'll see that the high or the low
of the day was the opening price approxi-
mately eight or nine times out of 10. The sec-
ond way to test the importance of the open-
ing price is to use the day trading charts—
that is Intraday charts—if you have access to
them. Using an intraday chart, mark the open-
ing price and draw a line across the time zone
for the rest of the day~a horizontal line where
the opening price is indicated. You'll be sur-
prised how often prices meander around that
opening price whether it is the high or the
low of the day. Even when it's not the high or
the low of the day, the opening price seems
to be some kind of harmonic or equilibrium
price that the market bounces against several
times during the day.
Armed with this information, a day trader and,
actually, a position trader can enter the mar-
ket to his advantage with probabilities on his
side. The charts on the following pages show
examples of how to use the opening price ad-
vantage as part of your armamentarium for
strategy in entering a market for a position
trade and also for profiting on a day trading
basis. Keep in mind that this technique does
not work all of the time, but that it does put
probability in your favor a great deal of the
time.
There is an important concept here to re-
member: forget about the closing price of
yesterday. It means absolutely nothing
when you're dealing with the opening
price concept. Whether the price gaps up
or the price gaps down is of no consequence
to you when you are using the opening price
to enter a market. You must forget the clos-
ing price of the previous day; the opening
price is your focus, especially when day trad-
ing. Whenever I taught this principle, stu-
dents always seemed to want to hang onto
the closing price of yesterday. You must re-
member not to use yesterday's closing
price when using the opening price prin-
ciple.
You will see that this technique does get
easier with practice as you become more ac-
customed to its use. The charts on the next
several pages present examples of how to
use the opening price in conjunction with
patterns and pattern recognition formations
in order to set up day trading probabilities.
You may want to use the "Key of the Day"
(Opening + High + Low divided by 3) with
this technique. If prices are above Key of
Day, only go long. If below Key of Day, only
go short.
Keep in mind that in day trading—and also
position trading—you must be concerned
with both the Price and the Time Axis. Some
people who day trade will inadvertently lose
money because they forget about the Time
Axis. They think they are trading just for sev-
eral days when, in fact, they put a trade on
for a day trade and it turns into a position
trade which gaps the opposite of what posi-

tion they are holding, resulting in a loss. When
you are day trading, you should be out on the
close. If you are position trading, you should
position yourself for a longer term move
somewhere in the neighborhood of three days
to three months, depending on your style of
trading.
The first example of how to use the opening
price is illustrated on page 112; this chart
shows the market opened at Price A then be-
gan to react downward and continue down.
People who bought near the high of the day
are now concerned whether the market is go-
ing back up through the high or have a key
reversal to the downside. As you can see, af-
ter a period of time, the market reached sup-
port. This support is at a major Fibonacci
number, the (.618) retracement off the open-
ing price. The market has held there and has
now started to move higher.
One of our favorite day trading techniques is
to buy that (.618) retracement from the open-
ing price with a stop at the (.85) retracement.
In other words, if the market dropped more
than 25 percent below the (.618) you would
be able to say that you were wrong; your stop
limitation is very small and you would be able
to profit as the market moved higher. As evi-
denced in this example, the market did, in
fact, move higher and you turned a profit at
the end of the day.
It is also important to get a very fair commis-
sion rate when day trading. As $25 - $30 range
is completely acceptable for grains, bonds,
Standards and Poors and just about any other
commodity. Good volatility is essential when
day trading. Trade the markets that arc quite
volatile and highly active with a great deal
of volume. This will be covered in greater
detail in another section.
The second example of how to use the open-
ing price is illustrated on page 113.
Note the opening price. The market breaks
rapidly and then starts to rally back toward
the opening price. Again, the market rallies
back to the Fibonacci number, (.618), and then
resumes its move to the downside. These two
examples demonstrate that if a trader is pa-
tient and waits for this particular pattern to
unfold, the probabilities are in his favor in a
twofold manner. First, he is trading in the di-
rection of the opening price. It meanders in
the direction the trend is going to be in. It will
be in his favor seven or eight times out often.
Secondly, he's trading in the direction of the
trend and selling into a rally at a very strong
mathematical point where the risk is quanti-
fied because, if the market continues to go
up, it will be stopped out with a very small
loss. The probabilities of these particular pat-
terns working are better than seven out of 10.







ENTRY TECHNIQUES
Here are some of my favorite entry tech-
niques used in conjunction with the geo-
metric patterns. They are listed in their
order of importance (importance to me!)
1. The Shapiro Iteration as described in
the following pages.
2. Limit Orders - Placed a few ticks above
or below the exact geometric price mea
surements. A predetermined stop loss
(approxiamtely $600) is placed at the
same time.
3. Candlestick Patterns - These patterns
graphically display the importance of
the trading range for that time
emphazing the opening price. Here are
four usable patterns:
A. Tweezers - This formation is the
equivalent of a double bottom.
Tweezers occur when 2 lines have
equal highs or lows in succession.
They help to quantify risk at the
completion of the geometric
patterns.
B. Doji's - The market opened and
closed at the same price after mak-
ing the highs and lows. They oc
cur when the market is in transi
tion from bullish to bearish mode
or vice versa. Doji's are even more
important at the end of a geometric
pattern. This is also true when
they occur after very volatile mar-
kets. It is a sign that ALL of the
market players —bulls and bears-
are nervous.
C. Hammer's - The hammer is a
period when the market has met
strong support after a sharp sell
off. It gets its name from "ham
mering out a bottom." A hammer
should be twice the length of the
candle. Hammer should be estheti-
cally easy to see. If you have a
doubt, it is probably not a ham
men
D. Shooting Stars—These are ac-
companied by an upside gap on
the opening with the market clos
ing near the lower end of the trad
ing range. These are particularly
useful entry techniques at the end
of the geometric pattern. They
appear as the opposite of the hang
ing man.
Many of the candlestick patterns may be
helpful as well. I only use these four be-
cause they seem to go hand in hand with
the geometric patterns.

4. The Volatility Stop Entry Technique
The Volatility Stop calculates the vola-
tility by using the average range of the
price bar. It is calculated by multiplying
the average range by a contstant. The
value is added to the lowest close when
short, and subtracted from the highest
when long:
Range = (Range x (N-l)) + High - Low /N
Short = Lowest Close + Range x C
Long - Highest Close - Range x C
My experience is to use the Volatility Stop
in strongly trending markets. It is an excel-
lent entry technique and in most instances
will be superior to valid trend line breaks,
or channel breakouts. The reverse stop also
acts to quantify risk as it relates to volatil-
ity. The constants should be kept between
2.5 and 4.0.

THE SHAPIRO ITERATION
When I day trade and use only one calcula-
tion to decide on an entry or exit value, I ap-
ply what I like to call the "Shapiro Iteration"
before putting on the trade. It involves wait-
ing one bar value of whatever the time value
is of the chart I am using to decide on the
trade (I wait five minutes if I am using a five
minute chart to make trading decisions, 30
minutes if I am using a 30 minute chart, etc.).
It was proposed by Steve Shapiro one day
after the market went against him literally al-
most before he had put the phone back into
its cradle after placing an order. Like the rest
of us, he too, has made decisions using emo-
tion rather than logic more times than he cares
to admit. Since we began applying it, the tech-
nique has saved both of us a great deal of
money. There is more than one lesson in his
explanation of what he calls his "Five Minute
Rule", but what I like to call the "Shapiro
Iteration."
The most difficult thing for any trader to do
is isolate the emotional part of his thinking
and keep it from interfering with his trading.
One of the best ways to accomplish this task
is to plan and place both the entry point and
price objective before you make the trade.
Including both of these price points with a
stop loss when you place your original order
will reduce the emotional element of trading.
The problem with this concept is that for
whatever reason, most traders simply cannot
operate this mechanically.
It is necessary, therefore, to be realistic and
try to develop a safety valve that can protect
us from ourselves if we cannot behave this
rationally. The closest concept to a fail-safe
rule I have found to use in the heat of trading
is the "Shapiro Iteration" or "Five Minute
Rule."
When a decision to put on a trade is made
during market hours, it is often made on the
basis of only one calculation, rather than the
more reliable confirmation of a number of
decisions drawing the same or similar con-
clusions about price.
Many times as we sit and watch the screen
we experience the urge to make a trade be-
cause it is beginning to move in the direction
we anticipated. We saw the trade before the
move began, but for some reason did not put
it on.
As the price moves our way, and particularly
if it begins to accelerate, there is an emotional
surge we experience that comes from a com-
bination of being right about the trade, and
feeling indecisive about not putting it on, as
well as guilty/angry about losing the profit.
It is precisely this eagerness to still want to
"hop on the train before it gets too far from
the station" that usually gets us in trouble.
Unless the price action suddenly slows down
drastically, or reverses altogether, the emo-
tional surge will continue to swell and many
times we will put on the trade, even though
we logically know it is not the best course of
action.

The result is too often what appears to be
the vengeance of the trading gods. We have
all had the experience of struggling with our-
selves about placing such an order, and when
we finally make the decision to do it, almost
as soon as we put the phone back in the
cradle the price action changes. We almost
believe that the market was active and alive
and just waiting for the exact moment we
put on our one or two contracts to reverse
the price movement.
It is especially important at these times to
remember that when this happens, the mar-
ket is not alive or right or wrong, and it is not
punishing us for doing the wrong thing. The
market simply and always just is. It is we
who are right or wrong. It is we who punish
ourselves for anger, or greed or indecision
or not doing our homework.
After acting more times than I care to admit
on this emotional impulse to place the right
trade at the wrong time, a very simple con-
clusion presented itself. Because the time
between actually putting on the trade and the
time the market seemed to reverse was so
small, (often it seemed to happen simulta-
neously no matter how hard I tried to "out-
smart" or "beat" the market), the only logi-
cal way to deal with this seemingly insur-
mountable temptation was to write down the
exact time and price when I finally decided
to make the trade, and force myself to wait
atleast five minutes, 300 seconds, before ac-
tually initiating it.
The logic was elegant in its simplicity. If the
trading gods really were waiting in ambush
for my emotions to drive me to make the trade
at exactly the wrong moment, in five minutes
I would observe a noticeable change in trend
in the price action, proof that I should not
have put on the trade.
When this is the case, the amount saved usu-
ally turns out to be substantial. This is true
for two reasons. First, when the price reverse
after a fast move in one direction, it is often
an equally speedy and sizable retracement of
the previous move. If I placed a close stop
to limit the loss, it is usually hit rather quickly
If a stop was not put on, it became a de-
structive game of playing catch up and pos-
sibly letting a small loss that should not have
occurred in the first place develop into a large
loss. When this happens your focus usually
follows the loss instead of looking for an
other profitable situation.
If in fact the trade still looked good five min-
utes after my emotions told me I couldn't
wait a minute longer, then all I did was lose a
little of the profit that was still to be made. In
either case the net is still a gain.
FIBONACCI RATIOS with PATTIERN RecgoNItTION 
121






APPENDIX I
TRADING RECORD
Stop protection should be no more than 3 percent of total trading equity.

APPENDIX II
DESCRIPTION OF GARTLEY "222"
This is the description of the Gartley "222"
pattern exactly as it appears on pages 221
and 222 of his book, Profits in the Stock
Market.
One of the Best Trading Opportunities
In the life of those who dabble on Wall street,
at some time or another there comes a yearn-
ing— "just to buy them right, once, if never
again." For those who have patience, the
study of top and bottom patterns will provide
such an opportunity every now and then-the
chance does not arise everyday, but when it
does, a worthwhile opportunity, with small
risk becomes available.
Let us look at Figure 27(A). When, after an
intermediate decline in either a bull or a bear
market, such as A-B in the diagram, has pro-
ceeded for some time, and activity has shown
a definite tendency to dry up, indication that
liquidation is terminating, a minor rally like
B-C sets in, with volume expanding on the
upside. And when a minor decline, after can-
celling a third to a half of the preceding mi-
nor advance (B-C) comes to a halt, with vol-
ume drying up again, a real opportunity is
presented to buy stocks, with a stop under
the previous low.
In eight out often cases wherein each of these
specific conditions occurs, a rally, which will
provide a worthwhile profit, ensues. In the
other two cases, only small losses have to be
taken. In trading this formation, the observer
is depending upon the probability that either
a head-and-shoulders, or double bottom,
which are the two reversal patterns which oc-
cur most frequently, is developing.
The art in conducting an operation of this kind
lies in:
a. Having the patience to wait until a decline
of substantial proportions has developed;
b. Observing that all conditions laid down are
present;
c. Having the courage to buy just as soon as
the minor reaction which tests the bottom
shows signs of terminating; and

d. Having the courage to get out with a fair
profit (10-20 per cent), or at least protect
it with stops.
Hourly charts of the averages, available for
guiding the operation, repay the market
student for all the efforts he puts into keep-
ing them day after day, when they are of
less practical use.
Similar opportunities occasionally develop for
that small part of the trading fraternity that
the intestinal fortitude and temperament to sell
stocks short. The case in reverse is laid out
in of Figure 27(B).
Figure 27 (B)
Gartley's book was written in the 1930's
and things have changed dramatically about
the markets. Not the markets themselves,
but the way they are reported. Communica-
tion is now instantaneous because of the
statellite dishes around the world connected
to all the computer trading desks around the
world. During Gartley's era, the Western
Union tickertape was the method of
communciation. As I wrote that last sen-
tence, I realized that is how I learned to
trade soybeans with Dave Nelson on his
Trans Lux ticker tape.
Thousands of new stocks and commodity
markets have been introduced since
Gartley's time. Most of these are very liquid
and easy to gain access to the chart pat-
terns. This is particularly true for the
intraday charts. In this section of the appen-
dix, I have selected some intraday charts
illustrating these patterns.
Included in the appendix is the page on my
monitor that shows what commoditites and
stocks I follow. Each has a monthly, daily
and intraday chart pattern. Intraday charts
are 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 30 minutes, 60
minutes as well as a tick chart to record
every tick. This is helpful to gauge whether
or not you are filled on your order and at
what price.
As one reads the "222" pattern described
by H. M. Gartley, three basic virtues are
suggested for trading.
1) Patience to wait for the market formation
to develop.

2) Courage to put the order in and a protec-
tive stop to minimize risk.
3) Fortitude and temperament to sell short.
Again protecting the positions with stops.
The "222" is one of the best patterns a
trader can expect. When it does not work it
usually means that a greater trend continua-
tion is in progress. Failure of the "222"
pattern can be anticipated in several ways:
1. The presence of a huge gap near the D
termination point.
2. Wide range price ranges as point D is
forming.
3. After the formation of point D the market
fails to reverse. This may indicate a level of
consolidation before resuming the trend.



















APPENDIX III
PORTFOLIO PAGE
This is the portfolio page I use each day. From these speculative vehicles I search
for the various patterns.
* The Transportation, Cash S&P, and Tick Indices are used as confirmations of the
patterns. The same patterns are present in the cash indices.
DESCRIPTION SYMBOL 
LAST 
NET 
HIGH 
LOW 
OPEN
US Bonds 
US7H 
11401 
+3 
11406 
11331 
11331
Swiss Francs 
SF7H 
.7454 
-.0011 
.7479 
.7439 
.7461
Deutsche Mark 
DM7H 
.6452 
-.0012 
.6473 
.6450 
.6469
Wheat 
W7H 
386.50 
-3.00 
389.00 
385.25 
388.75
Jap Yen 
JY7H 
.8712 
-.0038 
.8730 
.8695 
.8728
S&P 500 
SP7H 
764.90 
+0.30 
767.00 
764.60 
764.60
Dow 
INDU 
6565.90 
+4.99 
6576.28 
6560.91 
6560.91
Soybean Meal 
SM7H 
220.50 
-1.30 
220.50 
218.70 
220.40
Soybean 
S7F 
700.00 
-1.50 
700.00 
698.50 
699.50
Corn 
C7H 
262.50 
-2.00 
263.00 
262.25 
263.00
Gold 
GC7G 
371.10 
+0.00 
371.70 
371.00 
371.20
Silver 
SI7H 
482.00 
-9.30 
492.00 
480.00 
490.50
Transport 
TRAN 
2286.03 
-1.66 
2288.61 
2286.03 
2287.69
TICK Index 
TICK 
140.00 
565.00 
127.00 
127.00
Copper 
HG7H 
99.00 
+0.40 
99.15 
98.10 
98.00
NYFE 
YX7H 
401.85 
+0.40 
402.90 
401.80 
402.60
Cash S&P 
SPY 
757.95 
+1.16 
759.20 
756.79
Crude Oil 
CL7G 
25.51 
+0.29 
25.55 
25.13 
25.40
Soybean Oil 
BO7H 
.2339 
+.0009 
.2340 
.2339 
.2340
Natural Gas 
NR7H 
27.80 
-2.04 
28.00 
27.50 
27.70

APPENDIX 
IV
ROOTS AND UPROOTS
The first thing I was ever told about Larry
Pesavento was that he traded stocks using
the stars. Being a self proclaimed pseudo-
intellectual liberal from the East newly ar-
rived in a small central coast California
town, I immediately pictured a wizened old
guy with a long white beard who wore a
large, black pointed hat and cloak, both
covered with white glistening stars and half
moons. Maybe he even walked around
carrying a large staff and tapped it on the
ground for support as he walked.
At the time, I recently came west to accept
a teaching position at California Polytechnic
State University (Cal Poly) and was still in
the process of meeting people. One of
them was Michael Weintraub, the gregarious
owner of a store that sells excellent fur and
leather goods in San Louis Obispo. This,
in a small town where the mean annual
temperature was 70.2 degrees. The para-
dox was amazing to me and so was
Michael. He likes to shock people and
when he asked me what I liked to do in my .
spare time and I mentioned traded com-
modities, he melodramatically told me about
Larry.
When I met Larry in Michael's store on
night after hearing about him, I was startled
by his appearance. I was almost disap-
pointed there was no pointed cap, no cloak,
no stars or half moons. At first glance he
looked just like everybody else, until you
noticed the constant twinkle in his eye that
spoke of living life, loving it and inviting the
observer to share the ride. No magic, no
mystery. Just a nice guy who liked people/
He appeared to be generous and giving.
And he was.
Don't be fooled by appearance was the first
lesson I learned for LP. (As our friendship
grew he came to call me "Doc" and I would
call him LP.) The moral here is: watch your
expectations. Better yet, don't have them
and they won't be violated. With respect to
the markets, don't look for something you
want to be there. Learn to see what the
market offers and respect what's there. Put
more succinctly, don't look for what you
WANT to be in a trade, learn to see what
there IS in the trade. This was a lesson that
would haunt us both.
When Michael introduced us, he said to me,
"Go ahead, ask him anything you want," as
if to imply Larry possessed some kind of
secret monopoly on the wisdom of mar-
kets.
LP looked at Michael, who he knew loved
"to stir the pot." To reduce my awkward-
ness and embarrassment at Michael's
intentioned boldness Larry just

smiled his disarming smile and said, "Go
ahead, I don't' mind. I love what I do and
love to talk about the market."
That began both my friendship with LP and
a series of discussions that not only cov-
ered the mechanics of trading, but virtually
every aspect of life and how it related to the
psychology of trading and trading as a
metaphor for life.
Soon after we met, LP invited me to his
trading room to continue our discussions
and watch him trade. Being a late night
person at the time, there were few things I
was willing to get up to see at 5:20 AM.
Bonds and currencies start trading at that
time on the West coast (8:20 AM NY time).
LP seemed so interesting and funny that I
thought I would give it a try. It was one of
the wisest decisions I ever made. We
would sit and watch the markets and LP
would tell me market "war stories" about
his days as a stockbroker and floor trader,
and what he thought was going to happen
that day. I was delighted at how much he
knew and how funny he could be and how
often he was right about the markets.
Larry is the best pure trader I ever met or
read about. One morning on a particularly
slow trading day he turned to me and said,
"I'm bored. Let's paper trade some bel-
lies." Larry loves to trade pork bellies and
has an incredible knack for it. In a short
time he made 15 straight profitable paper
trades. On the basis of just one contract he
literally could have made more than
1000% that day trading one contract.
When he would say, "Let's put one on
now," or "Let's get out of it now," I would
invariably ask, "Why did you do that?" He
would invariably reply, "Because it was the
right thing to do." "Come on. LP, could
you be a little more specific," I would say,
feigning a mock annoyance with his cavalier
attitude. He would look at me with exagger-
ated exasperation and tease, "Come on
Doc, are you kidding me? This is easy. By
now you should not only know this, but be
able to teach it." Then, of course, he would
tell me, slowly and carefully, always empha-
sizing the importance of never putting on a
trade without a stop, and equally important,
the value of knowing when to get out.
It didn't take long to see he was right. It
was easier than I thought once I began to
see the patterns. It really doesn't take long
to learn them and be able to pick them out
on any chart just by looking. The tech-
niques in this book work, but what doesn't
necessarily accompany that knowledge is
the wisdom to apply it properly.
When I first started watching LP trade I
asked what I thought was a logical question,
one that I since heard many times. "Does it
work for everything, and how do you
know?" When I first asked, LP just smiled
and grabbed a chart. He cut off the name
and the scale so I didn't know what it was,

whether it was a stock or commodity, or
what the time bars were. He gave me (lie
chart and told me to look for the patterns.
"But there are no time bars on it. How will
I know what I'm looking at?" I protested,
without thinking my objection through.
For a rare moment he was serious. "Pay
attention. Stop looking for what you
WANT to see. Just look at what's there
and what you DO see."
Of course he was right. Once I stopped
looking for what I expected and started
looking at what was there, the patterns just
jumped out at me. He saw my face change
and slipped back into the non-serious LP.
A case in point. One morning we were
watching the market and LP was on the
phone. The conversation did not go well
and when LP put the receiver in the cradle
he immediately picked it back up, dialed his
broker and put on a very bad trade with no
stop, which immediately started going
against him. He watched the price go
against him and ignored a number of other
possibilities we were considering as he let
his frustration and annoyance with himself
grow.
After a few minutes of watching him stew, I
turned to him and quietly, "LP do you
know what you just did?"
He looked at me like he had just come out
of a trance. He knew exactly what I meant
and true professional that he is, said, "Doc,
you're right. That was really dumb. I let
myself get emotional." He immediatley
dialed his broker and closed the trade with a
small loss. Always the friend and teacher,
he said without embarassment, "Let's talk
about what just happened."
We identified a number of lessons to be
learned from the actions of those few min-
utes. First, when you trade, try to think of
nothing else at the time. Focus on what you
are doing, how you are doing it, and most
important of all, why you are doing it. The
market is what it is, and does what it does.
It doesn't care about who we are or what
we do. If we choose to act on bad a deci-
sion, it's okay with the market. How many
times have all of us heard someone com-
plain, "Look at what the market did to me
today?" The market did NOTHING to that
individual or anybody else. It doesn't
know that he's alive. Or care. It owes him
or us nothing. It simply is. What happened
he did to himself. The successful trader
makes bad decisions based on the prob-
abilities that the inherent harmony of the
markets will repeat itself, i.e.what has hap-
pened before it will happen again. The
trader's analysis suggests when, where, and
to what extent. The patterns that evolve are
always similiar but seldom the same. They
may be thought of as the grammar of how
the market speaks, in the same way how
words relate are the building blocks of
language.

The second lesson is to keep your emo-
tions out of your trading. Mathematics is
clear, concise and logical. The pattern
recognition and trend analysis in this book
provide techniques to put the probabilities
in your favor, but you must be in the proper
frame of mind to use them profitably. Out-
side concerns, especially personal or emo-
tional ones, must be put aside (admittedly
difficult to do), or you must not trade. To
allow "things" to bother you when you are
trying to trade is almost a guaranteed pre-
scription for disaster. The value of having
the wisdom and the discipline to see the
difference and act on it properly cannot be
over calculated. The money you DON'T
lose because of poor judgement and emo-
tionally driven decisions can be far greater
and more important to you that the profits
you do make by exercising proper trading
technique. The emotional price of making a
bad decision based on emotion can be
more costly and psychologically more
damaging that the loss of money. Money
can be remade more easily than confidence
and self assurance can be restored. Fortu-
nately in this case Larry caught himself
going in a dangerous direction on that trade
and was disciplined enough to cut his loss
and move on.
The third lesson is that making a bad deci-
sion and staying with it when you know it's
wrong, keeps you from aeeking and taking
advantage of other profitable opportunities.
A trade, especially a bad one, is over when
it's over. Forget it and move on.
These observations seem cold and calculat-
ing. And difficult to implement. They arc,
all of the above. They are also how a
professional trader trades. They require
discipline and confidence and the ego
strength to take responsibilty for our ac-
tions. Whenever LP and I followed our
guidelines we invariably make money.
When we thought we were smarter than the
market or "just wanted a little more," the
opposite was just as certain.
One of the best examples of this concept
that became a running joke with us is the
story about how "Ten dimes make a dol-
lar." One day, when LP had just concluded
a very profitable run of trades, he seemed
to linger over his decision about when to
exit the last trade. It earned a substantial
profit very quickly and LP was hesitant
about exiting it. Soon after it reached the
profit point LP had projected, and gone a
little farther, the price changed direction and
a fairly large profit turned into a loss.
"LP, why did you let that happen?" I
asked.
Somewhat sheepishly, he replied, "I just
made a lot of money hitting singles and
doubles, I felt like trying for a home run."
"Aw c'mon LP," I chided him with a smile,
you know better than that. Every time either
one of us does that we get nailed." We
both knew better, but every once in a while
we both still did it.

When he sets his mind to it, Larry can be
almost a perfect trader, doing exactly every-
thing how he teaches it. It is important to
realize that doesn't mean always making a
profit. What it does mean is that doing the
right thing for the right reason at the right
time will make a net profit over time, quite
possibly a large one. You learn to look at
the net results often trades, or twenty, not
just one.
"Doc, stop picking on me. I know what I
did," he laughed.
What I said next just came out. I didn't
think about until after I said it and we both
laughed. "LP, ten dimes make a dollar.
You want a dollar, don't be lazy. Make ten
dimes, 'cause a dollar might not be there in
one gulp."
Larry kept a straight face as he stopped,
looked thoughtful, reached for a pencil and
made a big show of writing as he spoke the
words,"Wait, Doc, I'm a little slow, let me
write this down, 'Ten ... dimes...make ... a
dollar..."
We both laughed and talked about it. The
many morals were clear, and we both were
guilty of violating our guidelines too many
times. Don't be greedy; don't look for
what's not there; take what the market
gives; don't think that after you make a
profit you're trading with the market's
money. Once you make it, it's yours.
Don't give it back foolishly. Carefully plan
every trade you make. Think of it as the
most important trade you ever made — until
the next one.
Larry was right about how easy it becomes
to recognize and spot the patterns and
eventually I did begin to help him teach his
technique. Like college teaching, helping
LP train commodity traders usually taught
me as much or more as I might teach them.
Seeing the light of knowledge suddenly
appear on someone's face where a split
second before there was uncertainty, is not
only psychologically rewarding for the
teacher, but also offers the opportunity to
analyze when the light dawned and why.
That provides insight into the workings of
the student's mind as well as the teacher's.
Both LP and I learned much from our
students. As with the market, the secret
was to observe and see what was there, not
what we wanted to be there.
When I observed that teaching how to trade
the markets was pretty much the same as
teaching communication at the university,
LP just smiled that boyish smile of his and
asked in exaggerated wonder, "You're
surprised!?" The truth was that learning
about the markets taught me more about my
behavior and that of others than anything
else. Again, LP and I talked about this
process many times. It taught us both how
to "see" many things more clearly. As LP
taught me, the market was indeed a meta-
phor for a great deal more.

Perhaps the best examples of this process
occurred a number of times with beginning
students who just learned to trade.
Larry would instruct him to choose three or
four different markets and pick one com-
modity from each to trade. When asked,
we usually suggested bonds, a metal and a
grain.
After three months or so, students would
call back to tell us how their trading was
going. Often when students called, they
would report 30% or 40% profits for the
period. Then they would ask if it was time
to start trading three or four more com-
modities. This question always made us
laugh because we knew what was coming
next. We would respond with our own
question, "What would happen if instead of
doubling the number of COMMODITIES
you traded, you doubled the number of
CONTRACTS you traded? Assuming
everything continued about the same, how
would you change your percentage of
profit?
Most of the time the student would take a
moment to do some math and generally
answer, "I'm not sure." This would cause
us to laugh again and purposely irritate the
student. "Why are you laughing?" would
be the next question.
"You're not listening," one of us would say.
"The PERCENTAGE of profit would stay
the same. The AMOUNT of profit would
change. Why increase your amount of
work (the number of commodities you
trade and therefore have to analyze) when
all you have to do to make more money is
increase the number of CONTRACTS? To
quote the old clich, ' if it ain't broke, don't
fix it.' Don't make more work for yourself,
just more money."
The other example occured when a student
would call and say "I just made ten ticks in
bonds" or "I just made 5 cents in beans,
what should I do? Should I close the trade
or wait and maybe get some more?"
Again we would laugh, and again, the stu-
dent would at first grow annoyed with our
laughter. One of us would ask how long the
trade took to happen. The answer was
usually, "half an hour" or "an hour." We
would laugh again and one of us would ask,
"Is that what you were looking for from this
trade? In response to a "yes," we would
continue, "would you prefer the trade took
four hours to make a profit? If you have a
chance to make what your analysis sug-
gested what was there, take it and look for
another trade. Would you rather get your
ten ticks in half an hour or half a day?"
What usually clinched it, was when we
asked "If we told you before the market
opened how to make ten ticks today, would
you do it and be satisfied?"
If the answer was "yes," as it usually was,
we would tell the student to answer his own
question about what to do regarding the
trade. It was an important part of the teach-
ing of the teaching process for the student
to be satisfied with his own decision, not

just ours. That helped develop a student's
confidence in trading.
Often a student defended the original deci-
sion and its result by adding, "But I
thought..." One of us would interrupt at
that point and gently say, "No, you didn't
think, and that is what will cost you money.
Now what did you learn today?" The
student would respond that he was at first
annoyed by our laughter, and didn't think
the situation through. That is precisely the
effect we wanted. It was unlikely in the
extreme that the student would make that
mistake again. We all want to be right as
much as we want to make a profit. Some-
times more so. And that's where the
trouble begins. An accurate analysis and
proper entry can be easily ruined by an
emotional response that changes the rules.
Good technique, but bad psychology equal
a bad result. Students usually saw the
lesson, laughed with us about their first
reaction, thanked us and said goodbye.
They called us to ask about a specific trade,
but we would try to turn it into a lesson and
get them to answer their own question. It
usually worked. It was the equivalent of
that old parable that teaches, when you give
a starving man a fish, he will eat for one
day. If you give him a fishing line and teach
him how to fish, he will eat every day.
When they called back a few months after
that, we shared another laugh when they
told us their percentages stayed the same,
but they were making more money and still
making mistakes, but not THAT one.
We once had a student who wanted very
much to learn to trade the S&P profitably.
As we showed him what to do, he kept
saying, "I understand what you're telling
me, but I don't do it that way."
Finally one of us asked if he was making a
profit trading. "Not really," he replied. Our
experience taught us he really meant he was
losing his shirt.
Then maybe you should try it another way,"
we suggested. When he left he was still
doing it his way.
Finally one of us asked him if he was mak-
ing a profit trading. "Not really," he replied.
Our experience taught us he really meant he
was losing his shirt.
The anecdote illustrates the proper answer
to a very important question. "Would you
rather be right, or get what you want?"
The reader is left to decide.
This story also illustrates another point — it
is only at the beginning of discovery that we
realize how great our ignorance. To this
end, Larry is fond of quoting a Confucian
proverb: When the student is ready, the
teacher will appear.
A spiritual friend of ours once told me, "Go
beyond the boundary of yourself to
know..." The technique taught in this book
allows the serious student to do exactly
that.

Over the years of my college teaching,
increasing numbers of my students con-
stantly complained about almost everything
and almost everyone. They saw themselves
as victims. Nothing was ever their fault.
They were jailhouse lawyers who would
argue for everything extra they could get,
whether or not they earned it. They repre-
sent the direction much of society is taking
today. Too many people refuse to take
responsibility for their own actions because
they see themselves as victims of unseen
malevolent forces. They become the trad-
ers who say, "Look what the market did to
me today."
When these students would argue for a few
more points they really didn't deserve, I
used to tell them, "Let me think about it.
After I make up my mind, I will listen to
reason, for then it can do no good." Or
smile mischieviously, and tell them, "Some-
times you're the bug and sometimes you're
the windshield."
Flip retorts or positive affirmations are
helpful and sometimes even fun, but they
will never substitute for knowledge, confi-
dence, and personal responsibility. Ernest
Hemingway once wrote, "Every man has
fears; those who face them with dignity also
have courage."
That is the bottom line. The inevitable
destiny of ignorance and mistake of arro-
gance is failure and self pity.
Remember, Babe Ruth hit 714 runs, but he
also struck out 1330 times.


APPENDIX 
V
SOME PRACTICAL TIPS ON CYCLES
Cycles are a funny lot-
Totally random they are not—-
Just when you think you have a great find-
Along comes another to challenge your
mind.
—-S.W.S.
'The above poem sums up the study of 
_
cycles. I believe that speculation markets
are non-random and chaotic. Within this
chaos are respectable patterns of price and
time. My Tomahawk neural network pro-
gram has shown this to be true on a very
consistent basis. There are two cycle
principles that I think each trader should
explore. These were first brought to my
attention when I studied Jim Hurst's
Cyclicic material in 1971. The first principle
is that of high translation. This means that
bearish and bullish cycles have distinct
characteristics.
CYCLE CREST FAR TO THE LEFT
OR EARLY IN THE CYCLE
*Bullish markets spend more lime going
up.
Bearish Cycle -- High Translation to
Left
Bullish Cycle - High Translation to
Right
CYCLE CREST FAR TO THE RIGHT
OR LATE IN THE CYCLE
*Bearish markets spend more time going
down.

The second cycle principle is that of
nominality. Cycles usually repeat in equal
increments. For instance, if there is a 9
period cycle it will usually repeat for at least
2 cycles = 18 periods. On occasion it will
repeat for more than 5 cycles (5 waves) but
then it will shift. The trader can learn two
valuable lessons from this phenomenon.
First, once the cycle has changed begin to
look for the new nominal cycle. Second,
once a nominal cycle has been identified
keep using it until it stops working. That
certainly sounds simple enough.
The study of cycles can be improved by
using the principles of rational proportion.
If you think of a price chart on any stock or
commodity as nothing more than a road
map, then all you need to do is connect the
dots to get to the destination. The following
diagram is an oversimplification of what I'm
trying to convey.
If the trader (analyst) will use the principle
of ratio and proportion it can leave valuable
clues to the validity of a cycle. Reminder—
we are dealing with probabilities only. Noth-
ing is written as absolute law.
"Take care of your losses and your
profits will take care of themselves."
—Amos Hostetter
Commodity Corp.

Fibonacci Trading Card:
My method of trading while on the floor of
the CME was actually quite simple. Each
night I would prepare the next day's trading
from my apartment at McClurg Court. I
kept daily charts on about 20 commodities
and intraday charts on all major CME fu-
tures contracts. While on the floor, I would
still trade Silver and Soybeans regularly, but
the bulk of trading was in T-Bills and Gold.
Later, it would be in the S&P 500 pit, but
that didn't start trading until April of 1982.
Because I did not like to enter the pits to
trade for myself, I would physically hand
the pit broker my order. I kept a swing chart
on a trading card in my jacket. This is what
it would look like:
with all of the Fibonacci numbers and the
.618 and 1.618 relationships. As mentioned
earlier, I did not know the importance of the
square roots of these numbers until 1989.
The following 2 pages are a replica of the
trading card I carried. I've included a card
with the .786 and 1.27 relationships for your
convenience. I still use these cards to this
day, but now they are much larger and are
placed on wooden frames hanging over my
desk.
Notice the price of the S&P in the chart.
That is the price it was trading at in 1982-
83. The nearby futures would routinely
trade at a discount to the cash S&P.
As prices would approach my buying or
selling points I would watch the "runners"
bringing orders into the pit from their re-
spective commission houses. During a
sharp rally or sell-off, this activity is really
easy to see. As the activity slackened I
moved to the pit and took the opposite side
(sell rallies -buy dips). I used a trading card






APPENDIX VI
SOME MORE PRACTICAL TIPS
MONEY MANAGEMENT
"Lose your opinion instead of your money"
—Paul Tudor Jones
1. 
Money management in risk speculation should be kept simple. Here are some "unbreakable
rules" and some "guidelines."
A. Unbreakable Rules
1. Never add to a losing position.
2. Never risk more than 10 percent of your trading capital on any one trade.
3. Always have a protective stop in the market.
4. If you don't have a profit in three days, exit the trade.
B. 
Guidelines
1. Never close a trade without a reason.
2. Take responsibility for your trades.
3. Markets that have higher lows are in uptrends. Markets that have lower highs are in downtrends.
4. Always do your analysis prior to the market open.
II. 
Ask these questions before closing a position.
A. Does the position show a loss?
B. Has it reached the price objective?
C. Are you convinced your opinion is wrong?
If the answer to all three of these questions is NO, then you must hold your position. If the answer to any
one of the three is a YES, then you may close the trade if you wish.
III. 
Observations
A. Calculate your trading capital and multiply by three percent. This will give you the amount of loss you can
take on any trade. Example: $10,000 x 3% = $300. You should only risk $300 on the trade.
B. As your account grows you must still use the three percent guideline, but you can trade more contracts.
C. If you are able to trade multiple contracts you should consider using a "trailing" stop on one of the positions.
This stems from the ability of the system to enter at major turning points in the market.
D. The trader must always protect himself from his own fallibility. Stops are placed for protection against
yourself. "Markets are seldom wrong; men often are!"-Roy Longstreet
"Life is a do-it yourself project."
IV. 
Recommended reading
A.Reminiscences of a Stock Operator, Edwin Lefevre
B.The Disciplined Trader, Mark Douglass
C.The Warrior Athlete, Dan Millman
D.The Art of War, Sun Tsu
E.The Psychology of Winning, Dennis Waitley

The Volatility Stop Entry Technique
The Volatility Stop calculates the volatility by using the average range of the price bar. It is
calculated by multiplying the average range bya constant. The value is added to the lowest
close when short, and subtracted from the highest high when long:
Range = (Range x (N - 1) + High - Low / N)
Short = Lowest Close + Range x C
Long = Highest Close - Range x C
My experience is to use the Volatility Stop in strongly trending markets. It is an excellent
entry technique and in most instances will be superior to valid trend line breaks, or channel
breakouts. The reverse stop also acts to quantify risk as it relates to volatility. The con-
stants should be kept between 2.5 and 4.0.

DANGER SIGNALS!
Markets are seldom wrong! There is one fact that is always present in the markets: If prices go up there
are more buyers; if prices go down there are more sellers! Here are a few technical indicators that suggest
a market may be changing character:
A. 
Gaps
A big price gap on a chart is indicative of a change in sentiment and deserves attention. Use
the Shapiro Iteration (wait one bar) before acting.
B. 
Wide Range
When price ranges become abnormally wide then price objectives are more likely to be
exceeded (1.618). You should know the average daily range of the commodity you are
trading.
C. 
Tail Close
Markets that close at the extreme top or bottom are indicating strength or weakness. Look
for several days of tail closes in the same direction.
"Take care of your losses
and the profits will take of themselves."
—Amos Hostetter
Commodity Corporation (circa 1967)

RULES OF JESSE LIVERMORE
Excerpted from Reminscences of a Stock Operator
by Edwin LeFevre
1. 
Of all the speculative blunders, there are few greater than trying to average a losing
game.
2. 
Always sell what shows you a loss and keep what shows you a profit.
3. 
You cannot try to force the market into giving you something it does not have to give.
4. 
The courage in a specualtor is merely the confidence to act on the decision of his mind.
5. 
A loss never bothers me after I take it. I forget it overnight. But being wrong-not taking
the loss-that is what does the damage to the pocketbook and to the soul.
6. 
The man who is right always has two forces working in his favor—basic conditions and
the men who are wrong.
7. 
The trend is evident to a man who has an open mind and reasonably clear sight. It is
never wise for a speculator to fit his facts to his theories.
8. 
In a narrow market when price moves within a narrow range, the thing to do is watch the
market, read the tape to determine the limits of prices, and make up your mind that you wi
not take an interest until the price breaks through the limit in either direction.
9. 
You watch the market with one objective: to determine the direction or price tendency. Price
like everything else, move along the line of least resistance.
10. In the long run commodtiy prices are governed but by one law—the economic law of suppl
and demand.
11. It costs me millions to learn that a dangerous enemy to a trader is his susceptibility to the
urging of a magnetic personality combined with a brilliant mind.
12. Have a profit—forget it! Have a loss, forget it even quicker!
13. It never was my thinking that made the big money for me. It was always my sitting, my sittin
tight.
14. There is only one side to the stock market and it is not the bull side or the bear side, but
the right side.

HE WHO KNOWS NOT
WHAT HE RISKS...
RISKS ALL!
There are three rules you need to develop in order to trade successfully:
1. Build a foundation of trust in yourself so that you will act in your own best interests—without
hesitation.
2. Follow a set of steps that will build confidence and a belief in your own consistency. This includes
learning to not give your money away.
3. Execute your trades flawlessly when a signal is given. Ask yourself these three questions:
a) Is it an identifiable pattern?
b) Are the sacred ratios present?
c) Can I afford to take the risk?
If the answer to these three questions is 'yes!' then you should take the trade.
Keep in mind these important factors:
• 
Money management always takes precedent over any trading methodology. You must never expose
yourself to unlimited risk. Stops are placed for protection against yourself.
• 
Never get into a trade where the risk is unknown.
• 
The mistake is not being wrong; the mistake is in staying wrong!
Fear causes us to narrow our focus of attention and distorts our perception of the environment.
• Self-discipline is the ability of maintaining your focus of attention when all the things in the environment
are in conflict.
Never let the market save you—you must save Yourself. Use stops!
• We deal in probabilities! The market is always greater than anything we can ever anticipate. No method-
ology of trading can tell you what is going to happen next. Profits come from string of trades and not
from one particular trade.
• 
Take care of hour losses and the profits will take care of themselves! Release yourself from being wrong
or the fear of losing money. Trading is not a game of right or wrong, it is the process of making
money.
• 
Be rigid in your rules and flexible with your observations.

APPENDIX VII
JANUARY 
2, 1997
This day will end the writing of this book. It is included because of its wild swings The
Dow Jones dropped more than 100 points during the day and then recovered all of the
loss in the last 25 minutes. The S&P 500 dropped 16 points, rallied 9 points, dropped 9
points and then closed up on the day. Traders should keep in mind that the volatility of the
stock market has been very mild since 1990. It might behoove the trader to prepare for
increased volatility in the next few years.





Art of War. Sun TCu.
Astro Cycles in Speculative Markets. Jensen, L. (Lambert-Gann
Publishing).
Astro-Cycles: The Trader's Viewpoint. Pesavento, Larry.
(AstroCycles, 1988).
Astro-Economic Interpretation. Jensen, L. (Lambert-Gann Pub-
lishing).
Business Cycles Versus Planetary Movements. Langham, J.M.
(Maghnal).
Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall
Street. Bernstein, Peter. (New York Free Press, 1992).
Chaos and Order in the Capital Markets. Peters, Edgar. (John
Wiley & Sons, 1991).
Commodity Futures Trading with Point and Figure. Max-
well, Joseph.
Cycles-The Science of Prediction. Daiken, Dewey. (Founda-
tion Study of Cycles).
Cyclical Market Forecasting: Stocks and Grains. Langham,
J.M. (Maghnal).
Divine Proportion. Huntley. (Dover Press).
Economic Cycles: Their Law and Course. Moore, H.
(Macmillan).
Elliott Wave Principle. Prechter Robert. (New Classics Li-
brary).
Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of
Crowds. Mackay, Chuck.
ADDITIONAL
Reading

Fibonacci Applications and Strategies for Traders. Fischer,
Robert.
Forecasting Financial Markets: The Truth Behind Techni-
cal Analysis. Plummer, Tony. (Kogan Page Ltd., London,
1990).
Forecasting Prices. Butaney, T.G. (Pearl Printing).
Geometry of Markets. Gilmore, Bryce T. (Bryce Gilmore &
Assoc., Pty Ltd., Melbourne, Australia, 1989).
Geometry of Markets II. Gilmore, Bryce T. (Bryce Gilmore &
Assoc., Pty Ltd., Melbourne, Australia, 1993).
Geometry of Stock Market Profits. Pesavento, Larry.
(Trader's Press, Inc., 1996).
Harmonic Vibrations. Pesavento, Larry. (Trader's Press,
Inc. 1996).
Investing for Profit with Torque Analysis of Stock Market
Cycles. Garrett, W. ((Ruff Pub. 508-448-6739)
Market Wizards: Interviews with Top Traders. Schwager,
Jack D. (Simon & Schuster, 1989).
Mastering Elliott Wave. Neely, Glenn.
Mathematics of Money Management. Vince, Ralph.
Planetary Effects on Stock Market Prices. Langham, J.M.
(Maghnal).
Planetary Harmonics of Speculative Markets. Pesavento
Larry. (Astro-Cycles, 1990).
Profit Magic of Stock Transactions Timing. Hurst, J. (Prentice
ADDITIONAL
Reading

Rocky Mountain Financial Workbook, Foster, W. (Box 1093,
Reseda, CA 91355).
Secret Teaching of'All Ages. Hall, M.R( Philosophical Society
of Los Angeles).
Stock and Commodity Trader's Handbook of Trend
Detemiinalors. Bayer, George. (Out of Print.)
Stock Market Prediction. Bradley. (Llewellyn Publishing).
Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets. Murphy, John
Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. Edwards and Magee
The Dimensions of Paradise: The Proportions and Symbolic
Numbers of Ancient Cosmology. Mitchell, John. (Harper
& Row, 1988)
The Disciplined Trader: Developing Winning Attitudes.
Douglass, Mark (New York Institute of Finance,
1990)
The Kabala of Numbers Sepherial (Newcastle).
The Magic Word. Gann, W.D. (Lambert-Gann Publishing).
The Major Works ofR.N. Elliott. (New Classics Library).
The Outer Game of Trading. Koppel, Robert and Abell,
Howard. (Proteus Publishing, 1974).
The Secret of the Ages. Collier, Robert.
Time Factors in the Stock Market. Bayer, George. (Out of
print.)
Tunnel Through the Air. Gann, W. D (Lambert-Gann Publish-
ing).
ADDITIONAL
Reading


MARKET ART!
Market-related art is available through
TRADERS PRESS.
If interested in full details, please contact:
Books and Gifts
for Investors and Traders
1-800-927-8222 
FAX 864-298-0221
Tradersprs@aol.com
I N C O R P O R A T E D
P.O. BOX 6206
GREENVILLE, S.C. 29606


• TECHNICAL ANALYSIS • OPTIONS • TRADING PSYCHOLOGY & DISCIPLINE • SPREAD TRADING • ELLIOTT
WAVE • W.D. GANN • INTRADAY TRADING • TRADING STRATEGIES
FREE TRADERS CATALOG
• FIBONACCI • FLOOR TR ADING • 31 FREE BOOKS (WITH ADDITIONAL PURCHASE) • MONEY
MANAGEMENT • MUTUAL FUNDS • SHORTSELLING/ BEAR MARKETS • STOCK INDEX TRADING •
SYSTEMS AND METHODS • MANY OTHER TOPICS •
TRADERS PRESS, INC. publishes a 72-page catalog which lists and describes hundreds of
books, tapes, courses and gifts of interest to stock, options, and futures traders.
(Regular price $5)
Get your FREE copy by writing, calling or faxing
TRADERS PRESS, INC.
Edward D. Dobson
TRADERS PRESS, INC.®
P.O. BOX 6206
GREENVILLE, SC 29606
Serving traders since 1975
800-927-8222
864-298-0222
FAX: 864-298-0221
Tradersprs@aol.com


The goal of TRADERS PRESS is to provide high-quality educational materials and gifts for traders and inves-
tors in stocks, options, and futures. In addition to our own publications, we distribute materials from many
different sources and publishers. Our unique recommendation service assures that you will be directed to the
best possible books on any given topic. We hope that we can help you, the investor, enhance and broaden your
own knowledge of investing and trading. We look forward to being of service to you.
Edward D. Dobson,
TRADERS PRESS
Contact TRADERS PRESS
for a free copy of our catalog
which describes hundreds of
books and gifts of interest to
traders and investors.
Serving Traders Since 1975

