
Film Censorship in the 
Asia-Paci c Region
 Film censorship has always been a controversial matter, particularly in 
jurisdictions with restrictive state-based censorship systems. This book reviews 
the  lm censorship systems in the Asia-Paci c region by comparing the systems 
used in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia. It identi es the key issues and 
concerns that arise from the design and implementation of the systems  by 
examining the censorship laws, policies, guidelines and processes. The book 
evaluates  lm practitioners’ and censors’ opinions of, and experiences in, dealing 
with those issues and goes on to develop reform proposals for the Malaysian  lm 
censorship system.
Saw Tiong Guan currently teaches at the Faculty of Law, University of Malaya, 
Malaysia. He obtained his doctorate degree from the University of Melbourne and 
is an advocate and solicitor of the High Court of Malaya. He is also a  lm director 
and producer.

Routledge Advances in Asia-Paci c Studies
Environment, Education and Society in the Asia-Paci c
Local traditions and global discourses
David Yencken, John Fien and Helen Sykes
Ageing in the Asia-Paci c Region
David R. Phillips
Caring for the Elderly in Japan and the US
Practices and policies
Susan Orpett Long
Human Rights and Gender Politics
Asia-Paci c perspectives
Edited by Anne Marie Hilsdon, Martha Macintyre, Vera Mackie and Maila Stivens
Human Rights in Japan, South Korea and Taiwan
Ian Neary 
Cultural Politics and Asian Values
The tepid war
Michael D. Barr
Social Policy in East and Southeast Asia
Education, health, housing and income maintenance
M. Ramesh
Sino-Japanese Relations
Facing the past, looking to the future?
Caroline Rose
Directors of Urban Change in Asia
Edited by Peter J.M. Nas

Education Reform and Education Policy in East Asia
Ka Ho Mok
The Strong and the Weak in Japanese Literature
Discrimination, egalitarianism, nationalism
Fuminobu Murakami
Civilization, Nation and Modernity in East Asia
Chih Yu Shih
Diminishing Con icts in Asia and the Paci c
Robin Jeffrey, Edward Aspinall and Anthony Regan
Health Transitions and the Double Disease Burden in Asia and the Paci c
Histories of responses to non-communicable and communicable diseases
Edited by Milton J. Lewis and Kerrie L. MacPherson
Film Censorship in the Asia-Paci c Region
Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia compared
Saw Tiong Guan

Film Censorship in the 
Asia-Paci c Region
Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia compared
Saw Tiong Guan

First published 2013
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business
© 2013 Saw Tiong Guan
The right of Saw Tiong Guan to be identi ed as author of this work has 
been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identi cation and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Saw, Tiong Guan.
Film censorship in the Asia Paci c Region : Malaysia, Hong Kong, and 
Australia compared / Saw Tiong Guan.
p. cm.  (Routledge Advances in Asia Paci c Studies ; 15)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Motion pictures Law and legislation Paci c Area. 2. Motion 
pictures Censorship Paci c Area. I. Title. 
KVC728.M67S29 2013
344.50531 dc23
2012031252
ISBN: 978 0 415 65689 4 (hbk)
ISBN: 978 0 203 06782 6 (ebk)
Typeset in Times
by Saxon Graphics Ltd, Derby

For my mother,
who taught me how to write,
and
for Piyasak Vitayaburananont,
who keeps me writing.

Contents
Table of cases 
xi
Table of statutes and rules 
xvii
List of  lms 
xix
List of tables 
xxii
Preface 
xxiii
1 
Introduction 
1
Setting the scene 1
Structure of the book 3
Legal literature about freedom of expression, obscenity and censorship 6
2 
 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 
in their socio-legal context 
13
Introduction 13
Malaysia 14
Hong Kong 21
Australia 27
Summary 34
3 
 Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: 
the laws, guidelines and processes 
36
Introduction 36
The Malaysian system 37
The Hong Kong system 41
The Australian system 48
Conclusion 55

x Contents
4 
 Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: 
the key issues 
56
Introduction 56
The Malaysian system 57
The Hong Kong system 62
The Australian system 67
Summary: an evaluation of the key issues 72
5 
 Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: 
the practitioners’ opinions and experiences 
78
Introduction 78
Film practitioners’ opinions of the key issues 83
Summary 106
6 
Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 
108
Introduction 108
The grounds of judicial review 113
The availability of judicial review to  lm practitioners: 
the  lter mechanisms 118
Remedies available under judicial review application: 
what can the applicant  lm practitioner achieve? 123
Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions: the best option? 125
7 
 Conclusion: proposals for the reform of the Malaysian 
 lm censorship system and further research 
130
Introduction 130
The areas of concern in the Malaysian  lm censorship system 
and proposals for reform 131
The areas of concern in the Hong Kong and Australian  lm 
censorship systems for further research 148
Conclusion 152
Notes 
153
Bibliography 
198
Index 
205

Table of cases
Abrams v United States
250 US 616 (1919) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Adultshop.com Ltd v Members of the Classi cation Review Board and anor.
[2008] 169 FCR 31 (Federal Court, Australia)
Alberts v California
354 US 476 (1957) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Anisminic Ltd v Foreign Compensation Commission
[1969] 2 AC 147 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation
[1948] 1 KB 223 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2)
[1990] 1 AC 109 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Australian Capital Television v Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 (High Court, Australia)
Badan Peguam Malaysia v Kerajaan Malaysia
[2008] 2 MLJ 285 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Brandenburg v Ohio
395 US 444 (1969) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Burstyn Inc. v Wilson
343 US 495 (1952) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Chaplinsky v New Hampshire
315 US 568 (1942) (Supreme Court, United States of America)

xii Table of cases
Che Omar Che Soh v Public Prosecutor
[1988] 2 MLJ 55 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v Evans
[1982] 1 WLR 1155 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Coleman v Power
[2004] 220 CLR 1 (High Court, Australia)
Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service
[1985] AC 374 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Crowe v Graham
(1968) 121 CLR 375 (High Court, Australia)
Director of Public Prosecutions v Whyte
[1972] 3 All ER 12 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Dr Mohd Nasir bin Hashim v Menteri Dalam Negeri Malaysia
[2006] 6 MLJ 213 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
Family Voice Australia v Members of the Classi cation Review Board
[2011] FCA 1014 (Federal Court, Australia)
George John v Goh Eng Wah Bros Filem Sdn Bhd
[1988] 1 MLJ 319 (High Court, Malaysia)
Ginzburg v United States
383 US 463 (1966) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Government of Malaysia v Jagdis Singh
[1987] 2 MLJ 185 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Haji Laugan Tarki bin Mohd Noor v Mahkamah Anak Negeri Penampang
[1988] 2 MLJ 85 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Harpers Trading (M) Sdn Bhd v National Union of Commercial Workers
[1991] 1 MLJ 417 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Hoh Kiang Ngan v Mahkamah Perusahaan Malaysia
[1995] 3 MLJ 378 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Hong Leong Equipment Sdn Bhd v Liew Fook Chuan
[1996] 1 MLJ 481 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)

Table of cases xiii
Hotel Equatorial (M) Sdn Bhd v National Union of Hotel, Bar and Restaurant 
Workers
[1984] 1 MLJ 363 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department
[2007] 2 AC 167 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
In re Amin [On appeal from Regina v Entry Clearance Of cer, Bombay, 
Ex parte Amin]
[1983] 2 AC 818 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Jacobellis v Ohio
378 US 184 (1964) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Katherine Lim KH Sr v Ketua Pengarah Perkhidmatan Perubatan Malaysia
[1997] 2 MLJ 538 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
Kerajaan Negeri Selangor v Sagong Tasi
[2005] 4 CLJ 169 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
Ketua Pengarah Kastam v Ho Kwan Seng
[1977] 2 MLJ 152 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Knuller (Publishing, Printing and Promotions) Ltd v Director of Public 
Prosecutions
[1973] AC 435 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Kumpulan Perangsang Selangor Bhd v Zaid bin Hj Mohd Noh
[1997] 1 MLJ 789 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
(1997) 189 CLR 520 (High Court, Australia)
Lee Kwan Woh v Public Prosecutor
[2009] 5 MLJ 301 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Lim Cho Hock v Government of the State of Perak
[1980] 2 MLJ 148 (High Court, Malaysia)
Majlis Perbandaran Pulau Pinang v Syarikat Berkerjasama sama Serbaguna 
Sungai Gelugor, Dalam Tanggungan
[1999] 3 MLJ 1 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Miller v California
413 US 15 (1973) (Supreme Court, United States of America)

xiv Table of cases
Minister of Finance, Government of Sabah v Petrojasa Sdn Bhd
[2008] 4 MLJ 641 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Minister of Home Affairs v Persatuan Aliran Kesedaran Malaysia
[1990] 1 MLJ 351 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Minister of Labour, Malaysia v Chan Meng Yuen
[1992] 2 MLJ 337 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Mohamed bin Ismail v Tan Sri Othman Saat
[1982] 2 MLJ 133 (High Court, Malaysia)
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
(1992) 177 CLR 1 (High Court, Australia)
Om Kumar v Union of India
(2001) 2 SCC 386 (Supreme Court, India)
O’Reilly v Mackman
[1983] 2 AC 237 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
Otto Preminger Institute v Austria
(1994) 19 EHRR 34 (European Court of Human Rights)
Paris Adult Theatre v Slaton
413 US 49 (1973) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Public Service Board of New South Wales v Osmond
(1986) 159 CLR 656 (High Court, Australia)
QSR Brands v Suruhanjaya Sekuriti
[2006] 3 MLJ 164 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
R v Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council, Ex parte Hook
[1976] 3 All ER 452 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
R v Butler
[1992] 89 DLR (4th) 449 (Supreme Court, Canada)
R v Calder & Boyars Ltd
[1969] 1 QB 151 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
R v Hicklin
(1868) LR 3 QB 360 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)

Table of cases xv
R v Hull University Visitor, Ex parte Page
[1993] AC 682 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
R v Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, Ex parte Shaw
[1952] 1 All ER 122 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
R v Panel on Take Over and Mergers, Ex parte Data n Plc
[1987] QB 815 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
R v Secretary of State for the Environment, Ex parte Nottinghamshire County 
Council
[1986] AC 240 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Brind
[1991] 1 AC 696 (House of Lords, United Kingdom)
R v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Ex parte Lonrho Plc
[1989] 1 WLR 525 (Court of Appeal, England and Wales)
R v Stanley
[1965] 2 QB 327 (Court of Criminal Appeal, England)
Rama Chandran R v The Industrial Court of Malaysia
[1997] 1 MLJ 145 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
Robin Tan Pang Heng v Ketua Pengarah Kesatuan Sekerja Malaysia
[2002] 1 MLJ 466 (High Court, Malaysia)
Rohana bte Arif n v Universiti Sains Malaysia
[1989] 1 MLJ 487 (High Court, Malaysia)
Roth v United States
354 US 476 (1957) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Schenk v United States
249 US 47 (1919) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Sivarasa Rasiah v Badan Peguam Malaysia & Anor
[2010] 2 MLJ 333 (Federal Court, Malaysia)
South East Asia Fire Bricks Sdn Bhd v Non Metallic Mineral Products Mfg 
Employees Union
[1980] 2 MLJ 165 (Privy Council appeal from Malaysia)

xvi Table of cases
Syarikat Kenderaan Melayu Kelantan Bhd v Transport Workers’ Union
[1995] 2 MLJ 336 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
Tan Tek Seng v Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan
[1996] 1 MLJ 261 (Court of Appeal, Malaysia)
United Engineers (M) Bhd v Lim Kit Siang
[1988] 2 MLJ 12 (Supreme Court, Malaysia)
Village Roadshow Corporation Ltd v Sheehan
(1987) 17 FCR 324 (Federal Court, Australia)
Whitney v California
274 US 357 (1927) (Supreme Court, United States of America)
Wingrove v United Kingdom
(1997) 24 EHRR 1 (European Court of Human Rights)

Table of statutes and rules
Malaysia
Cinematograph Films Ordinance 1952
Communications and Multimedia Act 1998
Courts of Judicature Act 1964
Federal Constitution
Film (Censorship) Act 1952
Film Censorship Act 2002
Internal Security Act 1960
Industrial Relations Act 1967
Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission Act 1998
National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia Act 1981
National Film Development Corporation (Compulsory Screening Scheme) 
Regulations 2005
National Language Act 1963
Printing Presses and Publications Act 1984
Rules of the Court of Appeal 1994
Rules of the Federal Court 1995
Rules of the High Court 1980
Sedition Act 1948
Speci c Relief Act 1950
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
Broadcasting Ordinance
Control of Obscene and Indecent Articles Ordinance
Film Censorship Ordinance
Film Censorship (Amendment) Ordinance 1994
Film Censorship Regulations 1953
Places of Public Entertainment Ordinance

xviii Table of statutes and rules
Australia
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
Australian Constitution
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
Censorship Act 1996 (Western Australia)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995
Classi cation of Publications, Films and Computer Games Act 1995 
(Northern Territory)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enactment) Act 
1995 (Australian Capital Territory)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 
1995 (Victoria)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 
1995 (New South Wales)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 
1995 (South Australia)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 
1995 (Tasmania)
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Regulations 2005
Customs Act 1901
Customs (Cinematograph Films) Regulations
Film and Video Tape Classi cation Act 1984 (New South Wales)
Income Tax Act 1936
Screen Australia Act 2008
England
Human Rights Act 1998
Obscene Publications Act 1857
Obscene Publications Act 1959
Video Recordings Act 1984
India
Constitution of India
United States of America
First Amendment to the United States Constitution
International and regional covenants
European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

Films
The Adventures of Barry McKenzie (Bruce Beresford, 1972)
Amok (Adman Salleh, 1995)
Anakku Sazali (My Son Sazali, Phani Majumdar, 1956)
Apa Khabar Orang Kampung (Village People Radio Show, Amir Muhammad, 
2007)
At the End of Daybreak (Ho Yuhang, 2009)
Bad Boy Bubby (Rolf de Heer, 1993)
Baise Moi (Rape Me, Virginie Despentes, 2000)
Beijing Rocks (Mabel Cheung, 2001)
Big Bullet (Benny Chan, 1996)
The Bird House (Khoo Eng Yow, 2006) 
The Boat People (Ann Hui, 1982)
Brokeback Mountain (Ang Lee, 2005)
Bruce Almighty (Tom Shadyac, 2003)
Cageman (Jacob Cheung, 1992)
Caligula (Tinto Brass, 1979)
Crocodile Dundee (Peter Faiman, 1986) 
Daredevil (Mark Steven Johnson, 2003) 
Days of Being Wild (Wong Kar Wai, 1990)
The Devil’s Playground (Fred Schepisi, 1976)
Double Tap (Lo Chi Leung, 2000)
Election (Johnnie To, 2005)
Embun (Erma Fatima, 2002)
The Eye (Danny Pang and Oxide Pang, 2002)
Fantasia / Fantasi (Aziz M. Osman, 1992)
Full Metal Jacket (Stanley Kubrick, 1987) 
Gerak Khas: The Movie (Yusof Haslam, 2001)
Gone in Sixty Seconds (Dominic Sena, 2000)
Hang Jebat (Hussain Haniff, 1961)
Hantu Bonceng (Ahmad Idham, 2011)
Happy Bigamist (Anthony Chan, 1987)
Happy Together (Wong Kar Wai, 1997)
Histeria (Hysteria, James Lee, 2009)

xx List of  lms
The Home Song Stories (Tony Ayres, 2007)
The Human Centipede II  (Tom Six, 2011)
I Don’t Want to Sleep Alone (Tsai Ming-liang, 2006)
In the Mood for Love (Wong Kar Wai, 2000)
Infernal Affairs (Andrew Lau and Alan Mak, 2002)
Irreversible (Gaspar Noe, 2002)
Istana Berdarah (Palace of Blood, Hussain Haniff, 1964)
Jedda (Charles Chauvel, 1955)
Jogho (Champion, U-Wei Haji Saari, 1997)
Kaki Bakar (The Arsonist, U-Wei Haji Saari, 1995)
Kami (Effendee Mazlan, 2008)
The Killer (John Woo, 1989)
Laila Majnum (B. S. Rajhans, 1933)
Lantana (Ray Lawrence, 2001)
Lan Yu (Stanley Kwan, 2001)
Lelaki Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist, Amir Muhammad, 2006)
Les Amants (The Lovers, Louis Malle, 1958)
Love Conquers All (Tan Chui Mui, 2006)
Lolita (Adrian Lyne, 1997)
Lust, Caution (Ang Lee, 2007)
Made in Hong Kong (Fruit Chan, 1997)
Malaysian Gods (Amir Muhammad, 2008)
Matinya Seorang Patriot (Death of a Patriot, Rahim Razali, 1984)
Mekanik (Mechanic, Othman Hafsham, 1983)
Mission: Impossible II (John Woo, 2000)
Muallaf (The Convert, Yasmin Ahmad, 2008)
Mukhsin (Yasmin Ahmad, 2007)
Naked Killers (Wong Jing, 1992)
New Police Story (Benny Chan, 2004)
Ocean’s Eleven (Steven Soderbergh, 2001)
Paloh (Adman Salleh, 2003)
Penarik Becha (The Rickshaw Man, P Ramlee, 1955)
Perempuan, Isteri & … (Woman, Wife & Whore, U-Wei Haji Saari, 1993)
The Piano (Jane Campion, 1993)
The Piano Teacher (Michael Haneke, 2001)
Picnic at Hanging Rock (Peter Weir, 1975)
Pontianak Harum Sundal Malam (Pontianak: A Scent of Tuberose, Shuhaimi 
Baba, 2004) 
Puteri Gunung Ledang (Princess of Mount Ledang, Saw Teong Hin, 2004)
Rabbit Proof Fence (Phillip Noyce, 2002)
Rain Dogs (Ho Yuhang, 2006)
Remp it (Ahmad Idham, 2006)
Ringgit Kasyorga (Dollar to Heaven, Shuhaimi Baba, 1995)
Rogue (Li Beihai, 1925)
Romance (Catherine Breillat, 1999)

List of  lms xxi
Rouge (Stanley Kwan, 1987)
Salo o le 120 giornate di Sodoma (Salo, the 120 Days of Sodom, Pier Paolo 
Pasolini, 1975)
Saving Private Ryan (Steven Spielberg, 1999)
Schindler’s List (Steven Spielberg, 1993)
Senario (Scenario, Aziz M. Osman, 1999)
Sepet (Chinese Eye, Yasmin Ahmad, 2004)
Serbian Film (Srdjan Spasojevic, 2010)
Sex and Zen (Michael Mak, 1991)
Shine (Scott Hicks, 1996)
Shortbus (John Cameron Mitchell, 2006)
The Soong Sisters (Mabel Cheung, 1997)
Stealing a Roast Duck (Liang Shaobo, 1909)
Stone Bros (Richard J. Frankland, 2009)
Stork (Tim Burstall, 1971)
The Story of the Kelly Gang (Charles Tait, 1906)
The Story of Woo Viet (Ann Hui, 1981)
Strictly Ballroom (Baz Luhrmann, 1992)
Summer Snow (Ann Hui, 1995)
Susuk (Amir Muhammad, 2008)
The Sword (Patrick Tam, 1980)
Ten Canoes (Rolf de Heer, 2006)
Time and Tide (Tsui Hark, 2000)
Vive L’Amour (Tsai Ming-liang, 1994)
Walkabout (Nicholas Roeg, 1971)
The Wayward Cloud (Tsai Ming-liang, 2005)
What time is it there? (Tsai Ming-liang, 2001)
XX Ray (Aziz M. Osman, 1992)
XX Ray 2 (Aziz M. Osman, 1995)
Zoolander (Ben Stiller, 2001)
Zu: Warriors from the Magic Mountain (Tsui Hark, 1983)
1957: Hati Malaya (1957: Heart of Malaya, Shuhaimi Baba, 2007)
9 Songs (Michael Winterbottom, 2004)

Tables
2.1 The Malaysian  lm production sector in  gures, 2000–2010 
18
2.2 The Malaysian  lm exhibition sector in  gures, 2005–2010 
19
2.3 The Australian  lm production sector in  gures, 2000–2010 
31
2.4 The Australian  lm exhibition sector in  gures, 2005–2010 
31
3.1 Film classi cation categories applicable in Malaysia 
40
3.2 Film classi cation categories applicable in Hong Kong 
45
3.3 Film classi cation categories applicable in Australia 
53
4.1 Levels of impact and the Australian classi cation categories 
70

Preface
Film censorship has always been a controversial matter, particularly in jurisdictions 
with restrictive state-based censorship systems. Film Censorship in the Asia
Paci c Region reviews the  lm censorship system in Malaysia by comparing it 
with the Hong Kong and Australian systems. It identi es key issues that arise 
from the systems by examining the laws, guidelines and administrative processes; 
evaluating  lm practitioners’ and censors’ opinions of, and experiences in, dealing 
with those issues in practice; and,  nally, develops reform proposals for the 
Malaysian  lm censorship system. The rationale for comparing Malaysia with 
Hong Kong and Australia is threefold: there are broad similarities in the censorship 
schemes in these three jurisdictions; they share a common legal heritage; and yet 
the  lm industries differ markedly in their artistic and commercial achievements.
From both doctrinal and empirical research, it is suggested that the Malaysian 
 lm censorship system adversely affects that country’s  lm industry and its  lm 
practitioners. Hence, reforms to the system are warranted. The book therefore 
investigates what changes to the Malaysian  lm censorship system appear likely 
to promote the artistic vibrancy and commercial viability of the country’s  lm 
industry and makes systematic reform proposals.
In addition to proposing reforms to the  lm censorship system, the book also 
explores the availability and suitability of judicial review as a legal avenue for  lm 
practitioners to redress grievances occasioned by state censorship of  lm. The 
remedies available to  lm practitioners by way of judicial review application are 
examined, and the question of whether such application is the best option for  lm 
practitioners to tackle censorship problems is weighed against countervailing factors.
This book attempts to serve three functions. First, it offers original materials to 
enrich media law and  lm and media studies literature by analysing  lm censorship 
from a legal perspective, as well as considering  lm practitioners’ and censors’ 
opinions and experiences when dealing with censorship. Second, the book 
explains the need for, and the potential of, judicial review in  lm censorship 
matters. Third, the book develops law reform proposals and makes 
recommendations for changes to the Malaysian  lm censorship system in light of 
detailed analysis of the systems in Hong Kong and Australia. The suggested 
reform proposals may also be applicable to other jurisdictions facing similar 
censorship issues and weaknesses in their existing systems. The book consists of 

xxiv Preface
seven chapters. Chapter 1 deals with introductory matters and literature about 
freedom of expression, obscenity and censorship. Chapter 2 provides an overview 
of the Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian  lm industries in their socio-legal 
contexts. Chapter 3 discusses the  lm censorship systems in the three jurisdictions 
under study by examining the relevant censorship laws, guidelines and processes. 
Chapter 4 identi es the key issues that arise in the systems and evaluates their 
likely effects on the  lm industries and practitioners. Chapter 5 focuses on the  lm 
practitioners’ opinions of the key issues identi ed in Chapter 4. Chapter 6 
examines the potential and viability of judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 
and,  nally, Chapter 7 draws together the analysis and proposes reforms to the 
 lm censorship system.
Film Censorship in the Asia Paci c Region emerges out of a doctoral thesis I 
completed in 2011 under the supervision of Professor Andrew Kenyon and 
Dr Amanda Whiting of the Melbourne Law School. Many people have assisted in 
the research that led to this book and I would like to thank, in particular, my 
supervisors and the interviewees who have generously shared their time, knowledge 
and experience with me. I thank my loving and supportive parents, Saw Chin Ting 
and Ti Lian Yuan; and my family, especially my sister Jo Anne who helped me in 
various ways while I worked on both this manuscript and my new  lm. Finally, I 
thank my close friends Wong Yew Leong, Yau Lap Ho, Azmi Sharom, Lim Wee 
Koon and Darren Parker, for whose ongoing support I am grateful.
Saw Tiong Guan
Kuala Lumpur
July 2012

1 
Introduction
Setting the scene
This book sets out to review the  lm censorship system in Malaysia; identify the 
key issues and concerns that arise from the design and implementation of the 
system and analyse their effects on the  lm industry; evaluate  lm practitioners’ 
opinions of, and experiences in, dealing with those censorship issues; and,  nally, 
propose a  lm censorship system which appears capable of promoting the artistic 
vibrancy and commercial viability of the Malaysian  lm industry.
In the attempt to achieve these objectives, reference is made to the experiences 
of two other jurisdictions: Hong Kong and Australia. Three reasons account for 
this. First, while their  lm censorship systems have differences, the overall 
approach to  lm censorship in each of these three jurisdictions shares broad 
similarities. For example, they are ‘state-based’ as opposed to ‘industry-based’ 
systems, where the censorship of  lms is overseen by entities established under 
legislation and with direct connections to government ministries or departments. 
In contrast, the United States and United Kingdom have not been chosen as the 
comparative jurisdictions. The former’s  lm censorship system is ‘industry-
based’, where  lm ratings are handled by the Motion Picture Association of 
America. This is a body formerly known as the Motion Picture Producers and 
Distributors Association of America, set up in 1922 by the major  lm studios to 
resist the government’s involvement by creating an arrangement of industry-based 
self-censorship known as the Production Code or the Hays Code.1 The ratings 
currently applicable in the United States are G (General Audiences); PG (Parental 
Guidance Suggested); PG-13 (Parents Strongly Cautioned); R (Restricted); and 
NC-17 (No One 17 and Under Admitted). Films rated NC-17 are restricted to 
adults while  lms rated R may be viewed by persons at least 17 years of age or 
children accompanied by a parent or adult guardian. The United Kingdom has an 
independent non-governmental body, the British Board of Film Classi cation, 
formerly known as the British Board of Film Censors (BBFC), established in 1912 
by the  lm industry as an independent entity with the aim of achieving uniformity 
in  lm classi cation, which operates outside the purview and control of both the 
British government and  lm industry.2 Films may be classi ed U, PG, 12/12A, 15, 
18 and 18R and the BBFC’s classi cation decisions may be overridden by local 

2 Introduction
council authorities. Films classi ed U, PG and 12 are unrestricted. However, 
audiences under 12 years of age must be accompanied by an adult in order to 
watch a 12A  lm. No one under the age of 15 may watch or purchase a  lm 
classi ed 15 and no one under the age of 18 may watch or purchase a  lm classi ed 
18. Second, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia share the common law tradition, 
each with an entrenched judicial review process which appears to be the primary 
legal means by which  lm practitioners could have recourse to formal remedies to 
redress grievances caused by censorship of their  lms. Third, the  lm industries in 
Hong Kong and Australia are more vibrant and successful both in artistic and 
commercial terms than the one in Malaysia. Hong Kong and Australia have seen 
the production of critically acclaimed  lms recognized and celebrated 
internationally since the 1970s and revenues generated at their box of ces have 
been enviable. Therefore, their experiences could provide illuminating comparisons 
and suggest recommendations for reform. While censorship is only one element 
underlying the  lm industry, the research suggests that the existing Hong Kong 
and Australian censorship systems – which are both transparent and more 
responsive to  lm practitioners’ needs and the conditions of the industries and the 
societies – contributed to the vibrancy and achievements of their  lm industries.
At the outset, it is useful to explain a number of key terms in this book. The 
term ‘ lm industry’ is used to encompass the activities of  lm production, 
distribution and exhibition; ‘ lm practitioners’ is used to denote  lm directors, 
producers, distributors and exhibitors; while ‘ lm’ is con ned to feature  lm, 
documentary and animation produced for commercial public release. This book 
focuses on censorship of  lms produced for exhibition in cinemas as well as 
distribution by way of sales and rental in Digital Versatile Disc (DVD) and Video 
Compact Disc (VCD) formats. It does not include censorship of  lms for the 
purposes of broadcasting on television, which is regulated under different laws.3 
The book places primary emphasis on the effects of  lm censorship and it is 
important to concede that a host of other factors, including genre, production 
budget, marketing strategy and popularity of the cast involved in a project, the 
size of domestic market and the standard of living of the society, and piracy are 
also likely to play signi cant roles in determining the viability of a country’s  lm 
industry, particularly in its commercial sense. It is also noteworthy that there is no 
correlation between the artistic accomplishment of a  lm and its commercial 
realization in the market. In other words, a highly artistic  lm does not necessarily 
translate into box of ce success. The phrase ‘artistic vibrancy and commercial 
viability of the  lm industry’ is used to express two distinct realities that appear to 
be affected by censorship. In regard to the former, censorship can obstruct creative 
and experimental production, while in regard to the latter, censorship can make 
 lms less appealing to audiences and therefore reduce box of ce revenues.
Why do issues relating to a  lm censorship system matter to a country,  lm 
industry and society? Three Malaysian  lm practitioners’ experiences emphasize 
the signi cance of this book.
Amir Muhammad, an independent  lmmaker, had two of his recent  lms – 
Lelaki Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist, 2006) and Apa Khabar Orang 

Introduction 3
Kampung (Village People Radio Show, 2007) – arbitrarily banned by the 
authorities while his latest  lm Malaysian Gods (2008) had its public exhibition 
in the country prohibited. The  lmmaker thus lost an outlet to present his  lms to 
audiences and was deprived of the opportunity to recoup the production costs. 
Society was barred from seeing three thought-provoking  lms while within the 
 lm industry another ‘deterrence’ was  rmly put in place to discourage other 
 lmmakers being more critical and experimental with their creative works.
Aziz M. Osman’s Fantasia (1992) was banned by the censors upon its 
completion. The  lm was only approved for public exhibition four years later, 
after its title had been changed and extensive alterations had been made to its 
content. The  lm was  nally released as Fantasi, with its plot, message and theme 
markedly different from the originally intended version, and the production 
company suffered substantial  nancial losses. Tragically, the producer did not 
live to see his  lm released.
Tsai Ming-liang, a Malaysian-born internationally acclaimed auteur, chose to 
make  lms in Taiwan and France instead of his home country because of 
censorship concerns.4 This has resulted in prestigious award-winning  lms such 
as Vive L’Amour (1994) and The Wayward Cloud (2005)5 being considered as 
Taiwanese  lms in which Taiwanese, rather than Malaysians, can take pride and 
they are not considered part of Malaysian cinematic culture and heritage in 
international competition.
This book suggests possible reform to the Malaysian  lm censorship system by 
way of amendments to the Film Censorship Act 2002, revision to the censorship 
guidelines and changes to the censorship process. It also provides  lm practitioners 
with an understanding of the potential of judicial review in obtaining remedies 
against censorship authorities. Additionally, the book provides  lm regulators 
with information about the effects of censorship on  lm practitioners so that in 
carrying out their duties they will be better positioned to act in a more sensible and 
responsible manner. While the focus of the analysis remains Malaysian, some 
possible reforms to the Hong Kong and Australian systems are also outlined.
Structure of the book
This book is structured in three parts. The  rst part deals with introductory matters, 
literature about free speech, obscenity and censorship and the Malaysian, Hong 
Kong and Australian  lm industries. The second part focuses on the  lm censorship 
systems, which are principally made up of censorship laws, guidelines and 
administrative processes, in the three jurisdictions under study. This part identi es 
and compares the key issues that arise from the censorship systems and then 
discusses  lm practitioners’ opinions of, and experiences in dealing with, those 
issues. From the analysis of the systems on paper and investigation of practice 
through  eldwork, the third part then considers two alternatives to tackle the 
adverse effects that the censorship system has on the  lm industry. These 
alternatives are applications for judicial review of censorship decisions and 
reforms to the existing  lm censorship system.

4 Introduction
A total of seven chapters make up the three parts outlined above. Chapters 1 
and 2 form the  rst part. After the introductory chapter, Chapter 2 serves as an 
introduction to the Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian  lm industries in their 
socio-legal context. Its purpose is to provide readers with an overview of the 
three jurisdictions and their  lm industries to better understand the context in 
which the censorship systems operate. Chapter 2 discusses a brief history of, and 
the contemporary socio-legal settings in, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia. 
The chapter then looks at the background and development of each of the three 
 lm industries and explains the initiatives undertaken by their respective 
governments. Industry statistics, which include the number of  lms produced 
annually, the gross box of ce revenues, the number of cinema screens and details 
of cinema admissions are also presented where available.
The second part of the book comprises Chapters 3 to 5. Chapter 3 discusses the 
 lm censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia by outlining the 
relevant legislation and guidelines. The chapter also elaborates the censorship 
mechanisms and processes. The comparative analysis of the  lm censorship laws 
and guidelines in each of the jurisdictions shows that they display marked 
differences and Chapter 4 highlights these differences and evaluates their likely 
effects. These key differences and issues are in regard to:
1 
the suitability, competence and independence of  lm censors in carrying out 
their duties;
2 
the exemption of  lms from censorship;
3 
matters to be taken into account by censors in the course of making censorship 
decisions;
4 
defects in  lm censorship guidelines;
5 
the power of censors to require alteration to be made before a  lm is approved 
for exhibition and distribution, and the opportunity to discuss with censors 
the classi cation category of a  lm;
6 
the provision of reasons for censorship decisions;
7 
the parties to, and procedures of, an appeal against censorship decisions;
8 
the availability of judicial review to aggrieved  lm practitioners.
These issues are intrinsically intertwined and inform the larger question: what are 
the adverse effects of the  lm censorship system on the  lm industry? Together 
Chapters 3 and 4 provide the basis for further investigation and evaluation of how 
the systems operate and affect the industries. It is recognized that before any 
conclusions can be drawn, it is pertinent to explore how these key issues are 
viewed and responded to by the parties who are most affected by them – the  lm 
practitioners and censors.
Chapter 5 thus continues by discussing the results of  eldwork, conducted to 
obtain  lm practitioners’ opinions of the key issues identi ed in Chapter 4. 
Interviews were conducted with 36  lm practitioners from Malaysia, Hong Kong 
and Australia and a representative from each of the censorship authorities. A 
number of factors account for the choice of conducting in-depth semi-structured 

Introduction 5
interviews for this book. First, interviews with  lm practitioners (and regulators) 
appeared very likely to provide the sort of information crucial for the writing of 
this book. The interviews aimed to capture a range of opinions and experiences in 
order to deepen and contextualize the analysis carried out through doctrinal 
research in other chapters. As such, the sample size of 12  lm practitioner 
interviewees in each jurisdiction was chosen to adequately assess a cross section 
of the  lm industry and to suf ciently represent the likely range of views of  lm 
practitioners from across the industry and from independent to mainstream 
practitioners. Second, interviews provided the most appropriate and viable 
empirical method and appeared to be the only primary source of information 
because Malaysian and Hong Kong  lm censorship reports are not publicly 
available, rendering impossible another plausible method of using documentary 
evidence. Other common research methods such as using multiple choice 
quantitative surveys or observing censorship processes in the three jurisdictions 
were not adopted as they were ill-suited to the complexities of censorship or 
inaccessible to observers. Third, interviews have a number of advantages that best 
suit the investigation being made. They provide a means of understanding the 
views and experiences of the interviewees in a way that could not be 
comprehensively understood through the use of other methods. They enable  lm 
practitioners to express their perspectives and recount their experiences in 
handling censorship concerns and problems. The process also allows for general 
comments and observations to be made by the interviewees. In addition, interviews 
enable the opinions and experiences of those subject to the censorship system to 
be drawn out and utilized in proposing reforms. The inclusion of interviews as 
part of the research ensures that the proposals for reform made are grounded in 
both artistic and commercial realities based on the interviewees’ responses.
The third part of the book comprises two chapters – Chapters 6 and 7. This part 
considers two alternatives to deal with the adverse impact of the Malaysian  lm 
censorship system on the  lm industry. Chapter 6 focuses on judicial review of 
 lm censorship decisions as a possible legal means for aggrieved  lm practitioners 
to seek redress against the censorship authorities. The chapter explores the 
availability of judicial review to  lm practitioners by examining the effect of 
ouster clauses, the locus standi requirement and the rule of exhaustion of 
alternative remedies. The grounds of challenge, the remedies (both common law 
and statutory) that a successful applicant- lm practitioner may obtain and whether 
judicial review is the best option for an aggrieved  lm practitioner are also 
discussed in this chapter. Finally, Chapter 7 draws together the analysis and 
proposes changes to the Malaysian  lm censorship system that appear likely to 
promote the artistic vibrancy and commercial viability of the country’s  lm 
industry. The proposals for reform are developed from Malaysian  lm 
practitioners’ input, the Hong Kong and Australian experiences as well as the 
author’s own analysis. The chapter concludes by highlighting concerns that arise 
in relation to the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship systems, such as 
issues regarding  lm advertising,  lm censorship panel arrangements, appeal 
against classi cation decisions and reclassi cation of  lms.

6 Introduction
Before beginning the analysis noted above, this chapter outlines aspects of the 
legal literature about freedom of expression to set out a key part of the wider 
framework pertaining to  lm censorship in the three jurisdictions. By the end of 
the book, it will be clear that a well-organized, transparent and responsive 
censorship system can operate without creating some of the dif culties or ‘vices’ 
emphasized in the free speech literature, such as the vagueness of the tests and 
standards to be applied in censoring materials.
Legal literature about freedom of expression, 
obscenity and censorship
It is possible to identify four common themes or topics that recur in legal writing 
about freedom of expression, obscenity and censorship.6 They are the rationales 
for a free speech principle; the legitimacy of the state’s role in regulating speech 
or expression; criticisms about de nitions of key censorship terms and applicable 
tests; and the issue of what a censorship system needs for it to be reconcilable with 
the free speech principle.
Free speech is generally understood as speech that is not subjected to state 
regulation or suppression and the dichotomy between citizen and state is the focus of 
many free speech debates.7 Historically, the free speech principle – a principle under 
which speech is entitled to special protection – began with, and developed through, 
the struggles for a free press.8 Three rationales justifying the principle are commonly 
found in legal literature across jurisdictions.9 They are the importance of free speech 
to the discovery of truth (free speech and truth), free speech as a necessity for an 
effective democracy (free speech and democracy), and free speech as an aspect of 
autonomy or self-determination and personal ful lment (free speech and autonomy). 
These rationales are the subject of lengthy debates and criticisms. They are not 
settled,10 but are nevertheless important as they form the philosophical foundations 
that determine the scope of the free speech principle and what it protects.11
Generally, the importance of free speech to the discovery of truth rationale has 
its roots in John Milton’s Aeropagitica: A Speech for the Liberty of Unlicensed 
Printing which was subsequently taken up by John Stuart Mill and later by the US 
Supreme Court judges.12 It is argued that truth can only be discovered where there 
is unrestricted discussion and competition between differing views in the open 
‘marketplace of ideas’. If the free circulation of ideas and exchange of information 
are restricted or suppressed, truth may be lost and displaced by falsehood.13 Free 
speech is thought to support processes of deliberation that will lead to the discovery 
of truth, where true opinion will be identi ed and false ideas exposed through 
criticism,14 for the betterment of the society. The second rationale argues that free 
speech is essential for a democracy to function effectively. It is argued that citizens 
have the right to receive information and views to be able to make informed 
decisions and to participate meaningfully in a democracy.15 It follows that this 
rationale covers factual speech relating to politics and government. ‘Non-political’ 
speech such as literary or artistic expressions is not easily covered with this 
rationale. The truth and democracy rationales both see speech as a means to an 

Introduction 7
end while the third rationale – free speech and autonomy – sees speech as having 
an inherent value16 and being an integral aspect of every individual’s right to self-
determination and ful lment.17 It is asserted under this rationale that the ability to 
express one’s ideas and views is an intrinsic part of being human. It enhances 
humanity and maintains human dignity and thus restriction or suppression of 
expression will inhibit autonomy and ful lment.18 This rationale covers a wide 
spectrum of expression and is at its strongest in protecting ‘aesthetic and self-
expressive speech’19 making it a relevant rationale for this book.
The legitimacy of the state’s role in regulating expression (by way of restriction 
or suppression) is also considered in much free speech and censorship literature. 
The discussion often notes provisions of international and regional instruments 
providing for freedom of expression such as Article 19 of the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and Article 10 of the European 
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).20 The right to 
freedom of expression as provided by these provisions is subject to quali cations 
or restrictions. For example, Article 19(2) of the ICCPR provides that ‘everyone 
shall have the right to freedom of expression’ and that right includes the ‘freedom 
to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds’ either orally, in 
writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media. However, clause 
(3) quali es the right by subjecting it to restrictions ‘provided by law’ that are 
necessary ‘for respect of the rights or reputations of others and for the protection 
of national security or of public order (ordre public) or of public health or morals’.21 
It is clear from these provisions that there is recognition at an international level 
that freedom of expression or free speech is not absolute. The exercise of the right 
to free speech is subject to laws promulgated by legislatures, where those laws 
comply with the limited allowable restrictions on speech provided for under these 
international provisions. As Barendt had observed, ‘most proponents of strong 
free speech guarantees concede that its exercise may be restricted in some 
circumstances, for example, when it is likely to lead to imminent violence’.22
Besides international instruments, constitutional protection of freedom of 
expression is also discussed in the literature, depending on the jurisdiction and 
context of the analysis. The closest to an absolute constitutional protection of free 
speech is found in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution which 
provides that ‘Congress shall make no law … abridging the freedom of speech or 
of the press …’23 This provision is unquali ed on its face and a literal interpretation 
would mean that no legal limitation can be placed on free speech. However, the 
US Supreme Court has on numerous occasions interpreted the First Amendment 
as subject to exceptions.24 For example, the Court has ruled that ‘hard-core 
pornography’ is not ‘speech’ and therefore, not protected by the First Amendment.25 
Issues such as whether pornography (or sexually explicit materials) constitutes 
‘speech’, the scope of protection under the First Amendment,26 arguments for and 
against proscription of pornography, and whether pornography should be restricted 
or suppressed27 are often the focus of censorship debates in America. This gives 
the US literature some relevance for this book, even given the atypical US 
approach to free speech.

8 Introduction
The Malaysian Federal Constitution and the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region Basic Law each has a provision guaranteeing the right to freedom of 
expression. However, not surprisingly, there are also provisions within these 
documents that qualify the right. The Australian Constitution, which in any event 
does not contain a bill of rights, does not expressly guarantee the right to freedom 
of expression. However, the Australian High Court has, in a number of cases, held 
that there exists an implied freedom of political communication as an incident of 
the system of representative government established by the Constitution.28 The 
constitutional protections of free speech in these three jurisdictions are further 
discussed in Chapter 2.
The third recurring theme in freedom of expression, obscenity and censorship 
literature concerns criticisms about the vagueness of de nitions of key censorship 
terms as well as the weaknesses of the obscenity tests. This theme is often 
discussed within the context of the history of obscenity laws29 which developed in 
England in the eighteenth century in a piecemeal fashion where the common law 
and statute each played an important role.30
The absence of precise de nitions of ‘obscenity’,31 ‘pornography’, and 
‘indecency’ is discussed in most of the literature, with examples including work 
by Barendt, Robertson and Nicol, Schauer, Butler and Rodrick, Strossen and 
White.32 It has been observed that ‘both “obscenity” and “indecency” are de ned 
by reference to vague and elastic formulae’,33 ‘the courts have been unable to 
provide a meaningful de nition of “indecent” short of “offending against 
recognised standards of propriety” or “shocking, disgusting and revolting ordinary 
people”’34 and that the term ‘pornography’ is ‘so vague, subjective and expansive 
that it could apply to all sexually oriented speech’.35 Frederick Schauer in The Law 
of Obscenity commented that the de nition and meaning of ‘hard-core 
pornography’ has been ‘elusive for many years’36 while Harry White observed 
that ‘vague wording and the absence of clear standards has been such a persistent 
characteristic of censorship statutes for so long’. 37 The US Supreme Court was 
also in troubled waters,  nding it dif cult to arrive at a precise or workable 
de nition of the terms. For example, in Roth v United States,38 Justice Brennan 
observed that ‘many decisions have recognized that these terms of obscenity 
statutes are not precise’.39 Six years later, in his dissenting judgment in Paris Adult 
Theatre v Slaton,40 the learned judge noted that the Supreme Court had ‘failed to 
formulate a standard that distinguished protected from unprotected speech’ and 
that a vague standard of obscenity would chill speech protected under the First 
Amendment.41 In Ginzburg v United States, Justice Black remarked that ‘not even 
the most learned judge, much less a layman, is capable of knowing in advance … 
whether certain material comes within the area of “obscenity” as that term is 
confused by the Court today’.42 Perhaps the clearest illustration of the Supreme 
Court’s struggle with the ‘elusive de nition’ comes from Justice Stewart in 
Jacobellis v Ohio – a case concerning the exhibition of the French  lm Les Amants 
(Louis Malle, 1958) – where the judge conceded that the term ‘obscenity’ may be 
‘inde nable’ and that he ‘could never succeed in intelligibly’ de ning it. However, 
the judge sought to assure us that ‘I know it when I see it’.43

Introduction 9
In the United Kingdom, the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship (the 
Williams Committee) acknowledged in the late 1970s the problems of de ning 
terms like ‘obscenity’ and ‘indecency’ and proposed that these terms be abandoned 
‘as having outlived their usefulness’. In its report, the Committee noted:
The question of de nition occupied a central position in our review … it is 
the de nitions of the existing law which contribute very largely to 
dissatisfaction with it and it is the problem of drawing lines for the future with 
which a good deal of our evidence was concerned. …. it became clear to us 
that the success of any new system would depend very heavily on the 
effectiveness of any legal de nition we proposed and also that there were 
very considerable dif culties in formulating a test of the right kind.
… The ‘tendency to deprave and corrupt’ and the words ‘obscene’ and 
‘indecent’ were, we concluded, now useless. The charges of vagueness and 
confusion were so widespread that it was clear to us that we should break 
with the past completely.44
The courts in Canada are also unable to formulate precise de nitions for these terms, 
prompting commentators to conclude that ‘the de nitive de nition of obscenity’ has 
not yet been formulated by the Canadian courts.45 Some Australian writers, including 
Gordon Hawkins, have, in summarizing existing debates on this issue, noted that 
‘the nature of the subject matter is such that attempts at clari cation or de nition are 
inevitably doomed to frustration and must always end in an impasse’.46
It is noteworthy that imprecise de nitions of key terms not only exist in 
obscenity and censorship laws but also in other branches of law.47 The law of tort 
(for example, negligence and public nuisance), professional ethics and consumer 
protection laws are some examples where  exible terms such as ‘ t and proper’, 
‘reasonable person’, ‘good character’ and ‘necessary or expedient’ are found. 
However, these terms (and their associated tests) raise less concern amongst 
commentators, litigants and judges compared to the vagueness that is apparent in 
obscenity and censorship laws. This may be attributable to at least two factors. The 
 rst factor is the dichotomy between criminal law and civil law with concepts of 
obscenity linked historically to obscene libel, a criminal offence carrying penal 
sanction. Therefore, clear de nition of the key terms and applicable tests have been 
deemed necessary in the interests of justice and to comply with the rule of law. 
Equally, there is a long standing criminal law principle known as the principle of 
maximum certainty in de ning offences.48 The second factor can be found in Chief 
Justice Warren’s judgment in Jacobellis v Ohio49 where the judge observed that:
In other areas of law, terms like ‘negligence’, although in common use for 
centuries, have been dif cult to de ne except in the most general manner. Yet 
the courts have been able to function in such areas with a reasonable degree 
of ef ciency. The obscenity problem, however, is aggravated by the fact that 
it involves the area of public expression, an area in which a broad range of 
freedom is vital to our society and is constitutionally protected.50

10 Introduction
That is, the particular social and legal value of free speech makes vagueness in 
de nitions especially problematic. While the value of free speech in the US 
context may well be exceptional, the literature and case law of many countries 
makes clear that free speech has a particular and high value.
The evolution of the obscenity test (as formulated by courts and legislatures in 
the Anglo-American common law world) is also considered at length by many legal 
scholars.51 When the English Obscene Publications Act was enacted in 1857, it did 
not de ne ‘obscenity’ and it was not until a decade later that Lord Chief Justice 
Cockburn came up with a formulation that in uenced the subject matter for many 
years in common law jurisdictions: ‘I think the test of obscenity is this, whether the 
tendency of the matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those whose 
minds are open to such immoral in uences, and into whose hands a publication of 
this sort may fall.’52 The Hicklin test, as it is commonly referred to, is based on the 
concept of morality53 and has numerous weaknesses including the determination of 
whose moral code is to be set as the benchmark.54 The test is also criticized for its 
focus on the effect of the article on the most vulnerable members of the society, 
whether or not they are likely to read or view it.55 A new test was introduced in 1959 
when the Obscene Publications Act was amended, with section 1 providing that a 
work is obscene if, taken as a whole, it is ‘such as to tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely, in all the circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it’. This statutory test goes beyond the Hicklin test in 
looking at the article as a whole and at all the relevant circumstances when assessing 
its likely effects on its primary audience,56 that is, those people who, the evidence 
suggests, would be likely to seek it out and pay for it, or else be suf ciently interested 
to borrow it or attend a viewing.57 The test requires the jury to consider the effect of 
the work on a signi cant proportion of the likely audience. The fact that the article 
may corrupt a few vulnerable people who gain access to it is to be ignored.58 Barendt 
observed that English law emphasizes that there is no absolute test to determine 
‘obscenity’ but rather there is a variable standard, the application of which depends 
on the probable readership or audience and the way in which harm is assessed by 
reference to these particular people, not ordinary people in general.59 The 1959 
amendments to the Obscene Publications Act also introduced the ‘public good’ 
defence under section 460 with the view to prevent works of artistic or literary merits 
from being sti ed.61 This amendment in effect sets up a two-stage procedure where 
the jury must  rst rule whether the article is obscene and then determine whether on 
balance, publication of the work is for the public good if it has literary or other 
merits.62 Barendt criticized this approach because ‘the jury must balance the literary 
or other merits of a work against its obscene character and determine whether 
publication is justi ed’.63 He is of the opinion that the US approach is more coherent 
in that it requires the court to consider literary and other merits of the article in the 
course of determining whether it is obscene.64 Under the US law, the current 
formulation is found in the leading case of Miller v California65 where ‘obscenity’ 
is limited to works which, taken as a whole, appeal to the prurient interest in sex; 
which portray sexual conduct in a patently offensive way; and which taken as a 
whole, do not have serious literary, artistic, political or scienti c value.66

Introduction 11
The US approach in considering literary and other merits of the work in the 
course of determining whether it is obscene appears the more sensible because if 
an article has serious artistic, literary or other merits, it will not (or rather, should 
not) be regarded as obscene in the  rst place. As explained in Chapters 3 and 4, 
under the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship systems – but not the 
Malaysian system – the artistic or other merits of a  lm are considered in the 
course of classifying the  lm, not after a decision to ban the  lm or to restrict it 
is made.
The question of what features a censorship system ought to have for it to be 
reconcilable with the free speech principle is a fourth theme that can be seen in the 
legal literature on freedom of expression. Although not always expressly discussed 
as an independent topic, legal writers who discuss censorship or prior restraint 
tend to offer views about the features that they consider ought to be introduced, 
after criticisms of the existing censorship system have been made.
Schauer, for example, suggested that the question of who decides what material 
or content is to be made available to the public is as important as the question of 
what material or content is to be made available. He argued that due emphasis 
should be placed on the entity that makes the decision and that ‘in many contexts 
there are choices that are not about whether content should be determined, but are 
rather about which people and which institutions should be involved in the 
determination’.67 According to this leading free speech theorist, there are ways in 
which ‘censorship is inevitable, necessary and desirable – but it is less inevitable, 
necessary, or desirable that this group rather than that group do it’.68 This point 
highlights the importance of entrusting the right entity to be the ‘decision-maker’ 
and in terms of  lm censorship, it raises the pertinent issue of competence, 
suitability and independence of censors, an issue considered at length in Chapters 
4, 5 and 7.
Another example on this fourth theme is Barendt who has identi ed a number 
of ‘disturbing features’ of administrative censorship or ‘the characteristic vices of 
prior restraints’.69 These ‘disturbing features’ include the observation that an 
administrative censor is likely to adopt ‘an unsympathetic attitude’ to the materials 
he or she is censoring; the likelihood of bias where government of cials may be 
keen to censor materials critical of the government; the fact that the censorship 
entity may be anxious about public criticism if it allows controversial material to 
be released; and the infringement of the principles of separation of powers when 
decisions about the right to publish are taken by the executive or its agents.70 
Barendt then proceeded to suggest a number of approaches where these ‘vices’ 
may be cured:
Arrangements might be made for ‘censorship’ decisions to be taken by an 
impartial tribunal (appointed by an independent commission rather than by the 
government), which would be required to apply detailed and precise standards 
and to conduct an open hearing at which the publisher is legally represented. 
The initial decision might be made subject to full and prompt review. Such 
arrangements would meet many of the objections to censorship systems…71

12 Introduction
The above quoted paragraph highlights  ve key features of a censorship system 
that will be considered in detail in later chapters of the book. They are the decision- 
making entities (this is also the key point raised by Schauer, as mentioned above), 
the censorship guidelines applied by  lm censors, the right to make representations 
to censors, the right to, and process of, an appeal against initial censorship 
decision, and the right to apply for judicial review challenging  lm censorship 
decisions in court. These key features along with several further issues which 
emerged as relevant through  eldwork will be discussed in the Malaysian, Hong 
Kong and Australian context. Many of these further issues are of a more detailed 
or operational nature. They concern the types of  lm subject to censorship, the 
constitution and composition of ad hoc censorship panels, the matters to be taken 
into consideration by censors in the course of making censorship decisions, the 
alteration of  lms before approval is granted, the provision of reasons for 
censorship decisions and the reclassi cation of  lms. Before reaching those 
matters, Chapter 2 outlines the  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia in their respective socio-legal context.

2 
The  lm industries in 
Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia in their 
socio-legal context
Introduction
This chapter outlines the historical background, current setting and governmental 
involvement in the Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian  lm industries in their 
respective socio-legal contexts. It provides an overview of the three  lm industries 
and relevant aspects of the political, legal and social settings of each of the 
jurisdictions to serve as a ‘backdrop’ to the discussions that follow in the book. It 
is also intended to position censorship within the wider framework of the industries 
and the jurisdictions in which they operate.
Under the ‘Overview of the jurisdiction’ sub-heading, the brief history, model of 
government and legal system of each jurisdiction are examined, along with a brief 
description of population according to ethnicity, language and religion. Thereafter 
the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and per capita income  gures will be highlighted 
to indicate the national standard of living. The ‘Overview of the industry’ section 
then charts the background and development of the three  lm industries, highlighting 
in particular, the timeline of major events in the industries (such as the time when 
 lm production began and the golden eras that the industries experienced) as well as 
the key entities that drove the development of the industries. Thereafter, the current 
setting of the industries is discussed, focusing on the operational arrangement of the 
three sectors of the industry – production, distribution and exhibition of  lms. At 
present, there is no oligopolistic control of the industry as these three sectors are 
now largely separated, although historically this was the case in all three jurisdictions. 
Data on the number of local  lms produced each year, the number of cinemas (and 
seating capacity), cinema admissions per year and the annual box of ce revenues 
are provided to point to the size of these  lm industries over the last decade. In 
general, Hong Kong produces the highest number of  lms per year, while Australia 
leads with the highest number of cinemas (and the largest seating capacity as a result 
of an expansion of multi-screen theatres) and the biggest annual box of ce receipts. 
Besides statistics to indicate the commercial scale of the industries, the achievements 
of Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian  lms at prestigious  lm festivals are also 
noted as an indicator of their artistic and critical success. The government’s 
involvement in the industry will then be discussed, focusing in particular on two 
aspects –  rst, the purpose or intention behind the governments’ involvement and 

14 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
second, the initiatives undertaken by key government agencies in view of developing 
the  lm industries. The purpose of governmental involvement in Malaysia and 
Australia is chie y cultural and social in nature while it is more commercially 
oriented in the case of Hong Kong. The incentives and supports provided by the 
governments are various in kind but are principally  nancial in form.
It must be noted that because the history of these  lm industries, their current 
operations and the governmental involvement are not the primary focus of this 
book, detailed extrapolation and analysis give way to a broad overview.1 The 
discussion that follows draws upon existing literature but the analysis extends 
these accounts by comparing the three  lm industries in terms of their background, 
current setting and their respective governments’ involvement.
Malaysia
An overview of the jurisdiction
Malaysia, a constitutional democracy,2 is a federation comprising thirteen states 
and three federal territories. The states in Peninsular Malaysia gained independence 
from the British on 31 August 1957,3 (forming the independent Federation of 
Malaya) and Malaysia was formed on 16 September 1963 when Singapore4 and 
the states of Sabah and Sarawak joined the Federation.5
The Federal Constitution, which according to article 4 is the supreme law of 
the country, provides for the Malaysian system of government.6 It establishes 
Malaysia as a federation with legislative and executive powers divided between 
the Federal and State governments.7 A Westminster model of parliamentary 
government was set up with the three branches of government – legislature, 
executive and judiciary – each exercising separate functions.8 The federal 
legislature consists of a bicameral Parliament – an elected lower house (the House 
of Representatives or Dewan Rakyat) and a non-elected upper house (the Senate 
or Dewan Negara). The Dewan Rakyat follows a multi-party system and, since 
independence, Malaysia has been governed by a coalition (of mostly ethnically 
based political parties) known from 1974 as the Barisan Nasional, led by the 
dominant United Malays National Organisation (UMNO). The executive power is 
vested in the Cabinet led by the Prime Minister while judicial powers rest with the 
judiciary headed by the Chief Justice.
Fundamental liberties9 are guaranteed in Part II of the Federal Constitution. Of 
particular relevance to the book is article 10 which provides that ‘every citizen has 
the right to freedom of speech and expression’ but Parliament may by law impose 
on the right:
… such restrictions as it deems necessary or expedient in the interest of the 
security of the Federation or any part thereof, friendly relations with other 
countries, public order or morality and restrictions designed to protect the 
privileges of Parliament or of any Legislative Assembly or to provide against 
contempt of court, defamation or incitement to any offence.

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 15
Restrictions on expression and speech were built into the constitutional provision 
and tensions often exist between the proponents of this fundamental liberty and 
the increasingly authoritarian executive.
Malaysia has a plural legal system.10 The common law system, a legacy of 
British colonial rule, and the Islamic legal system which applies Syariah law to 
Muslims in regard to family and religious matters, operate concurrently.11 The 
civil courts (common law courts) consist of the Federal Court (formerly known as 
the Supreme Court) which is the apex court of the country, the Court of Appeal, 
the High Courts, the Sessions Courts and the Magistrates’ Courts. Judges of the 
higher courts are appointed by the King, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister 
after consultation with the Conference of Rulers.12 The syariah courts, which run 
in parallel with the civil courts comprises the Syariah Appeal Court, the Syariah 
High Court and the Syariah Subordinate Courts.13 Since 1988, there have been 
concerns about the administration of justice in Malaysia. In May 2008 a 
Commission of Enquiry found that ‘ample evidence has emerged which clearly 
indicates that there is cause for concern about how judges in the upper echelons of 
the judiciary were appointed and the selection criteria employed’.14 In addition to 
perception of interference in judicial appointments, there has been widespread 
concern about the quality of judgments.15 As the result of the 2008 Commission of 
Enquiry, a Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC) was established to create 
greater transparency, accountability and good governance in the appointment of 
judges. It appears that the JAC has gone some way towards restoring public 
con dence in the administration of justice but it is too soon to measure its impact.
Malaysia is an ethnically and culturally diverse country. The 2010 government 
census tabulates a total population of 27.9 million with a breakdown based on 
ethnicity as follows: Malay 54.5 per cent, Chinese 25 per cent, indigenous people 
11.8 per cent, Indian 7.5 per cent and other minorities 1.2 per cent.16 The Malays 
and indigenous peoples are collectively known as bumiputra (sons of the soil). 
They make up the majority of the population and enjoy privileges in relation to 
land, public of ce, places in tertiary education, scholarship and trade.17 Many of 
the non-bumiputra population are descendants of migrant workers (mainly from 
China and India) who came to Malaya during British colonial times. As at 2010, 
72 per cent of the population are urban.18
Four major world religions – Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity and Islam – are 
practised in the country along with a number of other beliefs such as Taoism, 
Sikhism and animism. The majority of the Malaysian populace are Muslims (60.4 
per cent) followed by Buddhists (19.2 per cent), Christians (9.1 per cent) and 
Hindus (6.3 per cent).19 Article 3 of the Federal Constitution provides that Islam is 
‘the religion of the federation’ but it is pertinent to note that Malaysia is not an 
Islamic but a secular state,20 although this legal de nition is now contested 
politically by proponents of an Islamic state and other pressure groups. The 
increased ‘Islamization’ over the past two decades, which is traceable to the 
political competition between UMNO, the main governing party, and the opposition 
Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS, a conservative Islamic party) to claim higher 
‘Islamic credentials’ to secure the majority Malay votes, has seen the introduction 

16 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
and implementation of Islamic policies both at the federal and state levels (such as 
the Islam Hadhari or Civilizational Islam policy), prohibition of practices such as 
yoga (by the in uential National Fatwa Council of the Department of Islamic 
Development) and the banning of wayang kulit (shadow puppet theatre) in 
Kelantan, a state under the PAS administration. As noted in Chapter 7, the political 
contesting around the secular status of Malaysia may increase concerns about some 
of the weaknesses found in the censorship system, particularly the vagueness that 
appears in the censorship guidelines.21 The Malay language (or Bahasa Melayu) is 
designated as the national language22 and is widely used along with English, a 
variety of Chinese and Indian dialects as well as the indigenous languages. Malay 
is the of cial language of law, however English is still commonly used in the courts 
and the majority of judgments are written in English.
Malaysia is a middle-income country based on a multi-sector economy consisting 
of, amongst others, agriculture, mining, manufacturing and service industries.23 In 
2010, the country’s GDP (purchasing power parity) stood at USD 424.8 billion, 
with a GDP per capita of USD 15,000 – ranking seventy-sixth in the world.24
An overview of the Malaysian  lm industry
The background
It has been said that the Malaysian  lm industry was founded on Chinese 
investments, Indian imagination and Malay labour.25 Film exhibition began as 
early as 1910 with  lms coming in from France, Britain, America, China and 
India.26 One of the earliest  lm exhibitors was Shaw Brothers,27 which has, since 
the 1920s, expanded its cinema chains in Singapore and Malaya.28 The beginning 
of commercial  lm-making is attributed to the production of the  rst local  lm, 
entitled Laila Majnun, which was produced in 1933 by S.M. Chisty and directed 
by B.S. Rajhans from India.29
In the late 1930s, the Shaw Brothers established a production company in 
Singapore and produced numerous Malay language  lms with Chinese directors 
and technical crews brought in from Shanghai. There were about 13 feature  lms 
produced during the  edging stage of the  lm industry before the Japanese 
occupation of Malaya.30
Film production came to a halt during World War Two and the Japanese 
occupation but it had picked up again by the late 1940s when Shaw Brothers re-
entered the industry by setting up Malay Film Productions (MFP) in 1947.31 Besides 
MFP, the other major force that played a crucial role in developing the industry was 
Cathay-Keris which was formed in 1953. The era in which these two  lm studios 
reigned supreme32 (from the mid-1950s to the late 1960s) has often been dubbed 
the Golden Era of the  lm industry.33 Shaw Brothers under its own banner (1937 to 
1941) and as MFP (1947 to 1969) produced 170  lms while Cathay-Keris (1953 to 
1972) made 123  lms.34 These two studios, owned and run by Chinese entrepreneurs, 
forged an oligopolistic market structure whereby they took control of the three 
sectors of the industry – production, distribution and exhibition of  lms.35 Classic 

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 17
 lms from this era include Penarik Becha (The Rickshaw Man, P Ramlee, 1955) 
and Anakku Sazali (My Son Sazali, Phani Majumdar, 1956) which were produced 
by MFP as well as Hang Jebat (Hussain Haniff, 1961) and Istana Berdarah (Palace 
of Blood, Hussain Haniff, 1964) which were produced by Cathay-Keris.
In the early 1960s, another studio by the name of Merdeka Studio was set up in 
the capital Kuala Lumpur, and was active for about 20 years, producing 89  lms 
from 1960 to 1981.36 Film production in Malaysia peaked in the early 1960s where 
the combined output of the three studios contributed to the release of 23  lms in 
1963 alone,37 a  gure which was only surpassed four decades later. The  lm 
industry began to decline in the late 1960s due to the rise of production costs 
(which made it more commercially viable to import  lms than to produce them 
locally) and the introduction of television in 1963.38 Additionally, local  lms 
started to lose their appeal to audiences which, increasingly, became more 
attracted to American, Hong Kong and Indian  lms.39 MFP stopped producing 
 lms in 1967 followed by Cathay-Keris in 1972. The closure of Merdeka Studio 
in 1981 marks the end of the studio era in the Malaysian  lm industry.40
After the collapse of the studio system, a new independent phase began in the 
mid-1970s with the formation of independently owned production companies. 
Most of these companies were headed by Malays and the  lms were made by 
Malay talent41 for the Malay populace.42 The inadequate grasp of production, 
marketing and distribution expertise led to the eventual closure of many of these 
production companies, which had sprung up only a few years earlier.43 The 1980s 
and 1990s saw the emergence of new  lmmakers, many of whom had trained 
abroad. Those who made an impact on the  lm industry include Othman Hafsham 
(Mekanik (Mechanic) 1983), Rahim Razali (Matinya Seorang Patriot (Death of a 
Patriot) 1984), Aziz M. Osman (XX Ray, 1992) and U-Wei Haji Saari (Perempuan, 
Isteri & Jalang (Woman, Wife & Whore), 1993). These  lmmakers pioneered 
what is referred to as the ‘Malaysian New Wave’ movement.44
The advent of digital  lm-making technology in the new millennium paved the 
way for the emergence of yet another group of  lmmakers, operating on relatively 
smaller production budgets in parallel with the mainstream-commercial  lm 
practitioners, like Aziz M. Osman, Shuhaimi Baba (Pontianak Harum Sundal 
Malam (Pontianak: A Scent of Tuberose) 2004), Yusof Haslam (Gerak Khas: The 
Movie, 2001) and Saw Teong Hin (Puteri Gunung Ledang (Princess of Mount 
Ledang), 2004). This group of independent  lmmakers, which includes Yasmin 
Ahmad (Sepet (Chinese Eye), 2004 and Mukhsin, 2007), Amir Muhammad (Lelaki 
Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist), 2006), Ho Yuhang (Rain Dogs, 2006 and 
At the End of Daybreak, 2009) and Khoo Eng Yow (The Bird House, 2006) produce 
works that are more successful in terms of critical recognition abroad compared to 
the commercial productions churned out by the mainstream practitioners.45
The current setting
Until 1981, a person or company could engage in all three sectors of the industry 
– production, distribution and exhibition of  lms – at the same time. This, as noted 

18 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
above, was the ‘practice’ during the studio era when Shaw Brothers/MFP and 
Cathay-Keris basically controlled the whole operation of the  lm industry.46 The 
oligopolistic control of the industry became illegal (in 1981) as section 21(1) of 
the National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia Act 1981 (Act 244) 
prohibits the engagement of all three sectors by the same person or company.
A licence issued by the National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia 
or FINAS, a statutory body under the purview of the Ministry of Information, 
Communication and Culture, is required in order to engage in  lm production, 
distribution or exhibition. Licences issued may be subject to such conditions as 
FINAS imposes. FINAS is also empowered to refuse to issue a licence ‘without 
assigning any reason’ and such refusal ‘shall be  nal and conclusive and shall not 
be challenged, appealed against, reviewed, quashed or questioned in any court’.47
The number of feature  lms produced, the total production costs and the gross 
box of ce takings of Malaysian  lms for the period of 2000 to 2010 are summarized 
in Table 2.1.48
Most of the local  lms released in the past decade were produced by key 
production companies including Grand Brilliance (renamed as Primeworks Studio 
in 2008), Tayangan Unggul, Pesona Pictures, Nizarman Malaysia, Skop 
Productions and Da Huang Pictures with exhibition and distribution works 
handled by other entities. As of 2010, there are 19  lm exhibition companies 
operating in Malaysia, owning 100 cinemas, consisting of 571 screens and a total 
seating capacity of 110,424.49 The exhibition sector is concentrated in the cities 
and dominated by two cinema chains – Golden Screen Cinemas and Tanjong 
Golden Village Cinemas. Distribution of  lms in DVD and VCD formats are led 
by two other companies – Speedy Video Distributors and Berjaya HVN Malaysia. 
Foreign  lms account for the vast majority of the distribution and exhibition 
sectors. For example, 78 per cent of the total box of ce revenue in 2005 was 
generated by foreign  lms, mainly from Hollywood.50
Table 2.1 The Malaysian  lm production sector in  gures, 2000 2010
Year
Number of feature 
 lms produced
Total production costs
(in Malaysian Ringgit)
Gross domestic box 
of ce collections
(in Malaysian Ringgit)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
 7
11
10
16
21
20
20
21
28
27
38
 9.1 million
13.3 million
15.0 million
23.8 million
43.2 million
29.8 million
38.9 million
36.4 million
38.7 million
40.5 million
46.6 million
10.6 million
13.4 million
18.6 million
23.4 million
27.2 million
26.7 million
29.7 million
29.6 million
43.9 million
50.8 million
81.8 million

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 19
Table 2.2 highlights the industry’s exhibition sector statistics for the years 
2005 to 2010.51
The government’s involvement in the industry
Until the 1980s, the Malaysian  lm industry remained a ‘private undertaking’ and 
received neither assistance nor incentives directly from the government. It was 
only in 1974 that a committee was set up by the government to identify problems 
faced by the industry and to recommend measures to overcome them.52 The 
committee proposed the formation of a  lm development body which eventually 
materialized in 1981 in the form of the National Film Development Corporation 
of Malaysia. Since then, a number of initiatives have been introduced to spur the 
development of the  lm industry.
THE NATIONAL FILM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION OF MALAYSIA (FINAS)
FINAS was established under the National Film Development Corporation of 
Malaysia Act 1981 to promote, nurture and facilitate the development of the 
country’s  lm industry.53 On a broader basis, FINAS aims to ensure the creation 
and availability of screen content to enrich the national identity of the country by 
making it available to local and international audiences.54 In line with these 
objectives, FINAS provides  nancial assistance, production facilities and 
equipment and training to local  lm practitioners. In addition, FINAS also funds 
select  lm projects, for example Embun (Erma Fatima, 2002), Paloh (Adman 
Salleh, 2003) and 1957: Hati Malaya (Shuhaimi Baba, 2007).
The establishment of FINAS re ects the government’s awareness of the  lm 
industry as an enterprise with wide social, cultural and economic implications.55 
This is apparent as one of the six functions of FINAS is to ‘regulate and control 
the production, distribution and exhibition of  lms in Malaysia’.56 This regulatory 
function is carried out by way of controlling the issuing of licenses for  lm 
production, distribution and exhibition.
Table 2.2 The Malaysian  lm exhibition sector in  gures, 2005 2010
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Number of cinema admissions
Gross box of ce receipts
Number of cinemas
Number of screens
Total seating capacity
25.9 
million
RM 
217.4 
million
66
265
61,482
27.9 
million
RM 
235.0 
million
68
287
66,822
33.6 
million
RM 
289.3 
million
76
353
78,496
43.9 
million
RM 
380.7 
million
91
453
92,642
44.1 
million
RM 
403.3 
million
93
485
101,165
54.3 
million
RM 
518.2 
million
100
571
110,424

20 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
Since the introduction of the National Film Policy in 2005 (with the objectives 
‘to support the national  lm industry to be more progressive and internationally 
competitive’ and to be the ‘catalyst’ in making Malaysia the  lm-making hub of 
the region), FINAS has carried out a number of measures to develop the industry. 
One of the main efforts is the implementation of projects focusing on infrastructure 
development and upgrading of  lm facilities which has included the setting up of 
a new soundstage and the acquisition of high technology  lm production 
equipment for the bene t of  lm practitioners. In recent years, FINAS has also 
facilitated the marketing and promotion of Malaysian  lms to overseas  lm buyers 
at international  lm festivals’  lm market sidebars. Additionally, FINAS also 
manages a number of incentive schemes aimed at increasing the number of  lm 
productions and these schemes are discussed below.
THE COMPULSORY SCREENING SCHEME
The Compulsory Screening Scheme (Syarat Wajib Tayang) was introduced in 
2005 under the National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia 
(Compulsory Screening Scheme) Regulations 2005. Under this scheme, FINAS 
may certify a Malaysian or co-produced  lm which must then be screened at 
local cinemas. If a  lm is certi ed as eligible under the scheme, cinema operators 
are bound to exhibit the  lm as scheduled by FINAS57 therefore guaranteeing the 
 lm a certain number of days of screening in the cinemas. Failure to do so is a 
breach of the Film Exhibition Licence conditions whereby the exhibitor may be 
liable to a  ne or revocation of the licence. Exhibitors must screen an eligible 
 lm for 14 consecutive days in the biggest hall of their cinemas. However, the 
 lm may be moved to a smaller hall if the audience in the initial hall is less than 
30 per cent of seating capacity during the  rst four consecutive days of the run, 
or where the audience is less than 15 per cent of seating capacity after the  rst 
three days of screening.58 Exhibitors are allowed to withdraw the  lm from 
further screening if the latter situation occurs.59 Exhibitors are also required to 
submit a report pertaining to changes of cinema hall or withdrawal of any 
certi ed  lm to FINAS.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE AND INCENTIVE SCHEMES
The two main forms of  nancial scheme are the Feature Film Loan Scheme and 
the Entertainment Duty Incentive Scheme. The Feature Film Loan Scheme was 
launched in 2006 with a RM50 million fund to assist production companies by 
providing them with loans to produce feature  lms. This scheme is managed by 
FINAS and the Small and Medium Enterprises Bank. To be eligible, the applicant 
must be a production company owned by a Malaysian citizen with a valid  lm 
production licence, a good track record in  lm production and the capacity to 
repay the loan. The maximum amount of loan obtainable under this scheme for a 
 lm project is RM1.5 million or 90 per cent of the estimated production cost, 
whichever is lower, and the interest rate is charged at 4 per cent per annum.60

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 21
The Entertainment Duty Incentive Scheme enables Malaysian  lm producers or 
production companies to claim the rebate of entertainment duties collected by local 
authorities from the sales of admission tickets at cinemas. At present, 25 per cent 
of a ticket price is charged as entertainment duty. From 1989 to 2008, a total of 
RM43.5 million in the form of entertainment duty rebates was channelled back to 
the respective producers as a form of incentive to encourage more  lm productions.61
Other forms of  nancial assistances available to  lm practitioners include the 
National and Cultural Film Fund (a fund of RM15 million for the production of 
 lms with historical and cultural themes); the CGI Fund (a fund to assist local  lm 
practitioners in producing  lms with computer-generated imagery contents); and 
the Film in Malaysia Incentive (a scheme providing cash rebate on Qualifying 
Malaysian Production Expenditure to encourage  lm production in Malaysia).
Hong Kong
An overview of the jurisdiction
Hong Kong, a British colony ceded by China in 1841,62 became a special 
administrative region of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) on 1 July 1997.63 
On the same day, the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
– a constitutional document – came into effect, outlining the system of governance 
of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (HKSAR).64 The principle of 
‘one country, two systems’ was introduced to keep Hong Kong autonomous 
(except in the matters of defence and foreign affairs) and to continue the existing 
capitalist economic system and social life for 50 years after reuni cation with 
China.65 The Basic Law guarantees the HKSAR ‘a high degree of autonomy, 
enjoying executive, legislative and independent judicial power, including that of 
 nal adjudication’.66 The fundamental rights of Hong Kong residents are also 
guaranteed by the Basic Law.67 Two particularly relevant provisions to this book 
are article 27, which provides that Hong Kong residents ‘shall have the freedom 
of speech, of the press and of publication’ and article 4, which provides that the 
HKSAR shall safeguard the rights and freedoms of the residents in accordance 
with the law.
The executive branch of the government, known as the Executive Council and 
presided over by the Chief Executive (who is the head of the government), has the 
main responsibilities of formulating and implementing government policies, 
introducing bills to the legislature and drafting subordinate legislation.68 The 
HKSAR has a unicameral legislature known as the Legislative Council which 
comprises 60 members, with 30 of them elected by popular vote and the remaining 
30 indirectly elected by functional constituencies.69 The Legislative Council’s 
main functions, besides enacting, amending and repealing laws, include examining 
and approving budgets introduced by the Executive Council, debating issues of 
public interest and handling complaints made by residents.
Like Malaysia, Hong Kong also inherited the common law system from the 
British. The 1984 Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law ensure the 

22 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
continuance of this legal system in Hong Kong after ‘the handover’ of British rule 
to Chinese sovereignty.70 The common law principles, rules of equity and almost 
all of the legislation in force before 1 July 1997 – including the Film Censorship 
Ordinance – continue to apply.71 The HKSAR judiciary has  nal adjudication 
power with the Court of Final Appeal (lead by the Chief Justice, who is the head 
of the judicial branch) being the highest appellate court.72 The Court of Final 
Appeal is followed in rank by the High Court (comprising the Court of Appeal 
and the Court of First Instance), the District Court, the Magistrates’ Courts and 
Juvenile Courts.73
The HKSAR had a population of 7.15 million in 2010,74 overwhelmingly 
located in urban areas.75 According to the most recent by-census conducted by the 
Census and Statistics Department, 95 per cent of the population are ethnic Chinese, 
1.6 per cent are Filipinos, 1.3 per cent are Indonesians and 2.1 per cent are of 
various other ethnicities.76 The US Department of State reported that approximately 
43 per cent of the population practices some form of religion and the two most 
prevalent religions are Buddhism and Taoism. It is estimated that there are 
approximately 1.5 million Buddhists and Taoists; 550,000 Protestant Christians; 
over 400,000 Roman Catholics; 20,000 Mormons; over 100,000 Muslims; over 
40,000 Hindus; over 2,000 Sikhs; and over 3,000 Jews.77 The Basic Law does not 
provide for an of cial religion but guarantees the residents freedom of conscience.78 
Chinese and English are the two of cial languages in the HKSAR and the 
Cantonese dialect is the most widely spoken.79 All government public documents 
and legislation have to be published in Chinese and English.80
The special administrative region has a free-market economy driven by service-
based industries. The four key sectors of the economy are  nancial services 
(including banking, insurance and stock brokerage), trading and logistics, tourism 
and professional services (for example, legal, accounting and information 
technology related services).81 It is a developed capitalist economy with a GDP 
(purchasing power parity) of USD 337.1 billion in 2010.82 The GDP per capita in 
the same year was USD 46,900, ranking tenth internationally.83
An overview of the Hong Kong  lm industry
The background
Film exhibition began in Hong Kong in 189784 while  lm-making is commonly 
believed85 to have started in 1909 with the birth of the  rst known  lm entitled 
Stealing a Roast Duck directed by Liang Shaobo.86 Film production, in its 
commercial sense, started in 1923 when Li Min-wei (generally seen as the founder 
of the Hong Kong  lm industry) established Min Xin, the  rst Chinese-owned 
 lm company in Hong Kong.87 In 1925, Min Xin produced Rogue, Hong Kong’s 
 rst feature-length  lm and by the mid-1930s, hundreds of  lms had already been 
produced in the territory.88
During the Sino-Japanese War (which broke out in 1937) and the Civil War 
(between Nationalists and Communists) many  lmmakers in Shanghai moved 

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 23
their operations to Hong Kong. The in ux of talent and investment from Shanghai 
contributed to the development of the Hong Kong  lm industry89 and later to the 
bifurcation of the industry into two parallel cinemas – Mandarin cinema 
(transplanted in Hong Kong from Shanghai) and indigenous Cantonese cinema.90 
When Hong Kong fell under Japanese occupation in 1941,  lm production was 
‘suspended’ for more than three years91 and not a single Hong Kong  lm was 
made during this period.
Film production resumed after the Second World War. New production 
companies began to spring up, the important ones being Yung Hwa Studio and 
Union Film Enterprise Limited. Throughout the 1950s, about 50 to 70 production 
companies were set up each year resulting in a steady output of 150 to 170  lms 
annually.92 However, only about 20 to 25 of them stayed in business for more than 
a year and the surviving ones produced an average of six to eight  lms per year.93
In the 1960s and 1970s, martial arts  lms became very popular. This genre 
catapulted Hong Kong  lms into the international arena and skyrocketed the 
territory’s box of ce revenues to unprecedented  gures. It was noted that:94
In the mid-1970s, Hong Kong  lms started to out-gross imports, and by the 
early 1980s they enjoyed total dominance over foreign products, including 
those from Hollywood. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the income ratio of 
Hong Kong  lms to foreign  lms hovered around seven to three.
Besides martial arts, Cantonese operas, melodrama, comedy and romance were 
also popular genres with Hong Kong audiences.95
The Shaw Brothers Studio and Cathay Organisation are two of the most 
important entities in the Hong Kong  lm history. They dominated the industry in 
the 1950s and 1960s by becoming the major  lm producers. The sustained output 
is attributable to the studios’ set-up – well equipped soundstages,  lm processing 
labs, a star system and a developed distribution and exhibition network that saw 
their  lms reaching local audiences and the diasporic Chinese audiences across 
Asia.96 In addition to distributing and exhibiting their own productions, they also 
exhibited  lms by American studios.97 The Cathay Organisation and Shaw 
Brothers’ dominance began to wane in the 1970s, the former ceased  lm production 
in 1972 while the latter  nally switched to television productions in 1986.98
After the decline of the two giant studios, the  lm industry was rejuvenated by 
two events. The  rst was the arrival of the ‘New Wave’  lmmakers in the late 
1970s led by directors such as Patrick Tam (The Sword, 1980), Ann Hui (The Story 
of Woo Viet, 1981) and Tsui Hark (Zu: Warriors from the Magic Mountain, 1983). 
These  lmmakers introduced new technical, visual and presentation styles and 
explored aspects of contemporary social realities in their  lms.99 In the late 1980s, 
a second wave of  lmmakers emerged, the prominent ones including Stanley 
Kwan (Rouge, 1987) and Wong Kar Wai (Days of Being Wild, 1990). These 
 lmmakers drove Hong Kong cinema to greater artistic heights, gaining critical 
acclaim at prestigious  lm festivals such as the Festival de Cannes, the Venice 
Film Festival and the Berlin International Film Festival.100 The second event was 

24 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
the establishment of Golden Harvest, which went on to become the most prominent 
and successful company in the 1970s and 1980s. Founded in 1970, this powerhouse 
produced box of ce hits  rst with the legendary cinematic martial artist Bruce Lee 
in the 1970s and subsequently with Jackie Chan in the 1980s and 1990s. Besides 
 lm production, Golden Harvest also expanded into distribution and exhibition to 
ensure its  lms’ access to screens and a share of the box of ce revenues. Operating 
in parallel with Golden Harvest is a number of comparatively smaller independent 
production companies. Cinema City Company, Film Workshop Limited, and 
Win’s Films are some of the more successful ones, thriving on local exhibitors and 
overseas distributors’  nances to fund their productions.101
Hong Kong emerged as one of the world’s most vibrant and proli c cinemas 
from the 1980s to mid-1990s with its unique productions that held audiences 
captive. Hong Kong  lms of this era were enormously popular,  lling up cinemas 
and video stores in Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, South East Asia and Chinatowns 
around the world.102 Hong Kong  lms were so in demand in Asian territories that 
production companies were able to pre-sell their  lms to exhibitors and distributors 
even before a single scene was shot.103 This era of phenomenal success is referred 
to as the Golden Age of Hong Kong cinema,104 during which the  lm industry 
produced more than 200  lms a year, making Hong Kong the world’s third largest 
 lm producer (behind India and the United States of America) and the second 
largest  lm exporter.105
In the mid-1990s the  lm industry suffered a down cycle after almost two 
decades of creative and commercial successes. Its decline is attributable to a 
convergence of various factors, in particular:
1 
hyper production in the late 1980s and early 1990s which escalated the 
quantity of  lms but caused their quality to plummet (resulting in audiences 
turning away from Hong Kong  lms);106
2 
the in ltration of triads in the  lm industry;107
3 
strong competition from Hollywood, South Korean and Thai productions;108
4 
rampant piracy of Hong Kong  lms;109
5 
the impact of uncertainty about Hong Kong’s reuni cation with China;110
6 
the 1997/1998 Asian  nancial crisis (which not only affected the box of ce 
receipts but also caused investors to bail out of  lm productions).111
It ought to be noted that censorship is not one of the factors that caused the 
industry’s downturn. While the number of productions decreased by the late 
1990s, the  lm industry nevertheless still produced remarkable  lms during this 
period and well into the new millennium. There have been many  lms that enjoyed 
critical and/or commercial success like Wong Kar Wai’s In the Mood for Love 
(2000), Andrew Lau and Alan Mak’s Infernal Affairs (2002), Benny Chan’s New 
Police Story (2004) and Johnnie To’s Election (2005). In 2004, the Closer 
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) was signed between the PRC and 
HKSAR allowing Hong Kong  lm companies preferential access to the Chinese 
market by removing import quotas and fostering co-production opportunities.112

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 25
Throughout its history, a diverse variety of  lms have  ourished in Hong Kong, 
most notably after the arrival of the ‘New Wave’  lmmakers. Films exploring 
social issues (for example, Ann Hui’s The Boat People, 1982, Fruit Chan’s Made 
in Hong Kong, 1997), hyperbolic action  lms (John Woo’s The Killer, 1989, 
Benny Chan’s Big Bullet, 1996), social and political commentaries (Jacob Cheung’s 
Cageman, 1992, Mabel Cheung’s The Soong Sisters, 1997), exploitation  lms and 
risqué erotica (Michael Mak’s Sex and Zen, 1991 and Wong Jing’s Naked Killers, 
1992), horror  lms (the Pang Brothers’ The Eye, 2002), and gay cinema (Stanley 
Kwan’s Lan Yu, 2001) are amongst those that suggest how the Hong Kong  lm 
censorship system neither restricts nor hinders creative expressions in  lm.
The current setting
Hong Kong is one of Asia’s most proli c  lm producers and exporters. However, 
unlike the situation in Malaysia and Australia, where quite detailed statistics on 
the  lm industries are available to researchers,113 in Hong Kong such information 
could not be obtained for this book. Over the last decade, its  lm industry has 
produced an average of 55  lms a year. As there is no longer any major production 
studio dominating the  lm industry, most of the  lms released in the past decade 
were produced by these key entities – Media Asia Film, Emperor Motion Pictures, 
China Star Entertainment, Film Workshop Limited and Milkyway Image. In 
2010, the Hong Kong  lm industry produced 54 feature  lms with a total 
investment amount of USD104 million.114 With regard to the exhibition sector, 
there were 49 cinemas, consisting of 208 screens as at December 2010.115 The 
sector is dominated by cinema chains such as Golden Harvest Cinema, Broadway 
Circuit and UA Cinemas. Hong Kong  lms are usually distributed through 
Newport Circuit and Gala Film Distribution while foreign  lms’ distribution is 
handled mainly by Edko Circuit, Golden Scene Company Limited, United Artists, 
AMC Circuit and Pan Asia Circuit.116 Distribution of  lms in the DVD and VCD 
formats is led by companies like Fortune Star, Joy Sales Films and Videos 
Distributor and Mei Ah Film Company.
The government’s involvement in the industry
Since the establishment of the HKSAR in 1997, the government has set up a 
number of institutions and launched numerous initiatives to further develop the 
 lm industry. The key institutions and initiatives are discussed below.
THE FILM SERVICES OFFICE
The Film Services Of ce (FSO) was set up in 1998 to create and maintain an 
environment that is conducive to the long term development of the  lm industry, to 
promote local  lms abroad, to maintain Hong Kong’s status as a major  lm 
producing centre and to enhance Hong Kong’s position as a  lm trading and service 
hub in the Asia-Paci c region.117 The FSO (which operates under the Commerce 

26 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
and Economic Development Bureau of the HKSAR) co-ordinates and facilitates 
 lm production and on-location  lming in the territory. All the services provided by 
the FSO are free of charge and they include applications for  lming permits (from 
the relevant government agencies), liaising with owners or managements to make 
available their premises for  lming and regulating the use of pyrotechnics and 
dangerous materials for producing special effects in  lm production. The FSO also 
streamlines the various application procedures to establish a ‘production-friendly’ 
environment (in terms of convenience and lower  lming costs) for  lm practitioners.
THE HONG KONG FILM DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
The Hong Kong Film Development Council (HKFDC), which comprises members 
of the  lm fraternity and government agencies, was established in 2007 to advise 
the government on the overall policy, strategy and institutional arrangement for 
both short and long term development of the  lm industry.118 The recent major 
initiative undertaken by the HKFDC is the Hong Kong Film New Action project 
whereby large scale promotions have been carried out with a view to redeveloping 
markets for Hong Kong productions. Under this project, the HKFDC facilitates 
direct negotiations between foreign distributors, exhibitors and investors and Hong 
Kong  lm practitioners, commissions extensive market surveys (with the aim of 
providing  lm practitioners with data and analysis to better understand recent 
market trends in other countries), generates publicity for new  lm-making talents, 
and sends delegations to targeted new markets to promote Hong Kong  lms.119
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE SCHEMES
There are two  nancial schemes put in place by the HKSAR government to support 
the  lm industry. First, the Film Development Fund was set up in 1999 to support 
 lm or  lm-related projects.120 A total of HKD 300 million was injected into this 
fund in 2007 to expand its scope into  nancing small and medium budget  lm 
productions.121 In addition to  nancing  lm productions, the fund is also utilized to 
 nance projects aimed at promoting Hong Kong  lms abroad, to train local talent 
in  lm production and distribution as well as to enhance the appreciation of Hong 
Kong  lms by local audiences. Second, the Film Guarantee Fund was introduced 
in 2003 to assist production companies in obtaining loans (for the purpose of  lm 
production) from  nancial institutions and to create conducive  lm  nancing 
infrastructure in Hong Kong.122 Loan guarantees are provided to applicants who 
ful l the criteria irrespective of the theme and content of the  lm to be made. The 
scheme guarantees the repayment of 50 per cent of the loan amount provided by 
the lending institution to the applicant-production company. At any one time, a 
production company may be eligible for a loan guarantee for one  lm project only 
and that  lm must be intended for commercial theatrical release in Hong Kong.123
Other initiatives include the Hong Kong International Film and TV Market 
(FILMART), organized by the Hong Kong Trade Development Council to 
promote cross-media and cross-industry co-operation in  nancing, distribution 

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 27
and broadcasting; and the Hong Kong-Asia Financing Forum, a platform to 
facilitate co-production ventures between Asian  lm practitioners and investors.
Australia
An overview of the jurisdiction
The Commonwealth of Australia was established on 1 January 1901 (from the 
federation of British colonies)124 with the adoption of the Australian Constitution.125
Being a federal constitutional democracy,126 the country comprises six states 
and three territories with legislative, executive and judicial powers shared between 
the federal, state and territory institutions.127 Within each of these political units, 
there is a parliament elected by the people, an executive and an independent 
judiciary, exemplifying the doctrine of separation of powers between the three 
branches of government. The federal legislature is bicameral, comprising the 
Queen (represented by the Governor-General), the Senate (the upper house) and 
the House of Representatives (the lower house).128 The executive branch is headed 
by the Prime Minister, who is the leader of the party with majority support in the 
lower house, while the judiciary is led by the Chief Justice.
In common with Malaysia and Hong Kong, Australia has a common law legal 
system.129 At the federal level, there are four principal courts (known as the 
Commonwealth courts) and they are the High Court (the highest court and hence  nal 
court of appeal with both original and appellate jurisdiction), the Federal Court (which 
sits in each State and in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory 
when necessary),130 the Family Court (a specialist court dealing with family disputes) 
and the Federal Magistrates Court (established to handle less complex disputes under 
Commonwealth laws). There are also state and territory courts established to decide 
on cases brought under state or territory laws as well as cases arising under federal 
laws where jurisdiction is conferred on them.131 The Supreme Courts are the highest 
state and territory courts and they deal with both civil and criminal cases.
Interestingly, the Australian Constitution does not contain a bill of rights. 
Therefore, free speech is not expressly guaranteed in a constitutional document, 
unlike the situation in Malaysia and the HKSAR. It was observed that ‘unlike the 
basic laws of most nations, the Australian Constitution does not contain an express 
guarantee of freedom of expression… Nor has legislation providing such a 
guarantee been enacted at a federal or state level in Australia’.132 However, there 
is an implied freedom of political communication in Australia. The High Court in 
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation held:133
‘… the freedom of communication which the Constitution protects is not 
absolute. It is limited to what is necessary for the effective operation of the system 
of representative and responsible government provided for by the Constitution.’
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation and the subsequent case of 
Coleman v Power134 set out a test to determine whether a law is invalid due to 

28 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
the implied freedom of political communication. The ‘reasonably appropriate 
and adapted test’, as it is called, poses two questions for the determination of 
the validity of a law.135 First, does the law effectively burden freedom of 
communication about government or political matters either in its terms, 
operation or effect? Second, if the law effectively burdens that freedom, is the 
law reasonably appropriate and adapted to serve a legitimate end [in a 
manner]136 which is compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally 
prescribed system of representative and responsible government and the 
procedure prescribed by s 128 for submitting a proposed amendment of the 
Constitution to the informed decision of the people? If the  rst question is 
answered ‘yes’ and the second is answered ‘no’, then the law in question is 
invalid. The High Court in Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation also 
observed that: 
Unlike the First Amendment [to the US Constitution]… which has been 
interpreted to confer private rights, our Constitution contains no express right 
of freedom of communication or expression. Within our legal system, 
communications are free only to the extent that they are left unburdened by 
laws that comply with the Constitution.137
Australia is a culturally diverse society. The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
tabulated a total population of 22.1 million in 2010.138 About 89 per cent of the 
population is urban and the ethnicity breakdown is as follows: white 92 per cent 
(population of European descent), Asian 7 per cent and Aboriginal and others 1 
per cent.139 Australia has no state religion.140 In the most recent census, 25.8 per 
cent of the population identi ed themselves as Catholics, making it the largest 
religious community in the country. This is followed by Anglican (18.7 per cent), 
Uniting Church (5.7 per cent), Presbyterian and Reformed (3 per cent), Orthodox 
(2.7 per cent), other Christian (7.9 per cent), Buddhist (2.1 per cent), Muslim (1.7 
per cent) and others (2.4 per cent). Approximately 11.3 per cent of the respondents 
did not specify their religious belief while 18.7 per cent of them cited ‘No religion’ 
in the census.141 English is the most widely used language (by 78.5 per cent of the 
population) and is the de facto national language of Australia.142 Other major 
languages used in the country include Chinese, Italian, Greek and Vietnamese.
The country has a free-market economy with a large service sector.143 It is also 
an exporter of natural resources, energy and agricultural products. Australia’s 
GDP (purchasing power parity) totalled USD 901.5 billion in 2010, with a GDP 
per capita of USD 40,600 – ranking 19th internationally.144
An overview of the Australian  lm industry
The background
Film exhibition began as early as the late 1890s in Australia (which was not yet a 
single nation at that time, but a collection of British colonies).145 The earliest 

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 29
Australian  lms were made in 1896 in the documentary genre and in 1906, The 
Story of the Kelly Gang (Charles Tait), which is claimed to be the world’s  rst 
feature-length  lm, was produced.146 In the period of 1906 to 1911, Australia 
became the world’s largest  lm producing country where more than 150 feature 
 lms were made.147 In 1913, Australasian Films – a merger of nearly all the major 
Australian  lm companies – was established to produce, distribute and exhibit 
 lms. Australasian Films’ oligopolistic approach controlled the marketplace at 
that time by limiting its own productions and at the same time refusing to exhibit 
 lms made by others.148
The  lm industry’s development stalled in the late 1920s due to the effects of 
the Great Depression and in the subsequent four decades due to the dominance of 
Hollywood productions and the arrival of television.149 This downward spiral 
continued until the 1960s, with only a handful of  lms being produced 
sporadically. Film productions during this era were primarily carried out by two 
companies, FT Films and Cinesound Productions, and very seldom were there 
more than three  lms made in a single year.150 It was during this ‘down period’ 
that Charles Chauvel made the breakthrough Jedda (1955), the  rst feature  lm 
produced in colour by an Australian company and the  rst featuring Aborigines 
in leading roles.151
The 1960s saw social and cultural change in Australia where its populace, 
with an increased sense of nationalism, felt the need for an Australian identity. 
The government began to intervene actively in the arts and ‘re-establish’ the 
 lm industry to produce  lms that de ned and presented Australia and its 
culture to itself and to the world.152 The Australia Council for the Arts was set 
up in 1967 and in the following year, it announced plans for the  lm industry 
which resulted in the establishment of the Australian Film Development 
Corporation in 1970 (subsequently re-established as the Australian Film 
Commission, AFC).153 The AFC played a key role in encouraging  lm production 
in the 1970s, primarily by providing direct funding and investment. State-
funded  lm agencies were also established to provide assistance and support to 
the  lm fraternity.
The 1970s was the era of the Australian  lm revival (also referred to as the 
‘emergence of the New Australian Cinema’ by  lm scholars)154 when the AFC 
along with state  lm agencies were the major players in the industry, investing in 
90 per cent of the  lms made during that period and contributing more than 60 per 
cent of the overall funds.155 The  lms produced in the 1970s have unique and 
distinctive ‘Australian traits’, for example, the ‘ocker comedy’ genre with  lms 
such as Stork (Tim Burstall, 1971) and The Adventures of Barry McKenzie (Bruce 
Beresford, 1972). The decade also saw the birth of highly acclaimed  lms that 
placed Australia on the world’s  lm-making map like Walkabout (Nicholas Roeg, 
1971), Picnic at Hanging Rock (Peter Weir, 1975) and The Devil’s Playground 
(Fred Schepisi, 1976).156
In the 1980s, the Australian government provided further assistance to the 
industry in the form of tax incentives and concessions for capital expenditure on 
 lm production. A tax incentive commonly known as the Division 10BA scheme 

30 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
was introduced in 1981 to attract private investment in  lm productions.157 As a 
result of this scheme, 900  lm projects were launched within eight years (1981 to 
1988) leading to a boom in  lm production.158 One of the most commercially 
successful  lms produced was Crocodile Dundee (Peter Faiman, 1986) which 
became the highest grossing Australian  lm released domestically and the highest 
grossing  lm in the world in 1986.159 In 1988, the Film Finance Corporation 
Australia (FFC) was established to act as the principal entity in  lm  nancing and 
investment. The FFC then became the major government investor in Australian 
 lms and some of the more successful titles  nanced in part by the FFC in the 
1990s and 2000s include Strictly Ballroom (Baz Luhrmann, 1992), Shine (Scott 
Hicks, 1996), Lantana (Ray Lawrence, 2001) and The Home Song Stories (Tony 
Ayres, 2007). These  lms, in addition to being commercially successful160 were 
also critically acclaimed.161 There were also successful  lms produced outside of 
the FFC funding mechanism. The most remarkable being Philip Noyce’s Rabbit 
Proof Fence (2002), a  lm prompted by the Bringing Them Home report – the 
national inquiry into the thousands of Aboriginal children forcibly removed from 
their families by state authorities.
Besides commercial successes domestically and increasing sales in 
international markets, Australian  lms (like those produced in Hong Kong) 
also feature prominently at international  lm festivals, garnering accolades and 
critical acclaim. For example, in 1993, The Piano (Jane Campion) won the 
Palm D’Or (at the Festival de Cannes) and three Academy Awards while Bad 
Boy Bubby (Rolf de Heer, 1993) won four awards at the Venice Film Festival. 
In 1997, Shine (Scott Hicks) garnered seven Academy Awards nominations 
and in 2006, Rolf de Heer’s Ten Canoes won the Prix Special du Jury at the 
Festival de Cannes.
The productions that have emerged since the 1970s also illustrate the variety of 
 lms produced by the Australian  lm industry – from ‘outback’  lms to fantasy- 
horror  lms, from exploitation  lms to critical commentaries on social issues, as 
well as other  lm genres. Film scholar Jonathan Rayner succinctly summed it up: 
‘After thirty years the Australian cinema has largely accomplished its commercial 
and artistic  lmmaking objectives, and created a recognisable local and global 
identity as well as markets and consumers for its productions.’162
The current setting
The Australian  lm industry produced an average of 30 feature  lms and two 
international co-production features a year.163 Table 2.3 shows the number of 
feature  lms produced annually, their total production costs as well as the domestic 
box of ce receipts of Australian  lms from 2000 to 2010.164
In Australia, all production companies operating outside television networks 
are described as ‘independent production companies’ and unlike the major studios 
in the United States, none of these companies dominate the  lm industry. 
Australian production companies usually raise funding with  lm investors and 
 lm agencies on a project by project basis.165

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 31
Table 2.3 The Australian  lm production sector in  gures, 2000 2010
Year
Number of feature 
 lms produced
Total production costs
(in Australian Dollar)
Gross domestic box 
of ce collections
(in Australian Dollars)
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
27
25
27
19
22
29
32
30
34
32
41
142 million
162 million
170 million
 71 million
224 million
112 million
122 million
272 million
223 million
393 million
NA
54.2 million
63.4 million
41.8 million
30.3 million
11.9 million
23.1 million
40.0 million
36.0 million
35.5 million
54.8 million
50.6 million
* NA  Data not available
Film exhibition in the country is dominated by three companies – Hoyts, Village 
Roadshow and Greater Union, Birch Carroll & Coyle.166 Table 2.4 provides the 
number of cinema admissions, the gross box of ce revenues, the number of 
cinemas and screens as well as their total seating capacity from 2005 to 2010.167
As in many countries, the Australian domestic box of ce is dominated by 
blockbusters from Hollywood. Australian feature  lms accounted for, on average, 
5.5 per cent of the total gross takings at the box of ce in the past ten years. In 
2010, for example, Australian  lms earned AUD 50.6 million or 4.5 per cent of 
the total grosses.168 The distribution sector of the industry is led by af liates of the 
major American  lm studios. The  ve main distributors are United International 
Pictures, Twentieth Century Fox, Columbia, Buena Vista and Warner Brothers 
(via Village Roadshow). Other key distributors in Australia include Icon Film 
Distribution and Madman Entertainment. Most of these distributors do not own 
cinemas but have some sort of an ‘exclusive agreement’ with exhibitors to supply 
their  lms to be screened in their respective cinema chains.169
Table 2.4 The Australian  lm exhibition sector in  gures, 2005 2010
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Number of cinema admissions
Gross box of ce receipts
Number of cinemas
Number of screens
Total seating capacity
82.2 
million
AUD 
817.5 
million
519
1943
473,000
83.6 
million
AUD 
866.6 
million
494
1964
467,000
84.7 
million
AUD 
895.4 
million
485
1941
457,000
84.6 
million
AUD 
945.4 
million
493
1980
462,000
90.7 
million
AUD 
1,087.5 
million
492
1989
463,000
92.4 
million
AUD 
1,130.0 
million
474
1994
453,000

32 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
The government’s involvement in the industry
Signi cant involvement by the Australian government in the  lm industry began 
in the 1960s.170 The government’s involvement is mainly through direct  lm 
funding, tax incentives and concessions as well as establishing  lm agencies with 
the aim of fostering  lm production and  lm culture.171
The major  lm agencies established by the federal government include Screen 
Australia (which is a merger of the AFC, the FFC and Film Australia Limited), 
Aus lm and the National Film and Sound Archive. State governments also set up 
their own  lm agencies and they are Film Victoria, Northern Territory Film Of ce, 
New South Wales Film and Television Of ce, Paci c Film and Television 
Commission (Queensland), South Australian Film Corporation, Screen Tasmania, 
Screen West (Western Australia) and Screen ACT (Australian Capital Territory). 
These state-based agencies along with Aus lm provide location services to  lm 
practitioners, encourage local  lm productions through  nancial incentives,172 and 
support local  lm culture initiatives. They also provide  lm development and 
production support to projects originating from, or intending to have some 
production or post-production works in the agency’s particular state. The types of 
incentive and support vary from state to state. For example, Film Victoria invests 
in  lm projects, promotes the state as a centre for production and provides  lm 
practitioners with assistance on locations, permits, taxation and unions matters 
while the Paci c Film and Television Commission assists  lm practitioners to 
create, develop,  nance and market their projects through its 15 assistance schemes.
For the purpose of this book, only Screen Australia, being the principal federal-
based agency, and the Australian Screen Production Incentive, being the main set 
of the federal government’s initiatives, will be discussed.
SCREEN AUSTRALIA
Screen Australia was established in 2008 under the Screen Australia Act 2008. It 
brings together the functions of the FFC and Film Australia as well as most of the 
functions of the AFC. Acting as the key federal government direct funding body for 
the Australian screen production industry, the primary roles of Screen Australia are:
1 
to act as a centralized funding body, providing production  nancing for a 
range of screen productions including feature  lms and documentaries;173
2 
to encourage private investment in Australian screen production;
3 
to support Australian screen practitioners including providing development 
support for feature  lm and documentary projects as well as assisting 
practitioners in increasing the visibility and marketability of their projects 
both domestically and internationally;174
4 
to administer the Producer Offset incentive and the Australia International 
Co-production Program;175
5 
to support the development of screen culture in Australia; and
6 
to provide authoritative data and research to the  lm industry and government.

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 33
THE AUSTRALIAN SCREEN PRODUCTION INCENTIVE
In addition to providing funds via Screen Australia, the government also provides 
tax incentives to  lm practitioners. There are three types of tax incentive under the 
Australian Screen Production Incentive – the Producer Offset, Location Offset 
and Post, Digital and VFX Offset – introduced in 2007 with the aim of increasing 
production and assisting the industry to grow by developing sustainable 
businesses.176 These three mutually exclusive incentives, replaced the government’s 
earlier schemes – the Division 10BA scheme177 and the Film Licensed Investment 
Company (FLIC) scheme.178
The Producer Offset is a refundable tax offset for producers of quali ed screen 
productions. For feature  lms, this incentive offers a 40 per cent tax rebate of the 
Qualifying Australian Production Expenditure (QAPE, which is de ned as 
production expenditure reasonably attributable to goods, services and property 
provided by or used in Australia) incurred on the project.179 In addition to 
increasing local productions, the offset also encourages co-productions by 
providing an avenue to attract overseas investment in Australian projects. In order 
to be quali ed for the offset, a feature  lm must ful l the following criteria:180
1 
it must be completed;
2 
it must have a suf cient level of signi cant Australian content or it must be 
an of cial co-production;
3 
its QAPE must meet or exceed the relevant threshold (that is, AUD 500,000 
for a feature  lm);
4 
the applicant must be an Australian company or a foreign company with a 
permanent establishment in Australia;
5 
the applicant must have either carried out, or made arrangements for carrying 
out, all the activities necessary for the making of the  lm;
6 
the  lm must be produced for theatrical release in commercial cinemas.
The offset is applied against the taxable income of the applicant for the year, with 
any remainder being refunded in cash. Access to the Producer Offset will not bar 
a producer or production company from accessing other tax incentives provided 
by state  lm agencies.181
The Refundable Film Tax Offset (RFTO) was introduced in 2001 to encourage 
foreign productions to use Australian locations, cast, crews and service providers 
in producing their  lms.182 The RFTO was renamed the Location Offset in 2007 
and at present, it provides for a 16.5 per cent offset on a minimum of AUD 15 
million expenditure. This 16.5 per cent offset, which is calculated from a 
production’s QAPE, may represent between a 10 per cent to 15 per cent cash 
subsidy on the total budget of an eligible production.183 The Post, Digital and VFX 
Offset was introduced to assist the Australian visual effects, post-production and 
animation sector. Under this incentive, a 30 per cent offset is available for projects 
that spend at least AUD 500,000 in qualifying post, digital and visual effects 
expenditures in Australia.184 These would include expenditures on visual effects, 

34 The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia
audio and visual editing and green-screen photography tasks and the offset would 
apply irrespective of whether or not the production was shot in Australia.
Summary
Film production started at different points of time in the three jurisdictions covered 
in this book. The  rst to commence  lm production was Australia, where  lms 
were produced as early as 1906, followed by Hong Kong in 1923 and Malaysia in 
1933. Over the years, the  lm industries have undergone cycles of ‘success’ and 
‘failure’, and each has enjoyed a ‘golden era’ where the number of local 
productions soared and local  lms enjoyed popularity amongst domestic audiences 
in the face of strong competition from foreign  lms. The Malaysian  lm industry 
experienced this in the 1960s, the Australian  lm industry in the 1970s and the 
Hong Kong  lm industry in the 1980s.
At present, the production sectors of the  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong 
Kong and Australia are made up of independent production companies. There are 
no dominating studios or enterprises in the industries like there once were. The 
three sectors of the industry – production, distribution and exhibition – are now 
largely separated (although some prudent exhibitors also double as distributors) 
and therefore there is no oligopolistic control of the  lm markets. The Hong Kong 
 lm industry produces the highest number of  lms amongst the three industries 
under study. It produces, on average, 55  lms a year, while the Australian and 
Malaysian  lm industries produce, on average, 31 and 30  lms per year 
respectively. There are higher numbers of co-productions with foreign investors 
in the Hong Kong and Australian  lm industries compared to the Malaysian  lm 
industry, where the number of joint-production projects is negligible.
Malaysian  lms are made primarily for the domestic market. Overseas markets 
are very limited and the occasions of foreign distribution and exhibition are rare.185 
The market for Australian  lms is comparatively wider, partly because of the 
language of the  lms, covering in particular the United States and the United 
Kingdom. Amongst the three  lm industries, Hong Kong has the biggest market 
size where their  lms are distributed and exhibited in China, the United States, the 
United Kingdom, Australia, Japan, Korea, and South East Asian countries. The 
Hong Kong and Australian  lm industries have also produced a far greater number 
of  lms of acknowledged critical and aesthetic standing over the last 30 years. 
Those  lms are not only remarkable in terms of artistic achievement and commercial 
success but also encompass more genres and wider subject matters than Malaysian 
 lms. Hong Kong and Australian  lms are featured more prominently at prestigious 
international  lm festivals, winning accolades and critical admiration.
In terms of distribution and exhibition, the Malaysian, Hong Kong and 
Australian marketplaces are, at present, dominated by Hollywood productions. 
Domestic  lms’ share of the total national box of ce did not exceed 50 per cent of 
the gross receipts over the past decade. Hong Kong  lms accounted for, on 
average in the ten years up to 2010, 30.8 per cent of the total gross takings at the 
domestic box of ce, followed by Malaysian  lms with 16.3 per cent and Australian 

The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 35
 lms with 4.7 per cent.186 The total box of ce receipts of these three industries 
also differ where Australia has the highest gross receipts with an average of AUD 
740 million annually in the  ve years up to 2010.187 Cinema admissions were also 
the highest in Australia with an average of 85.2 million per year in the  ve years 
up to 2010, followed by Malaysia and Hong Kong.188
The Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian governments are involved in their 
respective  lm industries through agencies set up to promote the development of 
the industries and to provide assistance to  lm practitioners. However, each 
government entered the scene at a different time – the Australian government 
started its active participation in the 1970s, the Malaysian government began in the 
1980s and the HKSAR government got involved in the late 1990s. The governments’ 
intention or purpose in being involved in the industry also differs. The Malaysian 
and Australian governments aim to foster a national identity through  lms as well 
as to ensure the creation and availability of screen content for local and international 
audiences while the Hong Kong government’s involvement appears to be more 
inclined towards commerciality rather than social or cultural reasons. The types of 
incentive and support introduced also differ, although they are principally  nancial 
in form. In Malaysia and Australia, tax incentives or rebates are provided. Malaysian 
producers may claim the refund of entertainment duties levied on cinema ticket 
sales while Australian production companies may apply for various kinds of tax 
offset or concession at the federal and state levels. Neither entertainment nor 
production tax incentives are offered in Hong Kong but the government has 
introduced a scheme to guarantee loans provided by  nancial institutions to  lm 
practitioners, an effort to create conducive  lm  nancing infrastructure.
Each of the three governments has also introduced a form of incentive or 
scheme that is unique to their respective  lm industry. In Malaysia, there is the 
Compulsory Screening Scheme where quali ed local  lms will enjoy guaranteed 
public exhibition in major cinemas across the country for a period of time. In Hong 
Kong, major events such as  lm festivals and  lm markets are held annually to 
promote local  lms, to enhance Hong Kong’s position as a  lm trading and service 
hub and to serve as platforms for joint ventures with foreign distributors, exhibitors 
and investors. Large scale efforts have also been carried out to develop new 
markets for local productions. In Australia, comprehensive support and assistance 
are available to potential projects – from script development to production, and 
 nally the marketing of the completed  lm both locally and internationally.189
Government agencies – FINAS in Malaysia, the FSO and HKFDC in Hong 
Kong and Screen Australia and state government bodies in Australia – also invest 
in or fund  lm productions. The HKFDC  nances small and medium budget 
productions through the Film Development Fund that it administers, the Australian 
agencies provide direct funding and investment in select  lm projects, whereas 
FINAS funds certain ‘nationalistic’ productions.190 The purpose of  lm investment 
and project funding again appears to differ. Where FINAS and Screen Australia 
aim to ensure the creation of national screen content, FSO and HKFDC appear to 
do so more for commercial considerations.

3 
Film censorship systems in 
Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia
 
The laws, guidelines and 
processes
Introduction
There are three types of censorship system in which  lms are regulated. The  rst 
can be termed a state-based regulation system where entities are of cially 
established under legislative instruments to examine  lms prior to their availability 
to the public. Such entities operate under the purview of a government ministry or 
department and exert formal powers to censor  lms. This system is the most 
common of the three and it is adopted in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia. The 
second system can be termed an industry self-regulation system as exempli ed by 
the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) in the United States of 
America where the entity responsible to rate productions was set up by the  lm 
industry itself. The third system is regulation by an independent body as 
represented by the British Board of Film Classi cation (BBFC) in the United 
Kingdom. The BBFC was established by the cinema industry in 1912 to provide 
centralized and consistent  lm classi cation.1 In the 1940s, it became an 
independent body funded by the fees charged for  lm classi cation. The BBFC is 
independent of both the British government and the  lm industry.2
The  lm censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia are made 
up of their respective  lm censorship laws, guidelines and processes. This chapter 
discusses the main features of the laws and guidelines and describes the censorship 
processes. Each piece of legislation forming the legal basis for  lm censorship in 
the three jurisdictions under study came into force at different times and each has 
its distinctive features for the censorship processes. In addition to legislation, each 
jurisdiction also has a set of guidelines to assist censors in making their decisions. 
All three sets of guidelines contain a list of prohibited types of  lm and content, 
some of which are peculiar to each set of guidelines.3 There is no absolute freedom 
of expression for  lm practitioners and no absolute freedom of choice for adults 
in these jurisdictions. Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia have systematic  lm 
censorship processes in place and the structure of each process is, to a large extent, 
similar:  lms are censored and classi ed prior to their availability to the public; 
censorship is carried out based on legislative provisions and guidelines; and 
decisions made at the  rst instance may be reviewed by appealing to a higher-
ranking decision-making entity.

The laws, guidelines and processes 37
The Malaysian system
The law: Film Censorship Act 2002 (Act 620)
The legislation regulating  lm censorship in Malaysia is the Film Censorship Act 
2002 (Act 620). It came into force on 1 April 2002, repealing and replacing the 
Film (Censorship) Act 1952 (Act 35).4 When the Film Censorship Bill 2001 was 
tabled for its second reading, the then Deputy Minister of Home Affairs stated that 
because  lm has strong effects on the behaviour, attitude and lifestyle of the 
people, it was the responsibility of the government to enact laws to ensure that the 
noble values of Malaysians were not eroded by the presence of undesirable content 
in  lms.5
The Film Censorship Act 2002 is divided into eight parts. Part I deals with 
preliminary matters,6 Part II provides for the establishment of the Board of Censors 
while Part III makes provisions for the control of  lms and  lm publicity materials 
by setting out the mechanics of submitting  lms and  lm publicity materials for 
censorship.7 Part III also provides for the making of alterations to  lms as required 
by the Board of Censors,8 the issuance of censorship certi cates,9 as well as the 
requirement to display the mark of approval, censorship certi cate, classi cation 
and the name and address of the person who exhibits, distributes, displays or sells 
the  lm.10 Part IV establishes the Appeal Committee and provides a mechanism 
enabling  lm practitioners who are dissatis ed with the decision of the Board of 
Censors to appeal to the Appeal Committee.11 Part V contains provisions 
conferring powers on the Home Minister to issue directions,12 prohibitions13 and 
exemptions14 as well as to make regulations under the Act.15 Part VI then deals 
with powers relating to the enforcement of the Act and includes powers to 
investigate, search, seize and arrest. Penalties are also prescribed for speci c 
offences under the legislation.16 Part VII contains miscellaneous matters, including 
prosecution of censorship offences.17 The  nal part of the Act, Part VIII, deals 
with repeal, transitional and saving provisions.18 The Schedule to the Act provides 
for the administration and the conduct of meetings of the Board and the Committee.
The guidelines: Film Censorship Guidelines 1993
The censorship guidelines applied by the Board of Censors are known as the 
Garis Panduan Lembaga Penapis Filem 1993 or Film Censorship Guidelines 
1993 which were issued in the Malay language by the Prime Minister’s Department 
and approved by Cabinet on 17 November 1993.19 The Guidelines have since been 
applied as a guide for making censorship decisions until 15 March 2010 where 
they were replaced by a new set of guidelines known as the Garis Panduan 
Penapisan Filem or Film Censorship Guidelines.20 As is explained in Chapter 7, 
only minor changes and few improvements have been made and it may well be 
argued that the 2010 Guidelines are even more vague and convoluted than the 
1993 ones. Since the 2010 Guidelines are relatively new, it is unclear how they 
will be applied by censors and a more substantial amount of time would be needed 
to observe emerging patterns of application and their consequent effects. 

38 The laws, guidelines and processes
Additionally, on 21 December 2011 the Home Ministry announced that it will 
gradually cease censoring  lms and is considering substituting the current 
censorship arrangement with some form of industry regulation scheme. However, 
as of 1 June 2012, no changes have been made to the law and overall censorship 
scheme21 and it appears very unlikely that a new scheme will be enforced in the 
near future.22 Therefore, the initial focus remains on the 1993 Guidelines which 
have been in use for 17 years and clearly informed practitioners’ views during the 
 eldwork. The 2010 Guidelines will be textually examined and commented on in 
Chapter 7 in light of the  eldwork, when proposals for the reform of the Malaysian 
 lm censorship system are made.
Unlike in Hong Kong and Australia, there is no speci c provision in the 
Malaysian  lm censorship law that expressly provides for the power to make 
censorship guidelines. However, sections 19C and 28(2)(c) of the repealed Film 
(Censorship) Act 1952 (Act 35) may have empowered the relevant minister to 
draw up the guidelines.23 In any event, no challenge was ever made to the 1993 
Guidelines, and the 2002 Act does give the Home Minister power, as noted above, 
to issue directions as to the process to be followed in censorship.
The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 comprises six parts.24 Part A of the 
Guidelines lays down the general principles of  lm censorship in the following terms:
1 
to protect Malaysian society from the possibility of negative in uences 
resulting from watching  lms which may drive them to engage in immoral acts 
or to sympathize with ideologies that are inconsistent with the Rukunegara;25
2 
to prevent the exhibition and distribution of anti-government  lms and  lms 
that may offend other countries, especially ASEAN and Islamic countries or 
their leaders;
3 
to prevent the exhibition and distribution of  lms that propagate false 
teachings, deviations, criticisms or insults against any religion;
4 
to safeguard racial harmony;
5 
to serve as a code of conduct to promote the noble values of Malaysian society;
6 
to prevent the good name of individuals or organizations from being tarnished 
due to the screening of a  lm.
Part B of the Guidelines deals with the de nition of ‘ lm’, Part C provides for the 
steps to be followed by censors in censoring  lms and Part D sets out the eight 
questions that censors must consider before making a censorship decision. Parts C 
and D are examined further below, where the  lm censorship process in Malaysia 
is discussed. Under Part E, the types of  lm, content and portrayal that are not 
allowed to be exhibited and distributed in Malaysia are categorized into four 
broad headings referred to as ‘censorship elements’: ‘Ideology and Politics’, 
‘Religion’, ‘Socio-culture’ and ‘Order and Decorum’. Brief particulars of the 
prohibited types of  lm, content and portrayal are stated under each of these 
elements. Part F, the concluding part of the Guidelines, states that they are to be 
applied responsibly and that censors should be mindful of the aspiration of the 
government to create a Malaysian race that is culturally advanced and morally 

The laws, guidelines and processes 39
honourable. The appendix to the Guidelines entitled ‘Garis Panduan Terperinci 
Bagi Panduan Lembaga Penapis Filem Dalam Tontontapis Sesebuah Filem’ 
(Detailed Guidelines for the Guidance of the Board of Film Censors in Censoring 
Films)26 provides additional descriptions to some of the particulars mentioned 
under the four censorship elements stated in Part E.
The Guidelines are not published in the Gazette but copies are made available 
to  lm practitioners upon request purportedly to assist them in making production 
decisions as well as decisions in relation to acquiring exhibition and distribution 
rights to foreign  lms. However, many  lm practitioners have commented that the 
Guidelines are vague, inconclusive and confusing.27 Persistent calls have been 
made by  lm practitioners for a clearer set of guidelines to be introduced for the 
bene t of the  lm industry. The Dasar Per leman Negara (National Film Policy) 
which was approved by the Cabinet on 23 February 2005 had highlighted this 
issue by pointing out that the Guidelines lacked clarity and, therefore, its 
application had caused signi cant problems to  lm practitioners.
The process
Section 9 of the Film Censorship Act 2002 requires  lms to be submitted to the 
Board of Censors for censorship purposes before they can be exhibited and 
distributed to the public. The censorship process of a foreign  lm is similar to that 
of a local  lm. After a  lm is received for censorship purposes, the Chairman of 
the Board of Censors will appoint three or more members from the Board to form 
a panel to examine the  lm. A larger panel may be formed if the Chairman is of 
the opinion that the  lm to be examined is controversial or that there may be 
dif cult issues that would arise from the  lm.28 After viewing the  lm, the panel 
will then determine whether there is any scene, dialogue, sound or subtitle that 
should be altered based on the censorship guidelines. If alteration to the  lm is 
necessary, the panel will consider a set of eight questions stated in Part D of the 
Guidelines in order to determine the extent of alteration that should be made. 
These questions are:
1 
What is the genre of the  lm?
2 
What is the theme of the  lm?
3 
What is the message of the  lm?
4 
Are there any lessons to be learned from the  lm?
5 
Does the  lm have the possibility of in uencing a particular age group?
6 
Does the  lm over-revere or venerate any particular race, religion, country or 
ideology?
7 
Does the  lm have the possibility of offending any particular race, religion or 
country?
8 
Is the  lm compatible with the nation’s aspiration?
Under section 10(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002, there are three types of 
decision that the Board of Censors can make after examining a  lm and they are:

40 The laws, guidelines and processes
1 
approve the  lm for exhibition without any alteration;
2 
approve the  lm for exhibition with such alteration as the Board may require;
3 
refuse to approve the  lm for exhibition.29
After a decision is made, a censorship report will be prepared and submitted to the 
Chairman of the Board of Censors for approval. If the Chairman disagrees with 
the decision, he may request further viewing and deliberation by a larger panel.
The censorship decision is to be communicated to the owner of the  lm in writing.30 
If a  lm is approved for exhibition subject to alteration or if a  lm is refused approval, 
the Board must provide reasons for its decision.31 If a  lm is approved subject to 
alteration being made, the Board will seek the  lm owner’s consent to make such 
alteration. If consent is withheld, the  lm will be refused approval for exhibition and 
will be returned to its owner. It is provided under section 11(1) of the Act that 
alteration to a  lm may be made either by the Board or by the owner of the  lm.32
Films that are approved for exhibition and distribution will be classi ed under 
section 15 of the Act. There were  ve classi cation categories applicable in 
Malaysia prior to the introduction of the Film Censorship Guidelines on 15 March 
2010 and they are summarized in Table 3.1. It is noteworthy that  lms that are 
classi ed in restricted categories – 18SG; 18SX; 18PA and 18PL – may still be 
subject to alteration and not released in their entirety.33
In January 2012, these classi cation categories were replaced with a new and 
simpli ed set of categories and they are: ‘U’ (for general audience, suitable for 
viewing by all levels of society); ‘P13’ (not recommended for viewing by persons 
under 13 years of age without guidance from parents or guardians); and ‘18’ 
(restricted to persons of 18 years of age and over only). After a  lm is classi ed, 
a censorship certi cate will be issued34 and it is an offence if the classi cation 
mark is not displayed or if the  lm owner displays a classi cation which is 
different from that given by the Board.35
Table 3.1 Film classi cation categories applicable in Malaysia
Classi cation category
Description
U: For general audience
18SG: For 18 and above
18SX: For 18 and above
18PA: For 18 and above
18PL: For 18 and above
Suitable for viewing by all levels of society.
Contains elements of violence or horror that are not 
excessive. Suitable for viewing by those who are 18 years 
old and above only.
Contains elements of sex that are not excessive. Suitable for 
viewing by those who are 18 years old and above only.
Contains religious, social or political elements. Suitable for 
viewing by those who are 18 years old and above only.
Contains a combination of two or more elements of 
violence, horror or sex that are not excessive or contains 
religious, social or political elements. Suitable for viewing 
by those who are 18 years old and above only.

The laws, guidelines and processes 41
In addition to submitting a  lm for censorship purposes,  lm practitioners are 
also required to submit every  lm’s publicity material36 to the Board for its approval 
before such material can be displayed, distributed or circulated.37 The Board may 
approve the material without alteration, or approve it with such alteration as the 
Board may require, or refuse to approve it.38 If the Board approves publicity 
material subject to alteration being made or refuses to approve it, reasons for the 
decision must be provided.39 In addition, the Home Minister has absolute discretion 
to prohibit the display, distribution, possession or circulation of a  lm’s publicity 
material, if the Minister is of the opinion that it would be contrary to public interest.
In the event a  lm owner is dissatis ed with the censorship decision made by 
the Board of Censors, the owner may appeal to the Appeal Committee under 
section 21(1) by submitting a notice of appeal within 30 days from when the 
owner is noti ed of the Board’s decision. The notice of appeal may contain the 
 lm owner’s representation40 and an appeal may be made in relation to a decision 
that the  lm is not approved for exhibition, in regard to alteration that is required 
to be made to the  lm, or in regard to the classi cation category given to the  lm. 
After an appeal is  led, the Appeal Committee, with a quorum of six members, 
will examine the  lm again and review the decision in question.41 The Committee 
may con rm, vary or reverse the decision of the Board. The Committee’s 
decision is said to be  nal and not to be challenged in court.42 The Home Minister 
has the power, under sections 26 and 28, to override censorship decisions made 
by the Board and the Committee. With section 48 providing that ‘no decision of 
the Minister, the Board or the Committee under this Act or any regulations made 
under this Act shall be subject to appeal or review by any court on any ground’, 
the  nal censorship decision appears to rest with the Minister and that ministerial 
power appears to be unfettered.43
The Hong Kong system
The law: Film Censorship Ordinance (Cap. 392)
The legislation constituting the legal basis for  lm censorship in Hong Kong is the 
Film Censorship Ordinance (Cap. 392), which came into force on 10 November 
1988.44 The Ordinance attempts to preserve the features of the earlier approach to 
censorship and to achieve two other objectives:  rst, to introduce a three-tier  lm 
classi cation scheme and second, to remove any ambiguity in the legal legitimacy 
of  lm censorship in the territory.45 The enactment of the Ordinance can be 
directly linked to the embarrassing ‘leak’ of the Executive Council’s con dential 
documents by the Asian Wall Street Journal in March 1987.46 According to those 
documents, the Hong Kong Government was well aware as early as 1972 that the 
censorship of  lms might be illegal because the principles of censorship were 
stated in internal guidelines and not in the regulations made under the Places of 
Public Entertainment Ordinance (Cap.172).47 The International Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights (ICCPR) was invoked during the consultative process and 
debates on the Film Censorship Bill.48 The main argument canvassed during the 

42 The laws, guidelines and processes
debates was whether section 10(2)(c) of the proposed bill was compatible with the 
principle of freedom of expression as provided for in Article 19 of the ICCPR.49 
Subsequently, Article 19 was referred to in section 10(3)(d) of the Ordinance 
where censors are required to take into account the article when determining the 
suitability of a  lm for exhibition. The inclusion of Article 19 was a historic event 
in Hong Kong, being the  rst incident where a provision of an international 
covenant has found its way into the domestic law.50
The Film Censorship Ordinance contains ten parts. Part I deals with preliminary 
matters51 while Part II provides for the establishment of the Film Censorship 
Authority,52 the Panel of Censors53 and the Panel of Advisers.54 Part III makes it 
an offence to exhibit a  lm unless the  lm has been issued with either a certi cate 
of exemption or a certi cate of approval by the Film Censorship Authority. Part 
IV55 sets up the mechanism for submission of  lms for censorship purposes. Part 
V56 then deals with  lm classi cation57 and the issuance of certi cates of approval, 
notice of refusal to approve and notice concerning excision of a  lm.58 Part VI 
provides that the certi cate of exemption or certi cate of approval issued must be 
displayed in a conspicuous position where the  lm is to be exhibited. Part VIA is 
of particular importance to  lm distributors as it deals with publication (release) 
of  lms in videotape and disc formats.59 Part VIB in turn deals with submission 
for approval of  lm advertising materials.60 Part VII establishes the Board of 
Review,61 sets out the functions of the Board and the procedures of review.62 The 
 nal part of the legislation, Part VIII, deals with enforcement and miscellaneous 
matters.63 This part provides for offences in relation to exhibition or distribution 
of Category III  lms64 as well as offences in relation to contravention of conditions 
endorsed on censorship certi cates and the revocation of censorship certi cates.65 
The power to make regulations under the Ordinance is provided under section 29 
and the power to make censorship guidelines is provided under section 30.
The guidelines: Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors
The censorship guidelines applied in Hong Kong are the Film Censorship 
Guidelines for Censors, which came into effect on 3 December 1999 and are 
available in both Chinese and English language versions. The Guidelines were 
made under section 30 of the Film Censorship Ordinance, which provides that the 
Secretary for Commerce and Economic Development may from time to time cause 
to be prepared and published in the Gazette, guidelines not inconsistent with the 
Ordinance, indicating the manner in which it is proposed that censors exercise their 
functions. In addition to  lm censorship, the Guidelines, which are divided into 11 
parts, also deal with other incidental matters such as  lm advertising materials.
Part I states that the Guidelines should be read in conjunction with the Film 
Censorship Ordinance; that each  lm must be considered on its own merits; and that 
the aim of censors should be ‘to re ect contemporary public attitudes towards 
censorship standards’.66 The  rst part also acknowledges that the results of public 
opinion surveys on  lm censorship standards and advice provided by the Panel of 
Advisers are of assistance to censors in making censorship decisions. The legal 

The laws, guidelines and processes 43
principles of  lm censorship are stated in Part II by reproducing sections 10(2) and (3) 
of the Ordinance.67 Part III then explains the rationale and functions of the three-tier 
classi cation scheme as well as describing the  lm classi cation categories applicable 
in Hong Kong. Paragraph 6 of the Guidelines states the rationale as follows:
The classi cation of  lms into a three-tier system gives adults the opportunity 
to see a wider range of  lms dealing with the realities of the adult world, but 
at the same time, restricts children and youth from viewing what could be 
harmful to them in a way or another.
The two functions of the scheme are to lay down ‘a set of legally enforceable rules 
to restrict admission and access to adult  lms by minors’ and to offer parents ‘some 
advance information about the suitability of the  lm’ to enable them to decide 
whether their children should be allowed to watch the  lm or not.68 Part IV then 
stipulates that the person who submits a  lm for censorship purposes is required to 
state the classi cation category that is being sought for the  lm, and the censor 
assigned to examine the  lm should attempt to accommodate this wish, but may 
indicate any other classi cation he or she would be prepared to give, or refuse 
approval.69 Part V, entitled ‘Approaches in Classi cation’, constitutes the bulk of the 
Guidelines. This part provides for the approaches to be taken in censoring  lms by 
setting the limits of six censorship elements; ‘Cruelty, Torture or Violence’, ‘Horror 
and Shock’, ‘Disability’, ‘Sex and Nudity’, ‘Language’ and ‘Offensive Behaviour 
and Criminality’. It is interesting to note that the Guidelines expressly acknowledged 
that, apart from the ‘Disability’ and ‘Offensive Behaviour and Criminality’ elements, 
the rest of the elements are either established art forms or the reality of life in Hong 
Kong. For example, under the ‘Sex and Nudity’ element, it is stated that: ‘The 
depiction of nudity is an established art form’.70 Part V also provides for a list of 
content that is prohibited in any  lm to be exhibited and distributed in Hong Kong.71
Part VI deals with exemption of  lms where the classes and descriptions of 
 lms suitable to be exempted from censorship are stated.72 Part VII then deals 
with  lm titles where the Film Censorship Authority ‘may refuse to issue a 
certi cate of approval if he is of the opinion that the proposed title of a  lm is 
unsuitable for exhibition, publication or display to the public’.73 Part VIII deals 
with  lm advertising materials and  lm packaging where all advertising materials 
for, and packaging of, Category III  lms must be submitted for approval before 
they can be publicly exhibited, displayed or distributed.74 Parts IX and X of the 
Guidelines are not relevant for the purposes of the book as they provide for  lms 
submitted by clubs and cultural organizations and the exemption of slides of non-
commercial nature from censorship requirement, respectively. The  nal part of 
the Guidelines, Part XI, provides for advisory services where censors may be 
called upon to provide advice to  lm producers on the suitability or otherwise of 
a particular scene, language or theme, but such pre-production advice is not 
binding on the censor.75 Non-binding advice may also be given by censors in 
respect of choosing a classi cation category for a  lm submitted for censorship 
purposes and the possibility of changing a  lm’s classi cation category.76

44 The laws, guidelines and processes
The process
Section 8(1) of the Film Censorship Ordinance provides that a  lm intended for 
exhibition must be submitted to the Film Censorship Authority (hereinafter 
referred to as ‘the Authority’) in order to be dealt with either under section 9, 
which provides for exemption of  lms,77 or under section 10 which provides for 
censorship of  lms. Section 8(2) then provides that when a  lm is submitted, it 
must be accompanied by a statement as to the classi cation category that is being 
sought for the  lm and a declaration as to whether the  lm has been classi ed 
under the Control of Obscene and Indecent Articles Ordinance (Cap. 390).78
The censorship procedure is the same for foreign and local  lms. After a  lm 
is accepted under section 8 of the Ordinance and that  lm is not exempted, section 
10(1) provides that the Authority shall assign a censor to examine the  lm. In 
addition, the Authority may also assign not less than two advisers (from the Panel 
of Advisers) to provide advice to the assigned censor.79 The censor is required to 
view the  lm as soon as practicable and to consider the matters stated under 
section 10(2) as well as take into account the matters stated under section 10(3) of 
the Ordinance.80 The two provisions read as follows:
(2)  The censor shall as soon as practicable view the  lm and consider the 
following matters for the purpose of making his decision under 
subsection (4):
(a)  whether the  lm portrays, depicts or treats cruelty, torture, violence, 
crime, horror, disability, sexuality or indecent or offensive language or 
behaviour; and
(b)  whether the  lm denigrates or insults any particular class of the 
public by reference to the colour, race, religious belief or ethnic or 
national origins or the sex of the members of that class.
(3)  The censor shall, in viewing the  lm and considering the matters referred 
to in subsection (2), also take into account the following matters:
(a)  the effect of the  lm as a whole and its likely effect on the persons 
likely to view the  lm;
(b)  the artistic, educational, literary or scienti c merit of the  lm and its 
importance or value for cultural or social reasons; and
(c)  in relation to the intended exhibition of the  lm, the circumstances 
of such exhibition.
Thereafter, the censor is obliged to consult the advisers (if any) assigned to the 
 lm.81 The censor may also consult the Authority82 or, with the approval of the 
Authority, consult any other person.83 However, such consultations are not binding 
on the censor.84 The censor may then proceed to make his or her decision.
In making censorship decisions, censors are guided by the Film Censorship 
Guidelines for Censors. Section 10(4) of the Ordinance provides for the three 
types of censorship decision that a censor can make and the subsequent actions 
that must follow the decision:

The laws, guidelines and processes 45
(a)  if he [the censor] is of the opinion that the  lm is suitable for exhibition, 
approve the  lm for exhibition, give it a classi cation under section 
12(1) and record in writing by reference to the matter referred to in 
subsection (2) or (3) a statement of the reasons for his decision;
(b)  if he [the censor] is of the opinion that the  lm is not suitable for 
exhibition because of a matter referred to in subsection (2), refuse to 
approve the  lm for exhibition and record in writing by reference to the 
relevant matter referred to in subsection (2) a statement of the reasons for 
his decision; or
(c)  if he [the censor] is of the opinion, by reason of a speci ed piece or speci ed 
pieces of the  lm, that the  lm is not suitable for exhibition because of a 
matter referred to in subsection (2), or that he is unable to give the  lm an 
appropriate classi cation under section 12(1), record in writing –
(i)  the classi cation under section 12(1) he would be prepared to give 
to the  lm if such speci ed piece or pieces were excised from the 
 lm; and
(ii)  by reference to the relevant matter referred to in subsection (2), a 
statement of the reasons for his decision, or the reasons why he is 
unable to give the  lm an appropriate classi cation under section 
12(1), as the case may be.
If a  lm is approved for exhibition, the censor will classify it under section 12. 
The applicable classi cation categories are summarized in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2 Film classi cation categories applicable in Hong Kong
Classi cation category
Description
Category I
Category IIA
Category IIB
Category III
Approved for exhibition to persons of any age.
Approved for exhibition to persons of any age subject to the 
condition that any advertising material which relates to the 
 lm shall contain the following notice in block letters and 
Chinese characters prominently and legibly displayed  
‘NOT SUITABLE FOR CHILDREN’
Approved for exhibition to persons of any age subject to the 
condition that any advertising material which relates to the 
 lm shall contain the following notice in block letters and 
Chinese characters prominently and legibly displayed  ‘NOT 
SUITABLE FOR YOUNG PERSONS AND CHILDREN’
Approved for exhibition only to persons who have attained 
the age of 18 years subject to the condition that any 
advertising material which relates to the  lm shall contain 
the following notice in block letters and Chinese characters 
prominently and legibly displayed  ‘APPROVED FOR 
EXHIBITION ONLY TO PERSONS WHO HAVE 
ATTAINED THE AGE OF 18 YEARS’

46 The laws, guidelines and processes
Categories I, IIA and IIB are advisory in nature. There is no restriction on 
access to  lms so classi ed whereas  lms classi ed Category III are legally 
restricted to persons of 18 years of age and above.
After classifying the  lm, a certi cate of approval will be issued under section 
13(1) in respect of that  lm. Where a  lm is refused approval for exhibition, the 
Authority will issue a notice of refusal which states the censor’s reasons for the 
decision to the person who submitted the  lm.85 In the situation where a censor 
decides that a  lm is not suitable for exhibition, or that an appropriate classi cation 
could not be given due to a speci ed piece or pieces of the  lm, the Authority will 
issue a notice of the censor’s decision to the person who submitted the  lm 
specifying the piece or pieces of the  lm that require excision and the reasons for 
the censor’s decision.86 The Authority will return the  lm to the person who 
submitted it in order for the required excision to be made or, upon that person’s 
request, the Authority may arrange for the excision to be done.87 After the excision 
is made, the  lm will be approved with the classi cation category previously 
stated by the censor to be appropriate subject to the excision being made. The 
issuance of a certi cate of approval will follow and unless a condition to the 
contrary is imposed, the certi cate also operates as an approval for the release of 
the  lm in videotape and disc formats.88
Besides  lms, certain  lm advertising materials89 also need to be approved by 
the Authority. Whether a piece of  lm advertising material is subject to censorship 
would depend on the classi cation category the  lm receives. The relevant 
provision is section 15K which provides that if a  lm is classi ed under section 
12(1)(c) (that is, the Category III classi cation), any advertising material of that 
 lm must be submitted for approval. If a  lm is classi ed under section 12(1)(a) 
or (b) (Category I, Category IIA or Category IIB classi cations), it is not 
mandatory for the  lm’s advertising material to be submitted for approval. Where 
advertising material is submitted, the Authority may approve or refuse to approve 
it.90 In making its decision, the Authority must consider the matters set out under 
section 10(2), take into account the matters stated in section 10(3)91 and have 
regard to the following matters:92
(a)  the standards of morality, decency and propriety that are generally 
accepted by reasonable members of the community;
(b)  the dominant effect of the material as a whole;
(c)  the location where the material is likely to be displayed and the persons 
likely to view it; and
(d)  any artistic, educational, literary or scienti c merit it may possess.
Advertising materials will be refused approval if they contain contents that are 
offensive to ‘public morality, decency and ordinary good taste’.93
Censorship decisions are reviewable by the Board of Review when there is an 
appeal or request to do so. In a meeting to review a censorship decision, the 
attendance of six members of the Board shall form a quorum,94 but in the event 
that after 30 minutes have elapsed since the time  xed for the meeting and less 

The laws, guidelines and processes 47
than six members are in attendance, then four members are suf cient to form 
a quorum.95 Therefore, at least four individuals will be reviewing the appealed 
censorship decision.
There are three categories of person who may request the Board to review a 
decision and they are:
1 
the person who submitted the  lm;
2 
the Authority; and
3 
the person who is aggrieved by the exhibition of a  lm or the release of 
videotapes or discs of a  lm.
Section 17(1) of the Ordinance provides that where a person who submits a  lm 
is aggrieved by the censorship decision, he or she may, not later than 28 days after 
the day on which he or she is noti ed of the decision, request the Board of Review 
to review the decision in question. Section 17(2)(c) then provides that after a date 
to review the decision is  xed, a notice will be served on the person who made that 
request (the affected person), the Authority, and on any other person whom the 
Chairman of the Board considers to be a person who has an interest in the review 
or who can assist the Board in the review (the interested person), informing them 
that they and their representatives may attend and make representations before the 
Board. At the review meeting, the Board will view the  lm, consider the notice of 
request to review and the decision to which the request relates, consider the 
representations made under section 17(2)(c) and where appropriate, consider the 
matters stated under section 10(2) as well as take into account the matters stated 
under section 10(3) of the Ordinance.96
Section 18(1) of the Ordinance provides that when the Authority is of the 
opinion that a decision to approve a  lm for exhibition was not, or is no longer, 
an appropriate decision, the Authority may request the Board of Review to 
review the decision. In making the request, the Authority must serve on the 
person whose  lm was so approved for exhibition (the affected person), a copy 
of the notice of request and a statement informing the affected person that he or 
she may make written representation regarding the matter to the Board.97 Section 
18(3)(c) then provides that after a date is  xed for a meeting to review the 
decision, notice must be served on the affected person, the Authority, and any 
interested person, informing them that they and their representatives may attend 
the meeting and make representations. The affected person will be required to 
produce the  lm to which the request relates98 and if he or she fails to do so, the 
earlier decision to approve the  lm for exhibition is deemed to be revoked.99 At 
the meeting, the Board will view the  lm, consider the notice of request, the 
decision to which the request relates and the affected person’s written 
representation, consider the representations made under section 18(3)(c) and, 
where appropriate, consider the matters stated under section 10(2) as well as take 
into account the matters stated under section 10(3) of the Ordinance.100
Section 19(1) of the Ordinance provides that a person or persons aggrieved on 
moral, religious, educational or other grounds by the exhibition of a  lm or the 

48 The laws, guidelines and processes
release of a  lm in videotape or disc formats, may request the Board of Review 
to review the decision. Such a request may be declined if it is made in a frivolous 
and vexatious manner.101 If a request is accepted, section 19(3) provides that the 
affected and interested persons and the Authority will be served with a copy of 
the notice of request and a statement informing them that they may make written 
representation to the Board in respect of that request. Section 19(4)(c) then 
provides that after a date is  xed for a meeting to review the decision, a notice 
must be served on every concerned person and the Authority, informing them 
that they and their representatives may attend the meeting and make 
representations. At the meeting, the Board will view the  lm, consider the notice 
of request for review, the decision to which the request relates and any written 
representation made under section 19(3), consider the representations made 
under section 19(4)(c) and, where appropriate, consider the matters stated under 
section 10(2) as well as take into account the matters stated under section 10(3) 
of the Ordinance.
At the end of a review, the Board of Review will give its directions to the 
Authority or censor ‘with respect to the exercise by him of any of his functions’ 
under the Ordinance and the Authority or censor must comply with such 
directions.102 A copy of the Board’s decision will then be served on the affected 
person, the Authority and the interested person.103
The Australian system
The law: Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 
(Act No.7 of 1995)
The principal legislation governing  lm censorship (or classi cation) in Australia 
is the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 (Act 
No.7 of 1995), which was enacted by the Commonwealth Parliament and came 
into operation on 1 January 1996. Complementary state and territory enforcement 
legislation was enacted to support the Act by adopting the classi cation decisions 
made thereunder and creating an offence regime in each of the states and 
territories.104 The Act recognizes that the Commonwealth, states and territories are 
equal partners in the National Classi cation Scheme and that the policy on 
classi cation matters is derived from agreement between all jurisdictions.105 The 
philosophy underlying the Act and carried out through the scheme is to protect 
members of the community from exposure to unsolicited offensive material and 
minors from material that may harm or disturb them, but otherwise permitting 
adults to view (in relation to  lms) whatever they wish to.
For almost a century before the Act was passed,  lm censorship was governed 
by regulations made under the Customs Act 1901.106 For example, the Customs 
(Cinematograph Films) Regulations were enacted to control the importation of 
 lms.107 Once a  lm was imported, the circumstances in which the  lm could be 
exhibited and distributed were determined by the states and territories. Each state 
and territory had its own legislation governing  lm censorship and this ‘piecemeal’ 

The laws, guidelines and processes 49
regulating-style created an unnecessarily complex and unsatisfactory situation as 
the entire system lacked uniformity. In the words of the former Attorney-General, 
Daryl Williams, ‘It is a mess!’108 A reference was  nally made to the Australian 
Law Reform Commission in 1990 and the Commission recommended that:
There should be a federal Act, based on the Constitution s 122, establishing 
the classi cation bodies and setting out the procedure for classi cation… 
There will be a single procedure, avoiding the overlaps and duplications that 
presently exist, and that classi ers will derive their powers from a single 
source, removing the dif culty that they sometimes face now of con icting 
legislation from different jurisdiction. 109
When the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Bill was 
tabled for its second reading, Michael Lavarch, the then Attorney-General noted 
that the agreement of the states and territories to the Bill provided an opportunity 
to make Australia’s censorship laws ‘more uniform and simple, with consequential 
bene ts to the industry and the public’.110 The passing of the Act thus established 
a uniform National Classi cation Scheme.
As its title suggest, the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 provides for the classi cation of publications,  lms and 
computer games. For the purpose of this book, the provisions of the Act will only 
be discussed in regard to  lms. The Act contains ten parts. Part 1 provides for the 
preliminary matters111 while Part 2 deals with the classi cation of  lms where it 
sets out the categories of classi cations112 as well as laying down the procedural 
steps relating to submission of  lms for classi cation purposes.113 Part 3 provides 
for the application for approval of  lm advertisements114 whereas Part 4 deals with 
reclassi cation of  lms.115 Part 5 is of particular importance to  lm practitioners 
as it provides for review of classi cation decisions.116 This part sets out the persons 
who may apply for a review of a classi cation decision,117 the procedure of an 
application for review118 as well as the approach in which applications for review 
will be dealt with.119 The Classi cation Board is established under Part 6120 while 
the Classi cation Review Board is established under Part 7.121 Part 8 deals with 
miscellaneous matters such as the time frame within which the Classi cation 
Board and the Classi cation Review Board must make their decisions122 and the 
power of the Governor-General to make regulations under the Act.123 Part 9 in turn 
deals with transitional provisions and repeals.124 Part 10, which is the  nal part of 
the Act, is not relevant for the purpose of this book.
On 24 March 2011, the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC) was 
asked to undertake a review of censorship and classi cation and report on the 
framework for the classi cation of media content in Australia. The review 
considered issues including the effectiveness of the National Classi cation 
Scheme, the options for reform, the extent existing classi cation laws continue to 
provide an effective framework for the classi cation of media, the current 
classi cation categories, the rapid pace of technological change and the effect of 
media on children. The ALRC’s report, entitled Classi cation – Content 

50 The laws, guidelines and processes
Regulation and Convergent Media, was tabled in Parliament on 1 March 2012. Its 
central recommendation is the establishment of a new National Classi cation 
Scheme regulating the classi cation of media content through the enactment of a 
new legislation – the Classi cation of Media Content Act – to replace the existing 
classi cation cooperative scheme for the classi cation of publications,  lms and 
computer games. Recognizing that it is not possible to classify all media content 
in a digital age, the report made 57 recommendations for a new scheme that 
applies consistent rules to media content on all platforms – in cinemas, on 
television, on DVDs, and on the internet.125 The key recommendations made by 
the ALRC that are relevant to the  lm industry are:126
1 
a new Australian Government scheme that replaces the current cooperative 
scheme with enforcement under Commonwealth law and the establishment 
of a single agency responsible for this scheme;127
2 
a platform-neutral regulation with one set of laws establishing obligations to 
classify or restrict access to content across media platforms;128
3 
a clear scope of what must be classi ed (feature  lms that are both made and 
distributed on a commercial basis and likely to have a signi cant Australian 
audience must be classi ed prior to their availability to the public);129
4 
a single set of classi cation categories that apply to all media content in order 
to ensure that the same categories and criteria are applied to the classi cation 
of all media content. The recommended new classi cation categories are: G, 
PG, M, MA15+, R18+, X18+ and Prohibited. It is recommended that the RC 
(Refused Classi cation) category be renamed as Prohibited and its scope 
framed more narrowly;130
5 
a shift in regulatory forms to restricting access to adult content (content that 
has been, or is likely to be, classi ed R18+ or X18+) where content providers 
must take reasonable steps to restrict access to adult content consistent with 
the principle that children should be protected from material likely to harm 
them; and
6 
the abolition of the Classi cation Review Board.131
The report is still under the federal, state and territory governments’ consideration 
at the time this book went to press. Therefore, it is not certain as to whether all, 
or which particular, recommendations will be adopted. If the key recommendations 
noted above are translated into legislation and policies, it could potentially lead 
to the end of any single state having the power to override  lm classi cation 
decisions made by the Classi cation Board as the South Australian Classi cation 
Council has on occasion done. Another likely effect of the recommendations 
would be the availability of more contentious content in  lm as it is proposed that 
the scope of the new Prohibited category be narrowed down, therefore necessarily 
entailing fewer restrictions on  lm content allowable for exhibition and 
distribution. This will give Australian  lm practitioners a greater freedom of 
expression and the audience a wider choice of materials to watch. On the other 
hand, the recommendation to abolish the Classi cation Review Board raises 

The laws, guidelines and processes 51
concerns that the Classi cation Board would not be able to review its own 
decision completely free from bias and there would be the potential for con ict 
of interest.
As the recommendations have yet to materialize in the form of enforceable 
legislation, scheme and policies, the focus of the book remains on the classi cation 
system as it existed on 1 June 2012.
The guidelines: Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games
The classi cation guidelines applied in Australia are known as Guidelines for the 
Classi cation of Films and Computer Games. This set of guidelines was introduced 
on 30 March 2003 and subsequently revised in May 2005. Prior to the introduction 
of the Guidelines, there were two separate sets of guidelines – one for  lms (the 
Classi cation Guidelines for Films and Videotapes) and one for computer games 
(the Classi cation Guidelines for Computer Games) – each having separate 
classi cation categories and different applicable standards. The Guidelines serve 
to assist the Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board by providing 
the details of what material falls within each classi cation category for the Boards 
to determine the most appropriate classi cation of a  lm.
The Guidelines were made under section 12 of the Classi cation (Publications, 
Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 which also stipulates that the guidelines 
made must be agreed between the Commonwealth, states and territories and must 
be published in the Gazette. If the ministers agree to amend the guidelines, the 
guidelines are taken to be amended accordingly.132 Classi cation guidelines are to 
be reviewed from time to time and revised, if necessary, to ensure that they stay 
relevant. According to Des Clark, the then Director of the Of ce of Film and 
Literature Classi cations (OFLC),133 the Australian Government is committed to 
a classi cation system that ‘is clear, simple and which works for the community 
and industry’.
The Guidelines are divided into four parts. The introductory part states that the 
Guidelines are a ‘tool’ for classifying  lms and it explains ‘the different 
classi cation categories, and the scope and limits of material suitable for each 
category’.134 The introductory part also explains the legal context in which the 
Australian  lm classi cation system works as well as the applicable classi cation 
principles where section 11 of the Act (which provides for the matters to be taken 
into account in making classi cation decisions) and the preamble to the National 
Classi cation Code (which sets out the classi cation principles) were reproduced 
in full. The second part then explains the three essential principles underlying the 
use of the Guidelines. These interrelated principles are ‘the importance of context’, 
‘assessing impact’ and ‘the six classi able elements’, and are discussed further in 
Chapter 4. The third part of the Guidelines prescribes the limits of content suitable 
for each classi cation category (for example, under the MA15+ category, ‘strong 
coarse language may be used’, however ‘aggressive or very strong coarse 
language should be infrequent’)135 while the  nal part lists the meaning of the key 
terms used in the Guidelines.

52 The laws, guidelines and processes
The process
Non-exempted  lms136 have to be submitted to the Classi cation Board to be 
classi ed before they can be legally made available to the public. There is no 
difference in terms of procedure or standards in classifying Australian  lms and 
foreign  lms. Section 14 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 provides for the procedure of making an application for 
classi cation of a  lm.137 When making classi cation decisions, the Board 
operates in panels where at least three members of the Board will be assigned to 
examine a  lm. A larger panel may be formed in respect of a  lm if there are 
indications that there may be dif cult questions that would arise from the  lm.138 
In the event that members of the panel are divided in opinion, the decision of the 
majority prevails.139
In classifying a  lm, the Classi cation Board must assume that the  lm will 
only be released in the form in which it is considered for classi cation.140 Subject 
to section 9A (which provides that  lm that advocates the committing of a 
terrorist act must be refused classi cation),  lms are to be classi ed in accordance 
with the National Classi cation Code and the classi cation guidelines.141 The 
National Classi cation Code sets out the principles of classi cation in Australia 
as follows:142
Classi cation decisions are to give effect, as far as possible, to the following 
principles:
(a)  adults should be able to read, hear and see what they want;143
(b)  minors should be protected from material likely to harm or disturb them;
(c)  everyone should be protected from exposure to unsolicited material that 
they  nd offensive; and
(d)  the need to take into account of community concerns about:
(i)  depictions that condone or incite violence, particularly sexual violence; 
and
(ii) the portrayal of persons in a demeaning manner.
In making classi cation decisions, the Board must also take into account the 
matters stated under section 11 of the Act which are the standards of morality, 
decency and propriety generally accepted by reasonable adults; the literary, 
artistic or educational merit of the  lm; the general character of the  lm including 
whether it is of a medical, legal or scienti c character; and the persons or class of 
persons to or amongst whom the  lm is released or is likely to be released.
After having viewed the  lm and taken the matters stated under section 11 into 
account, the panel may then proceed to classify the  lm with an appropriate 
classi cation based on the Guidelines. In the classi cation process, the 
Classi cation Board neither requires nor recommends alteration to be made to 
 lm. The Board only determines the classi cation category and consumer advice 
that should be given to the  lm. Classi cation categories are provided under 
section 7(2) and they may be described in ascending order as in Table 3.3.

The laws, guidelines and processes 53
Table 3.3 Film classi cation categories applicable in Australia
Classi cation category
Description
G (General)
PG (Parental Guidance)
M (Mature)
MA15+ (Mature 
Accompanied)
R18+ (Restricted)
X18+ (Restricted)
RC (Refused Classi cation)
For general audience. Suitable for all ages.
Not recommended for viewing by persons under 15 years 
of age without guidance from parents or guardians.
Not recommended for persons under 15 years of age.
Not suitable for persons under 15 years of age. Under 15s 
must be accompanied by a parent or adult guardian.
Restricted to persons of 18 years of age and over only. 
May be offensive to sections of the adult community.
Restricted to persons of 18 years of age and over only. 
Contains only sexually explicit material with depictions of 
actual sexual intercourse and other sexual activity between 
consenting adults.
Banned
There is no restriction on access to  lms classi ed G, PG or M whereas  lms 
classi ed MA15+, R18+ or X18+ are legally restricted. Films that exceed the 
R18+ or X18+ classi cation limits will be refused classi cation (RC), which 
means they are banned.144 While section 7(2) determines the classi cation 
categories, the criteria for differentiating between those classi cations are found 
in the National Classi cation Code and the Guidelines for the Classi cation of 
Films and Computer Games and section 9 clearly states that  lms are to be 
classi ed in accordance with the Code and the Guidelines. If the Classi cation 
Board classi es a  lm PG, M, MA15+, R18+ or X18+, it must also determine the 
consumer advice which gives information about the content of the  lm.145 After 
classifying and determining the consumer advice of the  lm, the Director of the 
Board will issue a classi cation certi cate in respect of that  lm146 and the 
certi cate must include the following matters:147
1 
the determined markings for the classi cation given to the  lm;148
2 
the consumer advice for the  lm; and
3 
the applicant’s obligations about the display of the determined markings and 
consumer advice.
An applicant for classi cation may ask for a copy of the Board’s reasons for its 
decision.149
As is the case in Malaysia and Hong Kong,  lm advertising materials are also 
regulated in Australia where the relevant provisions are found under Part 3 of the 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.150 The 
Classi cation Board is empowered under section 29 to approve or refuse to 
approve an advertisement for a  lm either on an application for its approval or on 

54 The laws, guidelines and processes
its own initiative. In making its decision, the Board must take into account the 
matters set out under section 11 (which provides for the matters to be taken into 
account in classifying a  lm) and the Guidelines.151 The Board must refuse to 
approve an advertisement if it is of the opinion that the advertisement:
1 
describes, depicts or otherwise deals with matters of sex, drug misuse or 
addiction, crime, cruelty, violence or revolting or abhorrent phenomena in 
such a way that it offends against the standard of morality, decency and 
propriety generally accepted by reasonable adults to the extent that it should 
not be approved; or
2 
depicts or describes, in a way likely to cause offence to a reasonable adult, a 
person who is, or appears to be, a child under 18 (whether the person is 
engaged in sexual activity or not); or
3 
promotes crime or violence, or incites or instructs in matters of crime or 
violence; or
4 
is used, or is likely to be used, in a way that is offensive to a reasonable adult. 
The Board must also refuse to approve an advertisement for a  lm classi ed RC 
or a  lm that has not been classi ed.152 However, in relation to  lm yet to be 
classi ed, the person who intends to distribute or exhibit the  lm may apply to the 
Board for a certi cate of exemption in relation to the  lm for advertising 
purposes.153 If a  lm is advertised ahead of it being classi ed, there must be a 
marking on the advertisement stating ‘This  lm is yet to be classi ed’ and the 
marking must be replaced by the classi cation marking when the  lm is 
subsequently classi ed. Additionally,  lm trailers must then be only screened 
with  lms of the same or higher classi cation.
Decisions made by the Classi cation Board are reviewable by the Classi cation 
Review Board and section 42(1) provides that the following persons may apply 
for a review:
1 
the Commonwealth Minister;154
2 
the applicant for classi cation of the  lm concerned (the original applicant);
3 
the publisher of the  lm concerned; and
4 
a person aggrieved by the decision.
The procedure to apply for a review is provided under section 43. An application 
may be made by the Minister at any time,155 whereas application by the rest of the 
persons mentioned under section 42(1) must be made within 30 days after the 
receipt of the notice of the Classi cation Board’s decision156 or within such longer 
period as the Classi cation Review Board may allow.157 If an application for 
review is made by a person other than the original applicant, the Convenor of the 
Review Board is under a statutory duty to notify the original applicant in writing 
of the application and of the day on which the application will be considered.158
The manner in which the Classi cation Review Board must deal with an 
application for review of a decision is the same as that of the manner in which the 

The laws, guidelines and processes 55
Classi cation Board deals with an application for classi cation of  lm, which 
means that the decision will be made de novo.159 When the Review Board is 
convened to review a decision, it will hear submissions from the person who made 
the application for review as well as other parties with an interest in the decision.160 
The Review Board will make the classi cation decision afresh and provide the 
consumer advice of the  lm. In reviewing a decision, the Review Board is to be 
constituted of at least three members who are nominated for the purpose by the 
Convenor.161 In the event the members are divided in opinion, the decision of the 
majority will prevail.162 The Convener must give written notice of the Review 
Board’s decision to the applicant and to the persons who in the Convener’s opinion 
have an interest in the matter.163
The Convenor will thereafter issue a classi cation certi cate in respect of the 
 lm.164 The earlier classi cation certi cate issued by the Director of the 
Classi cation Board is taken to be revoked when the Convener of the Review 
Board issues the subsequent certi cate in respect of that  lm.165
Conclusion
The Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship systems are set up by 
the means of legislation and complemented by guidelines. Together, these 
documents inform, to a large extent, the censorship process in each of the three 
jurisdictions. From the examination of the documents, it is apparent that the 
systems displayed marked differences in several areas. These key differences, 
which give rise to issues and concerns, are analysed in the following chapter.

4 
Film censorship systems in 
Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia
 
The key issues
Introduction
Although the  lm censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia 
share broad similarities, on close examination, there are numerous distinctive 
features between them. On paper, these features appear to give rise to concerns 
and issues that may adversely affect  lm practitioners and the  lm industries. 
There are eight key issues identi ed in the Malaysian  lm censorship system 
when the documents about the law, guidelines and process are analysed and 
compared with the Hong Kong and Australian systems. These key issues are in 
regard to:
1 
the decision-making entities;
2 
the exemption of  lms from censorship;
3 
the matters to be taken into account by censors;
4 
censorship guidelines;
5 
alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category;
6 
provision of reasons for decisions;
7 
appeal against censorship decisions; and
8 
the availability of judicial review.
In this chapter, the discussion of these eight key issues will be presented in the 
context of each jurisdiction and arranged in the typical sequence a  lm would 
go through in a censorship process. It begins with identifying the entities 
responsible for making censorship decisions and the determination of whether 
a  lm is subject to censorship and continues until the point where a  lm 
practitioner challenges a censorship decision in court by way of judicial 
review. The chapter will highlight the differences in regard to the key issues 
between the Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian systems and analyse the 
weaknesses that are apparent in the printed materials pertaining to their laws, 
guidelines and processes. This analysis then sets the basis for further 
investigation and evaluation, through  eldwork, of how the systems operate 
and affect the  lm industries.

The key issues 57
The Malaysian system
Decision-making entities
There are three entities empowered by law to make  lm censorship decisions in 
Malaysia: the Board of Censors, the Appeal Committee and the Home Minister. 
The Board of Censors and the Appeal Committee are established under section 
4(1) and section 22(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 respectively and operate 
under the purview of the Film Control Division of the Home Ministry.1 The Board 
consists of 60 members, appointed by the Home Minister, who are retired senior 
government of cers2 and the Committee consists of 20 members,3 16 of which are 
appointed by the Home Minister, the rest being ex of cio members.4 Retired 
senior government of cers are appointed as  lm censors because of their 
knowledge of, and familiarity with, government policies.5
Two provisions in the Schedule to the Film Censorship Act 2002 may impair 
the independence of the Board and the Committee in discharging their duties. The 
 rst is paragraph 4 which provides that members of the Board and the Committee 
(except the ex of cio members) are appointed for a term of three years or such 
shorter term as the Minister speci es. After the term of of ce has expired, such 
members are eligible for reappointment. The second is paragraph 6 which reads: 
‘The Minister may revoke the appointment of a member of the Board or a member 
of the Appeal Committee other than an ex of cio member without assigning any 
reason for the revocation.’6 These provisions raise the possibility that  lm 
censorship decisions will be made by members of the Board or Committee with a 
view to securing their tenure of of ce.
The Home Minister holds three particularly notable powers under the Film 
Censorship Act 2002. The Minister is empowered under section 25 to issue to the 
Board or the Committee directions as to government policy relating to exhibition 
and distribution of  lms and such directions must be given effect to by the Board 
and Committee.7 Under section 26, the Minister is conferred the power, which is 
exercisable with absolute discretion, to prohibit the exhibition, display, distribution, 
possession, circulation or sale of any  lm or  lm publicity material, if the Minister 
is of the opinion that it would be contrary to public interest. Under section 28, the 
Minister can exempt any  lm or class of  lms, any  lm publicity materials or any 
person from the application of any provisions of the Act or any regulations made 
thereunder. It is also important to highlight that section 48 provides that decisions 
made by the Minister are not subject to appeal or review by any court on any ground.
Section 26 in particular, is questionable as it confers a very wide power on the 
Minister to prohibit the exhibition, distribution, possession, circulation or sale of 
a  lm, all of which are vital activities in a  lm industry. Because of section 48, the 
prohibition order made under section 26 appears not to be subject to appeal or 
review. Once the Minister forms the opinion that the exhibition, distribution, 
possession, circulation or sale of a  lm would be contrary to public interest, the 
Minister is empowered to ban the  lm. What matters would be contrary to public 
interest are not stated in the Act and thus are left open to the judgment of the 
Minister. This far reaching power also enables the Minister to ban a  lm even if 

58 The key issues
the  lm was initially approved for exhibition by the Board under section 10 or by 
the Committee under section 23. The  rst Malaysian  lm to ‘suffer’ under this 
veto power was Lelaki Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist, Amir Muhammad, 
2006) which was initially approved for exhibition without any alteration and 
classi ed as suitable for general viewing by all levels of society by the Board. The 
 lm was banned by the Minister 13 days before it was to begin its theatrical 
release in Malaysia.8
The exemption of  lms from censorship
Not every  lm is subject to censorship in Malaysia.9 There are numerous 
exceptions to the general rule that  lms must be approved by the Board of Censors 
before they can be made available to the public. One of the exceptions is found in 
section 8(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 which empowers the Board to issue 
a certi cate of exemption in respect of any  lm imported into Malaysia which the 
owner does not intend to exhibit or distribute in the country or which it is intended 
for private use only.10 The other exception is found in section 2(2)(a) which reads: 
‘This Act shall not apply to any  lm sponsored by the Federal Government or the 
Government of any State.’ Section 2(2)(a) created a situation where a number of 
‘privileged’ Malaysian  lms are not subject to censorship whereas other  lms will 
have to undergo the censorship process. This provision created a double-standard 
in the system where  lms funded by the government are allowed to be exhibited 
and distributed without being censored. In addition, the Home Minister is 
empowered under section 28 to exempt any  lm from censorship.
Matters to be taken into account by censors
Unlike the Hong Kong Film Censorship Ordinance and the Australian 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995, the Malaysian 
Film Censorship Act 2002 does not stipulate the matters that censors must consider 
or take into account in the course of making  lm censorship decisions. This 
omission means two important factors – the artistic merit of a  lm and the 
contemporary community standards – which may have substantial impact on 
decisions to be made, are not taken into account by the Board of Censors and the 
Appeal Committee during the censorship process.
It is noteworthy that there is no formal and systematic effort being undertaken 
in Malaysia to ensure that the censorship decisions made are re ective of current 
community standards. It is apparent from the marked inconsistencies of the 
decisions that  lm censorship is carried out subjectively and not based on the 
standards generally accepted by reasonable adults in the society.
Censorship guidelines
The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 were issued on 17 November 1993 and 
were applied for 17 years without any form of revision. As noted in Chapter 3, a 

The key issues 59
new set of guidelines was introduced by the Home Ministry on 15 March 2010 to 
replace the 1993 Guidelines. In general, the majority of the provisions contained 
in the new Film Censorship Guidelines are similar to those in the 1993 version. 
There is little improvement to the quality of the guidelines being achieved by the 
2010 revision exercise. The 2010 Guidelines will be discussed in Chapter 7.
The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 do not contain provisions relating to 
classi cation categories11 and, consequently, the types of content allowable under 
each applicable classi cation category are not spelt out. Upon careful examination, 
it is apparent that the majority of provisions in the Guidelines lack clarity and 
there are neither de nitions nor explanations for most of the key terms and phrases 
used therein. A simple example illustrates the point: ‘ lms that may retard national 
resilience are not to be allowed’.12 There are many more instances like this, as 
explored below.
The Guidelines categorize  lms and content that are deemed not suitable for 
exhibition and distribution into four censorship elements, which are ‘Ideology and 
Politics’, ‘Religion’, ‘Socio-culture’ and ‘Order and Decorum’.13 Under the ‘Ideology 
and Politics’ element, it is provided that the following are not to be allowed:
1 
 lms containing ideological propaganda that is inconsistent with the principles 
of the Rukunegara;
2 
 lms praising or spreading the teachings of communism that will arouse the 
sympathy of audiences towards communism;
3 
 lms that are detrimental to the political climate of the country;
4 
 lms that are detrimental to the image of the country; and
5 
 lms that may incite social tension.
From these provisions, it appears that there is the potential for political 
censorship in Malaysia. Under the second censorship element, ‘Religion’, it is 
provided that any  lm which gives an anti-God or anti-religion message that 
may affect the religious faith of its adherers or contains insults to any religion is 
prohibited. Under the ‘Socio-culture’ element, ‘ lms that may corrupt the 
morality and good conduct of the society’ and ‘ lms that may encourage the 
development of a culture that is incompatible with the Malaysian way of life’ 
are not allowed while under the ‘Order and Decorum’ element, the guidelines 
provide that the following content is not to be allowed in  lms exhibited and 
distributed in Malaysia:
1 
portrayal of criminal acts which include detailed depiction of the modus 
operandi of such acts that may be imitable;
2 
portrayal of victory of wickedness over justice and truth;
3 
portrayal of excessive violence;
4 
portrayal of explicit sex;
5 
portrayal that raises racial, religious, ethnic or class sentiments;
6 
portrayal of misuse or enjoyment of drugs; and
7 
portrayal which may incite the doing of unlawful acts.

60 The key issues
The appendix to the Guidelines then provides descriptions to some of the above 
mentioned particulars of the four censorship elements. Out of the four elements, 
‘Ideology and Politics’ is the most vaguely described whereas ‘Religion’ is the 
most detailed, with primary focus on  lms dealing with the Islamic faith where a 
total of 54 descriptions can be found. In addition, the Guidelines do not provide 
that censors should consider the degree, intensity and realism of the way a 
censorship element is presented. The provisions merely spell out in very general 
terms the types of  lm (in terms of their possible effects on the audience) and the 
portrayals in  lm that are not to be allowed.
The Guidelines are silent as to whether censors must take into account the 
context of the  lm in making their censorship decision. Therefore, even if a scene 
or a line of dialogue is justi able in the context of the  lm as a whole (or is 
necessary for the narrative or the aesthetics), it may not survive the censors’ 
‘scissors’ if that particular scene or dialogue contains an element that is prohibited 
by the Guidelines. This is in contrast with the  lm censorship guidelines applied 
in Hong Kong and Australia where contentious content may be allowed by censors 
if it is contextually justi ed in the  lm as a whole. Equally, it will be seen below 
that the descriptions used in Hong Kong and Australia are not as wide ranging and 
vague as those in Malaysia.
The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993, on the face of it, appear to have  ve 
substantial defects. They are in relation to the non-provision of the types of content 
allowable under each classi cation category; a lack of clarity in most of the 
provisions; the many types of  lm, content and portrayal which are prohibited; the 
lack of provision ensuring that the context of a  lm is to be taken into account by 
censors; and the absence of a requirement to consider the degree, intensity and 
realism of the way a censorship element is presented in  lm.
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
Films submitted for censorship purposes may be subjected to alteration,14 as 
one of the three types of decision that censors can make under section 10 of the 
Film Censorship Act 2002 is to ‘approve the  lm for exhibition with such 
alteration as it may require’.15 However, the  lm owner’s consent must be 
obtained before any alteration can be made to the  lm by the censorship 
authority. If consent to alter is given, the required alteration will be made and 
the  lm subsequently approved, whereas if consent is withheld, the  lm will be 
refused approval for exhibition and distribution. It is important to note that 
alteration may be required by censors even when a  lm is classi ed in a 
restricted classi cation category.
Closely linked to the issue of alteration, the  lm censorship law and guidelines 
do not provide that  lm practitioners may indicate and discuss (if necessary) with 
censors the classi cation category to be given to their  lms. Therefore, unlike the 
Hong Kong censorship system, there is no formal channel within the Malaysian 
system to seek a particular classi cation category, which could play a crucial role 
in the commercial viability of a  lm in the market.

The key issues 61
The provision of reasons for decisions
Section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that when the Board of 
Censors approves a  lm for exhibition subject to alteration being made to the  lm, 
or refuses to approve a  lm for exhibition, the Board must furnish in writing to the 
owner of the  lm, its reasons for requiring such alteration or for the refusal. 
Besides these two types of decision, the Board is not statutorily bound to furnish 
its reasons for decisions. For example, the Board is not bound to furnish reasons 
why it classi es a  lm with a particular classi cation category. In addition, there 
is no provision in the law or the Guidelines requiring the Appeal Committee and 
the Home Minister to provide reasons for their decisions. Under the common law 
applied in Malaysia, in the absence of a statutory requirement to provide reasons, 
there is no general duty or obligation on the part of the decision-maker to furnish 
reasons for its decisions.16
Appeal against censorship decisions
Section 21(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that the owner of a  lm 
who is aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Censors may within 30 days 
from the date on which the owner is noti ed of the decision, appeal to the Appeal 
Committee by lodging a notice of appeal. The word ‘owner’ is de ned under 
section 3 as follows:
‘owner’, in relation to a  lm or  lm publicity material, means –
a. 
 a person who is entitled to the possession of the  lm or  lm publicity 
material whether it is made or produced in Malaysia or imported 
from outside Malaysia; or
b.  any person who has the  lm or  lm publicity material in his control, 
possession or ownership at the time in question.
Therefore, sections 21(1) and 3 enable  lm directors, producers, exhibitors and 
distributors who are aggrieved by the Board’s decision to appeal to the Appeal 
Committee for a review of the censorship decision in question. There is no 
provision in the law that confers members of the public with the right to appeal 
against censorship decisions.
In appealing for review of a censorship decision, the  lm owner must lodge a 
written notice of appeal17 and that notice may contain his or her representations.18 
The only representation allowed is the written notice of appeal; the law does not 
provide  lm practitioners with the right to make oral representations before the 
Committee.
Availability of judicial review
There are two ouster clauses in the Film Censorship Act 2002. The  rst is section 
23(2) which reads: ‘The decision of the Appeal Committee shall be  nal and shall 

62 The key issues
not be questioned in any court of law’ and the second is section 48 which reads: 
‘No decision of the Minister, the Board or the Appeal Committee under this Act 
or any regulations made under this Act shall be subject to appeal or review by any 
court on any ground’. When the Film Censorship Bill 2001 was tabled for its 
second reading, the then Deputy Home Minister defended the need for section 48 
by stating that it is imperative that there be a  nal decision in  lm censorship 
matters and that ‘trivial problems should not be brought to courts for adjudication’.19 
However, censorship not only encroaches on the right to freedom of expression 
but also affects the right to livelihood of  lm practitioners and these fundamental 
rights are enshrined under articles 10 and 5 of the Federal Constitution 
respectively.20 It is not clear that censorship matters would necessarily be trivial.
If the ouster clauses are given their intended effect of completely shutting out 
the possibility of judicial review,  lm practitioners in Malaysia will not be able to 
challenge censorship decisions and seek legal remedies at all. As the decision-
making process and the decision itself are not subject to scrutiny by courts, there 
appears to be a real danger for  lm practitioners that their  lms may be censored 
on the whims and fancies of the decision-making entities.
The Hong Kong system
Decision-making entities
There are four entities involved in making  lm censorship decisions in Hong Kong: 
the Film Censorship Authority, the Panel of Censors, the Panel of Advisers and the 
Board of Review. These entities are constituted under the Film Censorship Ordinance 
and operated within the Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority of the 
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (hereinafter referred 
to as ‘TELA’) until 1 April 2012, when TELA was abolished and its functions taken 
over by the Of ce for Film, Newspaper and Article Administration of the 
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
Section 3 of the Film Censorship Ordinance established the Film Censorship 
Authority ‘who shall be a public of cer appointed by the Secretary for Commerce 
and Economic Development’. The Panel of Censors is established under section 
4 and its members (censors) are appointed by the Chief Executive of Hong Kong 
through open recruitment exercises where members of the public are invited to 
apply for a position.21 Appointments of censors are noti ed in the Gazette22 and 
in 2010, there were 40 gazetted censors working at TELA. The Panel of Advisers 
is established under section 6 and its members (referred to as ‘adviser’ in the 
Ordinance) are appointed by the Film Censorship Authority. They are responsible 
for advising censors in the process of forming their opinions on which censorship 
decisions will be based.23 The establishment of the Panel of Advisers allows for 
wider public participation in  lm censorship as it comprises about 300 members 
drawn from the Hong Kong community, representing people of different age, sex 
and profession.24 The Board of Review is established under section 16 and it 
consists of the Secretary for Commerce and Economic Development and nine 

The key issues 63
other members not being public of cers,25 appointed by the Chief Executive.26 
Hong Kong censors are appointed under the terms of civil service and their 
tenure of of ce lasts until the age of retirement (that is, 55 years old) if there is 
no resignation.27 Being a part of the civil service,  lm censors are subject to the 
same code of conduct and disciplinary requirements as of cers of other 
government departments and, therefore, the same criteria for termination of 
service applies.28
Unlike the Malaysian Film Censorship Act 2002, the Ordinance does not 
confer absolute discretionary power on any of the decision-making entities to 
prohibit the exhibition, distribution, circulation or sale of  lm.
The exemption of  lms from censorship
In Hong Kong, it is an offence to exhibit a  lm29 which is not issued with either a 
certi cate of exemption under section 9 or a certi cate of approval under section 
13 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.30 Section 8(1) of the Ordinance provides 
that a  lm intended for exhibition must be submitted for censorship purposes. The 
Film Censorship Authority may exercise its power under section 9 to exempt 
certain classes of  lm from censorship, in which case, a certi cate of exemption 
will be issued with or without conditions.31
Section 29 then empowers the Secretary for Commerce and Economic 
Development to make regulations to provide for ‘the classes or descriptions of 
 lms that are suitable to be exempted under section 9’.32 These classes are set out 
in the second schedule to the Film Censorship Regulations (Cap. 392A) as cultural, 
educational, instructional, promotional, sporting, travelogue, musical and religious 
 lms. These classes of  lm are relatively innocuous and therefore, can be 
exempted from the censorship process.
Matters to be taken into account by censors
The artistic merit of a  lm is one of the matters that censors must take into account 
in the process of making censorship decisions. The relevant provision is section 
10(3)(b) of the Film Censorship Ordinance which reads:
The censor shall, in viewing the  lm and considering the matters referred to 
in subsection (2), also take into account the following matters:…. (b) the 
artistic, educational, literary or scienti c merit of the  lm and its importance 
or value for cultural or social reasons.
It appears that such consideration is able to ‘off-set’ the effects of the matters 
stipulated under section 10(2)33 which may cause the  lm to be otherwise banned 
or classi ed with a restricted classi cation category.
In addition to ‘artistic merit’, censors are also required to take into account 
current community standards and attitudes towards  lm censorship. Two of 
TELA’s missions in regard to  lm censorship are stated as follows:34

64 The key issues
‘We are committed to – Following closely standards of taste and decency 
accepted by the community and re ecting them in our decision making; and 
Maintaining the relevance of our regulatory framework with regard to 
community needs, technological development and international practices.’
Paragraph 2 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors declares that ‘the aim 
of the censors should be to re ect contemporary public attitudes towards 
censorship standards’. In order to ensure that decisions are re ective of current 
community standards, TELA commissions surveys of community views on a 
regular basis.35 In addition to surveys, which are reported as Public Opinion 
Survey on Film Classi cation System, censors are also able to gauge community 
standards by consulting members of the Panel of Advisers for their views on the 
appropriate classi cation to be given to  lms. Film censorship in Hong Kong 
appears to be implemented comparatively objectively and not based on censors’ 
personal standards.
Censorship guidelines
Section 30 of the Film Censorship Ordinance provides that the Secretary for 
Commerce and Economic Development may ‘from time to time’ prepare 
censorship guidelines for the guidance of censors. The Film Censorship Guidelines 
for Censors were introduced in 1999 after a lengthy period of public consultation 
and discussion with all major representative bodies of the  lm industry.36 The way 
in which the Guidelines are to be applied is stated in paragraph 2. It provides that 
the guidelines are to be read in conjunction with the Film Censorship Ordinance 
and censors should aim to re ect contemporary public attitudes towards censorship 
standards in their decisions. A more liberal standard is to be applied to  lms to be 
classi ed Category III as censors ought to assume that only adults get to watch 
such  lms.37 In applying the Guidelines, censors should also take into account the 
prevailing public view and be aware of the changes of public opinion brought to 
light by public opinion surveys on  lm censorship standards.38
In addition to section 12 of the Ordinance, the  lm classi cation categories are 
also described in the Guidelines and the limits of each censorship element under 
every classi cation category are set out clearly, based on the degree, intensity and 
realism with which such elements are presented in a  lm.39 For example, under the 
‘Language’ element, it is stated in paragraph 33 that: ‘For Category IIA  lms, 
mild expletives with sexual connotations or coarse language may be used but only 
infrequently and are justi ed in context’.40 Thus, in carrying out their censorship 
duties, censors will consider the duration and frequency of the depictions of 
censorship elements, the presentation of the elements (for example, whether the 
contentious scenes are made up of close-up shots and whether the depictions are 
detailed and realistic) and whether the portrayals were contextually justi ed. The 
provisions in the Hong Kong guidelines are much clearer and more precise than 
those of the Malaysian guidelines. Additionally, the guidelines applied in Hong 
Kong are systematically structured and presented in a straightforward manner. 

The key issues 65
This can be illustrated by the following provision, among many others: ‘Scenes 
showing triad ceremonies, rituals, hand signs and paraphernalia including cryptic 
poems and icons should only be permitted in Category III  lms’.41
The Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors provide for six censorship 
elements, which are ‘Cruelty, Torture or Violence’, ‘Horror and Shock’, 
‘Disability’, ‘Sex and Nudity’, ‘Language’ and ‘Offensive Behaviour and 
Criminality,’ and contain a list of content that is prohibited in  lms to be exhibited 
and distributed in Hong Kong. Paragraph 36 provides that:
The following materials should not be permitted in any  lm:
a. 
 detailed or gratuitous depiction of a child who is, or who is apparently, 
under the age of 16 years engaging in sexual activity or crime;
b. 
 explicit or gratuitous depiction of extreme violence or cruelty;
c. 
 detailed instruction or encouragement in dangerous or criminal 
techniques which are imitable;
d.  detailed promotion, incitement or instruction on the use of dangerous 
drugs; and
e. 
 depiction of bestiality, necrophilia, sexual acts accompanied by 
offensive perversion (such as sadism or masochism) or exploitative 
incestuous behaviours.
Paragraph 37 then provides that if a depiction of the activities referred to in 
paragraph 36 is neither detailed nor explicit, it may be allowed to be classi ed 
Category IIB or Category III provided it is contextually justi ed. In addition, there 
are four types of  lm that will be refused approval in Hong Kong; namely,  lms 
which ‘encourage public hatred or fear of the physically or mentally handicapped’,42 
hard core pornography,43  lms which glorify the power of triads and membership 
in a triad society44 and  lms made ‘with the intention of inciting hatred or denigration 
on racial, religious, national or sexual differences’.45 The latter is subject to 
paragraph 42 where ‘ lms which seek, without obviously distorting facts, to depict 
existing or historical cases of racial or religious hatred should not give rise to 
objection’ and paragraph 44 where ‘censors should be prepared to accept  lms with 
a humorous but irreverent attitude to race, religion or sex, and those which, without 
malice, raise fair comment or practices in Hong Kong or overseas’. It is clear from 
the provisions of the Guidelines that not many types of  lm, content or portrayal 
are strictly and absolutely prohibited in Hong Kong, which is in marked contrast 
with the provisions in the Malaysian Film Censorship Guidelines 1993.
It is important to note that there are numerous provisions in the Hong Kong 
Guidelines allowing censors to approve  lms containing contentious elements if 
such content is justi able in the context of the  lm concerned. For example, 
paragraph 19 provides that violence may be allowed by censors even though it is 
‘depicted in a way which might terrorize, hurt or seriously unsettle’ if ‘there are 
suf cient other elements in the  lm which make such an effect justi able’. 
Another provision which may be highlighted here is paragraph 37 which, as 
discussed above, allows the  ve prohibited types of content listed under paragraph 

66 The key issues
36 to be approved if they are neither detailed nor explicit and they are ‘justi ed in 
the context of the  lm as a whole’.
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
Hong Kong  lm censors are empowered under section 10(4)(c) of the Film 
Censorship Ordinance to refuse to approve a  lm for exhibition unless certain 
footage (that is prohibited by the censorship law or guidelines) is excised from the 
 lm.46 Although censors have the power to require excision to be made to  lm, in 
practice, this power has been very rarely exercised.47
When a  lm is submitted for censorship purposes, it is to be accompanied by a 
statement as to the classi cation category which is sought for the  lm.48 The person 
who submits the  lm is thus given an opportunity to indicate to the censor the 
classi cation category that is desired for the  lm and, according to paragraphs 10 
and 60 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors, the assigned censor should, 
as far as possible, accommodate the classi cation sought. In the event that the 
classi cation sought cannot be accommodated, the censor can advise the person who 
submits the  lm as to the minimum excision that can be made to the  lm to secure 
the desired classi cation. These provisions provide a channel for  lm practitioners 
to interact with censors over the issue of classi cation category to be given to  lm.
The provision of reasons for decisions
By virtue of section 10(4) of the Film Censorship Ordinance, censors are required 
to provide reasons for all the types of censorship decision they make under the 
provision. Censors are not only required to provide their reasons for refusing to 
approve a  lm for exhibition, they are also required to provide reasons even if a 
 lm is approved for exhibition. Censors must also provide reasons when they are 
unable to give a  lm an appropriate classi cation or when they require excision to 
be made to the  lm. In addition, section 13 provides that where the censor refuses 
to approve a  lm or requires excision to be made to the  lm, or where the censor 
is unable to give an appropriate classi cation, the Film Censorship Authority shall 
forthwith give written notice of the censor’s decision and the reasons for the 
decision to the person who submitted the  lm. Although the censors’ duty to 
provide reasons for their decisions is expressly provided in the Ordinance, there is 
no statutory provision requiring the Board of Review members to do the same.
Appeal against censorship decisions
There are three categories of person who may appeal against a censorship decision:
1 
the person who submits the  lm;49
2 
the Film Censorship Authority;50 and
3 
the person who is aggrieved by the exhibition of a  lm or the release of a  lm 
in video tape or disc formats.51

The key issues 67
Therefore, depending on which type of  lm practitioner submits the  lm for 
censorship purposes,  lm directors, producers, exhibitors and distributors may 
appeal against a censorship decision. It is noteworthy that a member of the 
public who is aggrieved by a censorship decision also has the right to appeal 
against it.
When a censorship decision is appealed to the Board of Review, the  lm 
practitioner concerned has the right to make both oral and written representations 
to the Board. Written representations can be made under sections 17(1), 18(2) or 
19(3) while oral representations can be made under sections 17(2)(c), 18(3)(c) or 
19(4)(c) of the Film Censorship Ordinance. A right to be heard is therefore 
afforded to  lm practitioners by these statutory provisions.
Availability of judicial review
As there is no ouster clause in the Film Censorship Ordinance,  lm censorship 
decisions are open to challenge in court by way of judicial review. It is therefore 
possible for judicial review to be sought by  lm practitioners as an extension to 
the censorship process.
The Australian system
Decision-making entities
In Australia,  lm ‘censorship’ is generally known by the label ‘classi cation’, and 
there are two entities responsible for making  lm classi cation decisions: the 
Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board. The Classi cation 
Branch of the Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department provides 
administrative support to the Boards and has overall responsibility for Australian 
classi cation policy.
The Classi cation Board (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Board’) is established 
under section 45 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995 and its Director, Deputy Director and Senior Classi ers are appointed as 
full-time members.52 Regulation 17A of the Classi cation (Publications, Films 
and Computer Games) Regulations 2005 provides that the maximum number of 
members of the Board is 30 and in 2011 the Board had 12 full-time members.53 
Members of the Board (except temporary members)54 are appointed by the 
Governor-General55 and in doing so, regard is given to ‘the desirability of ensuring 
that the membership of the Board is broadly representative of the Australian 
community’.56 Before recommending the appointment of a member (selected 
through a competitive merit selection process via open recruitment exercises) to 
the Governor-General, the Commonwealth Minister must consult with the state 
and territory ministers in regard to the recommendation.57 A full-time member is 
to be appointed for a period speci ed in the instrument of appointment and such 
period shall not be longer than  ve years. A member is also eligible for 
reappointment58 but must not hold of ce for a total of more than seven years.59 

68 The key issues
The circumstances under which the appointment of a member of the Board could 
be terminated are expressly provided under section 65 of the Act. For example, an 
appointment can be terminated because of the member’s mental incapacity60 or 
where the member is absent from duty, except on leave of absence, for 28 days in 
any 12 months.61
The Classi cation Review Board (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Review 
Board’) is established under section 72 of the Act and it consists of a Convenor, 
a Deputy Convenor and at least three, but not more than eight, other members.62 
Members of the Review Board are appointed by the Governor-General63 and in 
doing so, section 74(2) requires that regard is to be given to the desirability of 
ensuring that its membership is broadly representative of the community.64 
Before recommending the appointment of a member, the Commonwealth 
Minister must consult with the state and territory ministers.65 Members of the 
Review Board are also recruited through a competitive merit selection process 
and they are to be appointed as part-time members66 for a time period as speci ed 
in the instrument of appointment but such period shall not be longer than  ve 
years.67 Members are eligible for reappointment but cannot hold of ce for a total 
of more than seven years.68 The Review Board meets as needed69 and its Convenor 
is empowered to give directions regarding the constitution of the Review Board 
for the purpose of considering a matter.70 In 2011, the Review Board operated 
with six members.71 The circumstances under which the appointment of a member 
can be terminated are stated under section 83. For example, an appointment can 
be terminated because of the member’s mental incapacity72 or where the member 
fails, without reasonable excuse, to disclose his or her interest in relation to 
matters under consideration.73
There is no provision in the Act that confers absolute discretionary power on 
the Minister, the Board, the Review Board or any of their members in carrying out 
their duties. The Board’s decision-making processes are expected to re ect sound 
administrative law practices and they are required to prepare annual reports.74 The 
Boards’ activities are also subject to parliamentary scrutiny.75
The exemption of  lms from classi cation
As in both Malaysia and Hong Kong, not every  lm is subject to censorship in 
Australia.76 Section 5B(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 lists 13 types of  lm as exempt  lms and provides that, subject 
to section 5B(3),77 application for classi cation of exempt  lms is not necessary. 
The 13 types of exempt  lms are business, accounting, professional, scienti c, 
educational, current affairs, hobbyist, sporting, family, live performance, musical 
presentation, religious and community or cultural  lms.78 Section 28A then 
provides that application may be made to the Board that an unclassi ed  lm is an 
exempt  lm and the Board may grant a certi cate under section 28B certifying 
that the  lm is an exempt  lm. In the event the Board decides that a  lm that has 
earlier been granted a certi cate under section 28B contains material that was not 
brought to the Board’s attention before the certi cate was granted and such 

The key issues 69
material would have caused the  lm to be classi ed M or a higher classi cation, 
the Board must revoke the certi cate granted.79
Matters to be taken into account by classi ers
Section 11 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995 provides for the matters to be taken into account by classi ers in the course 
of making their decisions. These matters are ‘the standards of morality, decency 
and propriety generally accepted by reasonable adults’; ‘the literary, artistic or 
educational merit’ of the  lm; the ‘general character’ of the  lm including 
‘whether it is of a medical, legal or scienti c character’; and ‘the persons or class 
of persons to or amongst whom it is published or is intended or likely to be 
published’. This provision recognizes the importance of freedom of artistic 
expression and current community standards by requiring classi ers to take into 
account the artistic merit of the  lm as well as the standards of morality, decency 
and propriety accepted by the community when making their decisions.
To ensure classi cation decisions are re ective of the community’s standards, 
the Act provides that the Board and Review Board should, as far as possible, be 
constituted by members who are broadly representative of the Australian 
community.80 In addition, the Community Assessment Panel (CAP) scheme was 
introduced to ‘test the extent to which the decisions made by the Board re ected 
current Australian community standards’.81 Members of the CAP (randomly selected 
from a cross-section of the society) are given basic classi cation training before 
being asked to make classi cation recommendations for  lms shown to them. The 
classi cations recommended by the CAP will then be compared to those given by 
the Board to gauge how accurately the Board’s decisions re ect current community 
standards.82 Besides the CAP scheme, research and surveys into community 
standards and attitudes towards  lm classi cation are also carried out periodically.83
Classi cation guidelines
Public consultations were carried out to obtain community feedback before the 
Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games were drawn up 
and introduced in 2003. The consultative process was widely advertised to call for 
submissions and discussion papers were also sent to stakeholders.84 The Guidelines 
expressly state that they are to be revised from time to time with ‘extensive 
community input’ and since 2003 the Guidelines have been revised twice to keep 
the provisions up to date and relevant.
The method of applying the Guidelines is stated in the ‘Using the Guidelines: 
Essential Principles’ section where three inter-related principles – ‘context’, 
‘impact’ and ‘classi able elements’ – are explained. It is provided that the ‘context’ 
principle is to be used to determine whether a ‘classi able element’ is justi ed by 
a  lm’s storyline or themes and the ‘impact’ of a  lm will have to be assessed in 
view of the ‘classi able elements’ that appear in the  lm. The Guidelines employ 
the hierarchy as stated in Table 4.1 in assessing the ‘impact’ of a  lm:

70 The key issues
Table 4.1 Levels of impact and the Australian classi cation categories
Level of impact
Classi cation category
Very mild
Mild
Moderate
Strong
High
Very high
G
PG
M
MA15+
R18+
RC
The Guidelines then went on to provide that in assessing the impact of a  lm, 
the classi ers are required to consider the treatment of individual classi able 
elements, the cumulative effect of those elements, and the purpose and tone of 
the scenes containing such elements. The impact of a scene may be higher if, for 
example, it contains greater detail, is prolonged or is realistic rather than 
stylized.
The scope and limit of contents suitable for each classi cation category are 
also described in the Guidelines. With the exception of X18+ and RC, all the 
classi cation categories are presented in a similar format. They begin with the 
‘Impact Test’ section which determines the threshold for the classi cation 
category and then this is followed by a list of the classi able elements with 
descriptions limiting the content for each element in the category.85
There are six classi able elements provided in the Guidelines and they are 
themes,86 violence, sex, language, drug use and nudity. In summary, the Board 
will take into account:
1 
whether these classi able elements (as they appear in a  lm) are justi ed in 
the context of the  lm;
2 
the impact of each of the classi able elements, including their frequency, 
intensity and cumulative effect;
3 
the purpose and tone of scenes containing classi able elements; and
4 
the manner in which the classi able elements are treated, before classifying a 
 lm in an appropriate classi cation category.
Films will be refused classi cation (banned) if they contain any of the following 
content:87
1 
detailed instruction or promotion in matters of crime or violence;
2 
the promotion or provision of instruction in paedophile activity;
3 
depictions of child sexual abuse or any other exploitative or offensive 
depictions involving a person who is, or appears to be, a child under 18 years;
4 
gratuitous, exploitative or offensive depictions of:
a. 
violence with a very high degree of impact or which are excessively 
frequent, prolonged or detailed;

The key issues 71
b. 
cruelty or real violence which are very detailed or which have a high impact;
c. 
sexual violence;
5 
depictions of practices such as bestiality;
6 
gratuitous, exploitative or offensive depictions of:
a. 
sexual activity accompanied by fetishes or practices which are offensive 
or abhorrent;
b. 
incest fantasies or other fantasies which are offensive or abhorrent;
7 
detailed instruction in the use of proscribed drugs; or
8 
material promoting or encouraging proscribed drug use.
The Guidelines are drafted in a comparatively precise and simple manner and the 
key terms employed therein are clear and detailed in comparison with the 
Malaysian guidelines.
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
The Board is not empowered under the law to require alteration to be made to  lms. 
It only determines the classi cation of a  lm and decides the consumer advice that 
should be given about the  lm.88 Similarly, the Review Board in reviewing a 
decision does not have the power to require alteration to be made to  lms.
Unlike the Hong Kong  lm censorship system, the Australian system does not 
provide for  lm practitioners to indicate and discuss with classi ers the 
classi cation category sought for their  lms. Neither does the Board provide  lm 
practitioners with advice as to alterations that can be made to a submitted  lm in 
order for it to be classi ed under a particular category.89
The provision of reasons for decisions
There is no provision in the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 requiring either the Board or the Review Board to provide 
reasons for their decisions. Although section 26 of the Act deals with notices of 
decision, it does not confer on  lm practitioners the right to reasoned decisions. 
The provision merely states that the Director of the Board and the Convenor of the 
Review Board must give written notice of the decision they made to the applicant 
and to persons who have an interest in the matter.
In Australia, there is no general common law right to reasoned decisions.90 
However, section 13 of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 
provides that any person who is entitled to apply to the court for review of any 
decision reviewable under section 5 may request the decision-maker for a 
statement of reasons for the decision.91 Where a request is made, the decision-
maker must furnish, as soon as practicable and in any event within 28 days after 
receiving the request, the said statement of reasons in writing.92 Therefore,  lm 
practitioners may request a statement of reasons from the Board and the Review 
Board.93 It is noteworthy that the Review Board does publish the reasons for its 
decisions on the Australian Government Classi cation website.94

72 The key issues
Appeal against classi cation decisions
Section 42(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995 provides for four categories of person who may appeal against a Board’s 
decision to the Review Board, and they are the Commonwealth Minister,95 the 
original applicant for classi cation, the publisher of the  lm and a person 
aggrieved by the decision. The word ‘publisher’ is not de ned in the Act but with 
reference to the de nition of ‘publish’ under section 5,96 ‘the publisher of the  lm’ 
would include  lm directors, producers, distributors and exhibitors. As regards a 
‘person aggrieved by the decision’, the Review Board may refuse to deal with an 
application made by this category of person if it is satis ed that the application is 
frivolous or vexatious and not made in good faith.97 Section 42(3) further provides 
that if the decision in question is a restricted decision – that is, a decision to 
classify a  lm MA15+, R18+, X18+ or RC – a person who has engaged in 
activities or research into the contentious aspects of the theme or subject matter of 
the  lm concerned, or an organization whose purposes or activities are related to 
the contentious aspects of the theme or subject matter of the  lm, are to be taken 
as persons aggrieved by the decision.98
The applicant for a review may be present at the screening of the  lm in 
question before the Review Board99 but it is not provided in the Act that the 
applicant has the right to make representations. However, online material suggests 
that, in the process of reviewing a decision, the Review Board will hear submissions 
from the applicant and from parties with an interest in the decision.100
Availability of judicial review
The Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 does not 
contain an ouster clause purporting to bar  lm practitioners from challenging the 
decisions made by the Board and the Review Board by way of judicial review. In 
fact, there have been numerous judicial review applications being made to 
challenge decisions of the Review Board, which is further discussed in Chapter 6.
Summary: an evaluation of the key issues
On the face of it, the Malaysian  lm censorship system appears to suffer in the 
eight key areas discussed above. The issues raised by analysing the systems on 
paper may be summarized as follows.
Decision making entities
The Malaysian Board of Censors can be  lled with retired senior government 
of cers by the Home Minister and unlike in Hong Kong and Australia, no open 
recruitment exercise is carried out in Malaysia to locate suitable and competent 
candidates to be appointed as members of the Board. The appointment of members 
of the Board and the Appeal Committee may be revoked by the Minister at any 

The key issues 73
time without having to provide any reason for the revocation. The discretionary 
power to reappoint these members after their terms of service have expired also 
rests with the Minister. Since tenure of of ce lies in the hands of the Minister, 
members of these two entities could be inhibited by concerns over their tenure and 
in uenced to make decisions that conform to the Minister’s (or the Executive’s) 
wishes or directives. Film censorship decisions could thus be overly in uenced by 
government policies or personal instructions and not by the merits or content of 
the  lm itself or by the provisions of the law and guidelines. An example is the 
banning of Lelaki Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist, Amir Muhammad, 
2006) discussed in Chapter 5 below. This is in stark contrast with the position in 
Australia where the law spells out clearly the circumstances under which the 
appointment of members of the Board and the Review Board could be terminated. 
By expressly laying down the circumstances of termination of appointment, 
arbitrary termination appears to be very unlikely. Consequently, members of the 
public can expect that these decision-making entities will be more independent in 
making their decisions.
In addition, the Malaysian Home Minister has considerable power, exercisable 
at his absolute discretion, to prohibit the exhibition, distribution, possession or 
sale of any  lm in the country. No decision-making entity is afforded such power 
under the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship systems.
Free speech scholars, including Schauer and Barendt, have often discussed in 
their writings the importance of having competent and impartial decision-makers 
in censorship matters.101 The former, for example, noted that the determination of 
who decides what material or content is to be made available to the populace is of 
equal importance to the determination of what type of material or content is to be 
made available,102 while the latter described the likelihood of bias, where of cials 
appointed by the government may be keen to censor materials that are critical of 
the government, as one of the ‘disturbing features’ of administrative censorship.103
The exemption of  lms from censorship
The appearance of a double-standard exists in the treatment of  lms in Malaysia 
because the Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that  lms funded by the 
government are not subject to the censorship process. Additionally, the Home 
Minister is empowered to exempt any  lm from censorship at his sole discretion. 
If this power is exercised, it would appear to undermine the censorship system as 
a whole. Apart from exempting certain types of  lm that are stipulated in the 
legislation, no decision-making entity in Hong Kong or Australia is given carte 
blanche power to exempt  lms from the censorship process.
Matters to be taken into account by censors
Unlike the Hong Kong Film Censorship Ordinance and the Australian 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995, the Malaysian 
Film Censorship Act 2002 does not stipulate the matters that censors must consider 

74 The key issues
or take into account when making censorship decisions. Quite apart from the 
undesirable lack of clarity this gives the Malaysian system, it is not at all clear 
whether the artistic merit of the  lm under examination is taken into account in 
practice at all.
Additionally (and again, in contrast with the situation in the Hong Kong and 
Australian models),  lm censors in Malaysia are not required to take into account 
contemporary community standards. There appears to be no effort made in 
Malaysia to ensure that the censorship decisions are re ective of current 
community standards. Therefore, Malaysian censors appear to carry out their 
duties more subjectively when compared with the approach adopted by their Hong 
Kong and Australian counterparts who aim to achieve a level of objectivity.104 
Malaysian censors may be imposing their personal standards within the system 
and ignoring the standards of reasonable adults in the community. As discussed in 
Chapter 1, artistic merit is taken into account by the English and American courts 
when they decide whether a work charged to be obscene is so or otherwise. The 
legal literature on this point indicates the importance of the consideration of 
artistic merit in deciding whether a ‘speech’ or ‘expression’ is to be suppressed.
Censorship guidelines
The Malaysian Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 appear to suffer from four 
related ‘defects’:
1 
The provisions in the Guidelines lack clarity. They are imprecise, vaguely 
drafted and the key terms and phrases are not de ned. This ‘defect’ will leave 
censors with wide discretion to interpret the provisions and inconsistent 
censorship decisions could well be made.
2 
Unlike the guidelines applied in Hong Kong and Australia, the Malaysian 
Guidelines do not provide for contentious content to be approved for 
exhibition and distribution if it is justi ed in the context of the  lm as a whole. 
Related to this omission, there is no provision in the Guidelines requiring 
censors to take into account the degree and intensity with which censorship 
elements are presented in a  lm and the realism of such presentation. 
Therefore, if contentious material or a censorship element appears in a  lm, 
the scene containing such content must be altered or possibly, the entire  lm 
itself will be refused approval for exhibition. This ‘defect’ has made the 
Malaysian censors’ job rather simplistic as they are not required, unlike their 
Hong Kong and Australian counterparts, to weigh considerations such as the 
context of the  lm and the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of 
particular content in the  lm.
3 
The applicable  lm classi cation categories are not provided for in the Guidelines 
and thus the limit of each censorship element allowable under the various 
classi cation categories is not set out clearly within the censorship system.
4 
Many more types of  lm, content and portrayals are prohibited under the 
guidelines applied in Malaysia when compared to the guidelines applied in 

The key issues 75
Hong Kong and Australia. For example, political censorship is provided in 
the Malaysian Guidelines where  lms propagating or portraying political 
ideology such as communism are prohibited. There is no political censorship 
in  lms under the Hong Kong and Australian guidelines. Another example 
would be the strict regulation of  lms containing religious themes or content, 
which appears to be absent in the Hong Kong and Australian guidelines.105
In comparison, the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship guidelines are 
relatively clearly drafted, systematically presented and responsive in nature, 
which appears likely to make their application more coherent and the outcomes 
more relevant and acceptable. Both sets of guidelines were drawn up with input 
from  lm practitioners and the public and they contain:
1 
clear instructions as to how they should be applied;
2 
provisions allowing contentious content to be justi ed in the context of the  lm;
3 
provisions requiring censors to take into account the degree, intensity and 
realism with which a particular censorship element is presented; and
4 
descriptions of the limits of content allowed under each classi cation category.
Like obscenity and indecency laws, vagueness in de nitions and applicable 
standards or tests also exists in  lm censorship and it can be found in the censorship 
guidelines applied by censors.106 Although vagueness cannot be completely 
eliminated, the degree of uncertainty could, and should, be minimized. As 
discussed in this chapter (and con rmed in the following chapter), the Hong Kong 
and Australian systems are more successful in dealing with the problems of 
vagueness than the Malaysian system, and this is achieved primarily by drawing 
up clearly de ned descriptions of the limits of content allowable under the 
systems. As raised in Chapter 1, vagueness bedevils discussion of censorship 
laws. However, a key factor in practice is the relative clarity of terms and how 
consistently they can be understood and applied.
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
Malaysian censors are empowered under the censorship law to require alteration 
– which includes excision, addition, erasure and reconstruction of scenes, 
dialogues, sound and subtitles107 – to be made before a  lm is approved for 
exhibition and distribution. This is in contrast with the situation in Australia and 
Hong Kong where the former’s decision-making entities do not have such power, 
while the latter’s censors only have the power to require excision to be made and 
it is only exercised under extreme circumstances.108 Alteration in whatever form, 
affects the artistic integrity of the  lm concerned and the exercise of such power 
raises concerns about freedom of expression particularly to the ‘free speech and 
autonomy’ rationale discussed in Chapter 1. This rationale sees speech or 
expression as having an inherent value and as being an integral aspect of every 
individual’s right to self-ful lment. Alteration to  lms in effect restricts and 

76 The key issues
suppresses  lm practitioners’ expression and thus inhibits their autonomy and 
self-ful lment.
In addition, there appears to be no formal channel for  lm practitioners in 
Malaysia to interact with censors over the issue of classi cation category. The 
classi cation category a  lm receives has implications for its commercial viability, 
as a restrictive category may reduce potential audiences and therefore shrink box 
of ce revenues as discussed in Chapter 5. In Hong Kong, when a  lm is submitted 
for censorship purposes, the  lm practitioner concerned may indicate the 
classi cation category that is being sought for the  lm. The censor assigned to 
examine the  lm will have to, as far as possible, accommodate the classi cation 
sought and in the event the classi cation could not be accommodated, advice will 
be given about any excision that could be made to the  lm to secure the desired 
classi cation. Discussion between censors and  lm practitioners may occur within 
such a process. On paper, the Australian system also lacks a formal channel for 
 lm practitioners to indicate the classi cation they are seeking or discuss the 
classi cation category to be given to their  lm.
The provision of reasons for decisions
Under the Malaysian  lm censorship system, the provision of reasons for 
decisions is con ned to only two instances: one, where the Board of Censors 
approves a  lm for exhibition subject to alteration being made to the  lm and 
two, where approval is refused. Additionally, the Appeal Committee and the 
Home Minister are not required under the Film Censorship Act 2002 to provide 
reasons for their decisions. In Hong Kong, censors are required to furnish reasons 
for every censorship decision they make under the Film Censorship Ordinance, 
while in Australia, the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 
ensures that  lm practitioners are able to obtain reasons for the decisions made 
on their  lms.
In Malaysia and Hong Kong, reasons for censorship decisions are not made 
public. They are only provided to the  lm practitioners concerned. In Australia, 
reasons for  lm classi cation decisions made by the Board are also not made 
available to members of the public, but the Review Board’s reasons for decisions 
are published on the Classi cation website.
Appeal against censorship decisions
Film practitioners in Malaysia are not afforded a statutory right to make oral 
representations before the Appeal Committee at the appeal stage of a censorship 
process. Such an omission would appear to deprive them of an opportunity to be 
heard to justify the contentious content or portrayals in their  lms that censors 
found objectionable. In contrast, the Hong Kong Film Censorship Ordinance 
confers on  lm practitioners the right to make oral representations before the 
Board of Review. In Australia, such right is not statutorily guaranteed but the 
Review Board has expressly stated on its of cial website that it will hear 

The key issues 77
submissions from the person who appealed against the decision as well as from 
parties with an interest in the decision.
Availability of judicial review
There are two ouster clauses in the Malaysian Film Censorship Act 2002 
purporting to oust the court’s judicial review jurisdiction in  lm censorship 
matters. This is in stark contrast with the Hong Kong and Australian legislation 
where there is no provision barring  lm practitioners from seeking legal remedies 
from the judiciary. It must be noted that judicial review appears to be an important 
safeguard for  lm practitioners working in jurisdictions with a state-based 
censorship system, as is the case in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia.
The ouster clauses’ effect of excluding judicial review applications may be 
avoided if the courts extend the ambit of jurisdictional errors to include errors of 
law therein. The English and Malaysian courts’ approach in dealing with ouster 
clauses is discussed in Chapter 6 where it is argued that whenever an error of law 
is committed by the decision-maker, no ouster clause, however widely drafted, 
may exclude judicial review of the decision made. Another point to be noted in 
regard to the availability of judicial review is that free speech scholars argue that it 
is wrong for entities other than the courts to decide ultimately whether an individual 
has a right to free speech.109 This suggests that  lm censorship authorities’ decisions 
to ban  lms should not be  nal, conclusive or exempt from judicial scrutiny.
The  lm censorship laws, guidelines and processes as discussed in the preceding 
chapter and the key issues and concerns analysed in this chapter suggest that the 
Malaysian  lm censorship system needs to be reformed. However, many aspects 
of the situation set out in the documents about the laws, guidelines and processes 
can be further, and usefully, examined through  eldwork that investigates the 
operation of the system in each jurisdiction. Results from that  eldwork are 
reported and analysed in the following chapter.

5 
Film censorship systems in 
Malaysia, Hong Kong and 
Australia
 
The practitioners’ opinions and 
experiences
Introduction
As discussed in Chapter 1, interviews with Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian 
 lm practitioners were conducted to obtain their opinions of the key issues that 
arise in the  lm censorship systems as identi ed and analysed in the preceding 
chapter. The  lm practitioner interviewees were also asked about their experiences 
in dealing with censorship authorities and about any changes to the existing system 
that they hoped to see take place. The key issues discussed during the interviews 
are closely linked to one another, forming the larger question of ‘What are the 
effects of the  lm censorship laws, guidelines and processes on the  lm industries?’, 
which is then used to answer the question of ‘What changes, if any, to the  lm 
censorship system appear likely to promote the artistic vibrancy and commercial 
viability of the  lm industry?’ Thirty six interviews were conducted with  lm 
practitioners from the three jurisdictions under study and the outcome is reported 
in this chapter. After a summary of the general perceptions and experiences of the 
interviewees in each of the systems, their opinions of the speci c key issues are 
discussed and  nally conclusions are drawn from the opinions.
The Malaysian  lm censorship system has been described, amongst other 
things, as ‘restricting’, ‘conservative’, ‘outdated’, ‘inconsistent’ and ‘haphazard’. 
All of the Malaysian  lm practitioners interviewed for this book felt artistically 
and/or commercially constrained by the system. Tsai Ming-liang, a Malaysian-
born, Taipei-based and internationally renowned  lm director, noted that:1
One of the reasons why I chose not to return to Malaysia to make  lms is 
because it is very troublesome. You are not sure when you will encounter 
problems with the authorities… and after you have completed your  lm, you 
are never sure whether it will be approved for exhibition or not.
U-Wei Haji Saari, another prominent Malaysian director, pointed out that:2
Sloppy censorship indicates to the outside people that we are so intolerant 
and that we are really way back. That scares them… because now  lms are 
going global with things such as co-productions, so it is dif cult for me to get 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 79
foreign producers to invest in my work because they know that it can be 
butchered, it can be censored! That is the negative effect of our censorship.
The above opinions were echoed by Lorna Tee, a Malaysian  lm producer and 
distributor now based in Hong Kong, in that ‘it is hard because you don’t know 
how your  lm will be censored and whether it can be released in Malaysia, or 
whether you have to re-edit it… that is not good commercially’.3
A point that is apparent from the Malaysian  eldwork is that favouritism is 
prevalent, in that independent  lm practitioners are marginalized while the more 
established practitioners appear to receive better treatment from censors. The 
preferential treatment includes easier access to censors for discussion (three of 
the interviewees disclosed that they can easily meet with censors to discuss the 
censorship decisions made on their  lms because they personally know the 
censors, as well as the Chair of the Appeal Committee) and more lenient 
censorship decisions on certain ‘preferred’  lms. This made it clear that what is 
permissible in one  lm may not be so in another. Amir Muhammad, an independent 
 lm director and producer who had his two independently produced  lms banned, 
noted that the censors tend to be ‘friendlier’ to  lms  nanced by established 
production companies. In reference to Susuk (2008),4 a horror  lm which he 
directed for a prominent production company, Amir noted that the two minor cuts 
required by the Board of Censors ‘may have a lot to do with the fact that it was 
 nanced by this big company and they [the censors] don’t really bother the big 
companies. They pick on the small ones’.5 Yasmin Ahmad, whose  lms Sepet 
(Chinese Eye, 2004) and Muallaf (The Convert, 2008) had encountered censorship 
problems, noted that: 
They [the censors] will let go of a  lm that has a man touching a woman’s 
breast and then they will not let go of a  lm that has a woman showing a little 
bit of leg, like in Sepet. They let Remp it go but not Sepet… see, if you are a 
big  lm producer and have friends in high places, you are more likely to get 
things through.6
The award-winning  lm director then went on to state that: 
If a  lm was independently produced, it is easier for them to ban it but if it 
was produced by big studios like some of my  lms, then they are less likely 
to ban it and I think perhaps because they know the people who are producing 
them, that it was from a big studio…. Big studios seem to be able to get things 
through more easily than independent  lmmakers. Muallaf was independent 
and it is having problems.7
Film directors and producers in Malaysia are inhibited by censorship concerns 
whenever they embark on a  lm project. Some quotes from the interviews will 
exemplify this point: ‘censorship is always at the back of our minds’;8 ‘there are 
many  lms which I think will never get passed if they are made’;9 ‘in every  lm 

80 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
that I wanted to make, I would always think “Would the censorship board allow it 
to be shown to the public?”’;10 and ‘we get short of ideas because we cannot do this, 
cannot do that’.11 Self-censorship is common and most of the Malaysian directors 
and producers interviewed disclosed that they self-censor and often avoid violence, 
sex and other contentious content in their  lms because of censorship concerns 
even though such content may be necessary in the context of their  lms. Some of 
the interviewees pointed out that the restrictive censorship system in Malaysia has 
created an environment which was ‘not suitable for  lm makers to grow’,12 caused 
their  lms to be much less appealing to cinema-goers,13 and was the root cause of 
the very limited variety of  lms being produced locally.14 Censorship ensures only 
‘safe  lms’ are made and nothing else. Aziz M. Osman, a director and producer 
who was shaken by the experience that he had with the censorship authorities, 
admitted that ‘after the experiences that I have had [with the censors], I don’t want 
to take risks anymore… I need to play safe, I need to survive’.15
The standard of censorship has also become stricter than before the introduction 
of the Film Censorship Guidelines in 1993. Tsai Ming-liang, for example, pointed 
out that ‘there is no improvement in terms of perception and openness to arts… at 
least last time, in P. Ramlee’s  lms [in the 1950s and 1960s], there were kissing 
scenes or bathing scenes but now, they are not allowed at all… it is, in fact, moving 
backwards and has become very conservative’.16 The Malaysian interviewees also 
said that freedom of expression was very important for them,17 some even describing 
it as of ‘the ultimate importance’.18 It is clear from the interviews that  lm 
practitioners in Malaysia crave freedom of artistic expression, which they do not 
enjoy, and that they believe the censorship system adversely affects their ability to 
produce commercially viable  lms.
Some of the Malaysian interviewees also pointed out that there was double 
standard applied to treatment between local  lms and foreign  lms. Ruhani Abdul 
Rahman, a  lm producer, noted that Malaysian  lmmakers were often reminded 
not to include many types of content in their  lms but such content was allowed 
in foreign  lms. The producer believed that this was detrimental to local producers 
in that their  lms would not be as appealing and competitive as imported ones.19 
For example, prior to 2004 Malaysian  lmmakers were not permitted to make 
horror  lms (which are very popular among local audiences) but such  lms were 
imported from abroad (notably from Hong Kong, Japan, Korea and America) to 
be distributed and exhibited locally.20 The pre-2004 prohibition not only obstructed 
creative expression but also barred local  lmmakers from gaining a share of the 
pro table horror  lm market.21
By contrast, the interviews with Hong Kong  lm practitioners clearly showed 
the interviewees to be happy and satis ed with the existing censorship system. 
There is no major dissatisfaction with or complaint about the overall functioning 
of the system. Gordon Chan, for example, noted that ‘I never had any problem at 
all with the Hong Kong  lm censorship system in my 20-odd years in  lmmaking’.22 
The current President of the Hong Kong Film Directors’ Guild then added ‘I 
always think that the freedom of speech and the censorship system in Hong Kong 
are the main reasons why our  lms succeed’. The Hong Kong interviewees were 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 81
generally of the opinion that the  lm censorship system worked very well, 
particularly its three-tier classi cation scheme which they described as ‘a very 
good practice’.23 Benny Chan, a commercially successful action  lm director and 
producer, noted that:
The three-tier classi cation scheme is very clear and as a director, there is no 
problem for me at all. We know that certain scenes would push a  lm into the 
Category III classi cation and therefore will make it not suitable for young 
audiences but it does not prohibit us from making the  lm we wanted. As 
long as we are willing to accept that the  lm will eventually be classi ed 
Category III, we can go ahead and make it.24
Producer Terence Chang observed that the classi cation scheme is ‘a good one’ 
and that it worked very well in Hong Kong. Chang then added that since the 
introduction of the scheme, coarse language, nudity and sex scenes were allowed 
in  lms for exhibition and distribution.25 Wellington Fung, a veteran  lm producer 
and co-founder of Media Asia (one of the largest and most successful  lm 
production and distribution companies in Hong Kong today) was of a similar 
opinion and further noted that ‘the classi cation system gives liberty to  lmmakers 
to make different types of  lm and to choose their audiences when they decide on 
a  lm project’.26
The Hong Kong interviewees also saw the  lm censorship system as ‘liberal’,27 
‘ef cient’,28 ‘very practical’,29 ‘running smoothly and reasonable’,30 ‘operates in a 
consistent manner’,31 that ‘it does not affect creativity’32 and, importantly, ‘there 
is no government interference in it’.33 Gordon Chan, for example, attributed the 
critical and commercial successes enjoyed by the Hong Kong  lm industry to the 
liberal and transparent censorship system. Chan noted that ‘I do think the reason 
why the  lm industry is so successful is because of our freedom of expression and 
that freedom was due to the way in which our censorship system was handled’.34 
The positive responses are supported by the fact that when the interviewees were 
asked what reforms they would like to see to the Hong Kong  lm censorship 
system, most of them replied with con dence that change to the system is not 
necessary.35 Benny Chan, for example, expressed the view that: ‘I think the 
censorship system is really good. We have the three-tier classi cation scheme, we 
can appeal, we can discuss with censors… so it is really good. I don’t see any 
changes or reforms are needed.’ It is noteworthy that all of the Hong Kong 
interviewees were hard-pressed to come up with any substantial changes that they 
thought could make the current system better.
Additionally, in stark contrast with the perceptions and experiences of the 
Malaysian interviewees, all of the Hong Kong interviewees disclosed that they did 
not feel at all constrained by the  lm censorship system. The interviewees noted 
that they very rarely self-censored their  lm projects and did not avoid graphic 
violence, sex or other contentious content in their  lms because of censorship 
concerns in Hong Kong.36 The interviewees were also of the opinion that the Hong 
Kong censors were not conferred wide discretionary powers under the law and 

82 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
that the  lm censorship standards had remained more or less the same after the 
reuni cation with China in 1997. The interviewees also expressed the opinion that 
freedom of expression is very important to them. Gordon Chan, for example, 
related the importance of the freedom to the viability of the  lm industry and the 
competitiveness of local productions. Chan was of the opinion that in order to 
compete with foreign  lms (particularly those from Hollywood) local  lm 
practitioners needed the freedom to produce creative and cutting edge  lms to 
attract audiences. In addition, Chan pointed out that freedom of expression was 
also crucial to  lmmakers who wanted to explore sensitive social or political 
issues in their  lms.
It is not the Hong Kong  lm censorship system but the Chinese  lm censorship 
system that causes concerns to Hong Kong  lm practitioners. Benny Chan, for 
example, noted that:
The biggest market for us now is in Mainland China and it does not have a 
three-tier classi cation system like the one we have here in Hong Kong...  lm 
censorship in China is very strict and our concern is with Chinese censorship, 
not with censorship in Hong Kong... we really need the Mainland Chinese 
market and the size of the box of ce revenue there is very attractive.
Mabel Cheung, who spent more than a year in Beijing dealing with the censorship 
authorities to get her  lm The Soong Sisters released without her having to excise 
18 minutes of the  lm’s footage (as required by the Chinese censors), claimed that 
‘a lot of Hong Kong  lmmakers are looking towards China and they have to self-
censor in order to get co-production projects and to get their  lms released there. 
That really restricts them!’37 Gordon Chan, who has in the past decade worked 
both in China and Hong Kong, revealed that ‘when I work in a co-production 
project in China, I feel so constrained’ and, like his colleagues Benny Chan and 
Mable Cheung, Chan thought that China should adopt the Hong Kong three-tier 
classi cation scheme.38
The majority of the Australian  lm practitioners interviewed for this book were 
satis ed with the country’s classi cation system. They were of the opinion that it 
was ‘in good shape’, ‘effective’, ‘works well’ and ‘representative of the community 
standards’.39 For example, Tony Ayres, a director and producer, thought that 
Australia had ‘a healthy classi cation system where  lms get seen in the context 
that they were designed to be seen in’;40 Rolf de Heer, an award-winning  lm 
director and producer, noted that the classi cation system was ‘not a restrictive’ 
one;41 Ray Lawrence, a  lm director, was of the opinion that the classi ers were 
doing ‘a good job’42 while James Hewison, Theatrical Distribution Manager at 
Madman Entertainment, found the classi cation process to be ‘transparent’ and 
noted that ‘there are very few  lms that can’t be released in cinemas’,43 while Joel 
Pearlman, Managing Director of Roadshow Films, observed that the system was 
‘effective in providing guidance to all the constituents who need it’.44
These interviewees noted that they were neither artistically nor commercially 
constrained by the classi cation system. They were of the opinion that freedom of 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 83
expression is very important for them as  lmmakers and agreed that they did enjoy 
it in Australia. The interviewees were also of the opinion that they were free to make 
the  lms they wanted to as long as there is a demand for such  lms in the market. 
Therefore, the Australian  lm industry is subject more to commercial pressures than 
censorship. As Tony Ayres puts it: ‘the kind of constraints in terms of freedom of 
expression for us are more economic… in terms of the stories that you can tell being 
the kind of stories that people would want to see’. It is also apparent from the 
 eldwork that Australian  lm practitioners do not avoid graphic violence, sexual 
content or other contentious elements in their  lms (or the  lms they intend to 
distribute or exhibit) because of censorship concerns, or purely out of fear of how 
the  lms might be classi ed. Censorship was not viewed as an impediment in this 
case. Such content was avoided, if ever, because of different factors, such as on 
moral grounds and personal taste, commercial considerations or because such 
content was not necessary for their  lms. Peter Campbell, for example, noted that 
his distribution company, Accent Film Entertainment, did ‘reject  lms that are 
exploitative… but that had nothing to do with the censorship system but morals’;45 
while director Ray Lawrence, noted that ‘I feel responsible for the amount of 
violence, sex and the contentious content… All my  lms are for mature audience 
but I would still self-censor in a way if I felt that something was gratuitous’.
The interviewees’ opinions of the key issues that arise from the  lm censorship 
systems as identi ed in Chapter 4 will now be considered in turn.
Film practitioners’ opinions of the key issues
Decision-making entities
There are three concerns with regard to the  lm censorship decision-making 
entities in Malaysia:
1 
the suitability and competence of the appointed  lm censors;
2 
the independence of  lm censors in making censorship decisions; and
3 
the Home Minister’s discretionary power to override censorship decisions 
and prohibit the exhibition and distribution of  lms.
All of the Malaysian interviewees expressed concerns about the suitability and 
competence of the  lm censors in carrying out their duties. As discussed in Chapter 
3, the Board of Censors is made up of retired senior government of cers with little, 
if any, knowledge or experience in  lm and  lmmaking. U-Wei Haji Saari noted 
that government of cers who performed well during their tenure were ‘rewarded’ 
with a position on the Board after they retired from service. The  lmmaker was of 
the opinion that these censors were ‘conservative and narrow minded’ and that 
they censored  lms according to their whims and fancies. Based on his own 
experiences in dealing with the Board, U-Wei found that the censors approached 
 lm as something that ‘challenges or threatens’ them and they did not attempt to 
understand or appreciate  lms. He added: ‘from what I have seen the censors do to 

84 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
my  lms, I don’t think they are sensitive enough nor really have real bearing of 
what  lm is all about’. The way in which censors were appointed was also 
questioned by Ruhani Abdul Rahman: ‘what the government is doing is just giving 
these retired of cers something to do [after their retirement]. I think it should not 
be that way. It should be given to the right people to do the job’. The seasoned 
producer also noted that most of the censors had no experience in or knowledge of 
 lm and thus were not suitable to serve as  lm censors.46 Lorna Tee was also of the 
opinion that the Malaysian censors had ‘very little understanding of  lm’ while 
Ahmad Puad Onah, a producer and distributor who heads Primeworks Studio, 
found the censors to be operating with the mindset that ‘anything that is out of the 
ordinary should not be shown to the audience’. Ahmad Puad was also of the 
opinion that the censors did not understand the adverse effects of alteration to the 
 lm as a whole, noting that ‘there are not enough people who know and understand 
the  lm industry in the censorship board… the board is  lled with retired 
government of cers who cut scenes out without understanding how it will affect 
the  lm’. Tsai Ming-liang felt that the censors’ exposure to the varieties of  lm 
was very limited. Tsai noted that the censors’ appreciation of  lm was very shallow 
and therefore they were not quali ed to make censorship judgments.
The suitability, competence and maturity of  lm censors are also re ected in 
their decisions. Amir Muhammad noted that there were many ‘stupid decisions’ 
being made. He cited the censorship decision for Love Conquers All (Tan Chui 
Mui, 2006), a  lm he produced, as one example. The Board of Censors required 
alteration to be made to a scene where a character of Chinese ethnicity uttered the 
word ‘assalamualaikum’47 to a character of Malay ethnicity. The Board required 
alteration to be made to the scene, citing the reason that a Chinese character is not 
supposed to utter that word. As a result, the dialogue had to be ‘beeped’ making it 
seem as if the Chinese character was cursing, which in effect made ‘something 
rude out of something which wasn’t’.48 While elaborating his experiences in 
dealing with censors, Aziz M. Osman also suggested that the censors were ill-
equipped and not intelligent enough to make censorship decisions.49 Aziz was also 
of the opinion that the composition of the Board of Censors and the Appeal 
Committee was not representative of the Malaysian community and that the 
censors were out of touch with contemporary community standards, being 
unaware of ‘what is really happening on the ground’. Commenting on her 
experiences in meeting with members of the Board and Committee over the 
censorship decision of her  lm Sepet (2004) – an interracial love story between a 
Chinese boy and a Malay girl – Yasmin Ahmad remarked that the censors 
concerned were not competent to carry out their duties, that they ‘just censor 
indiscriminately’ and that they were ‘lazy, stubborn and stupid’.
The in uence of the Home Minister on the Board of Censors and Appeal 
Committee caused concerns over independence. This could be linked to the fact 
that members of the Board and the Committee are appointed by the Minister50 and 
their appointments may be revoked by the Minister at any time and without having 
to assign any reason.51 An example is the banning of Lelaki Komunis Terakhir 
(The Last Communist, Amir Muhammad, 2006) – a documentary tracing the 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 85
places where Chin Peng, exiled leader of the Communist Party of Malaya, had 
lived.52 The  lm was initially approved for exhibition without any alteration and 
classi ed ‘U’ (suitable for general audience) by the Board of Censors but after the 
Home Minister exercised his discretionary power under section 26 of the Film 
Censorship Act 2002 to ban the  lm, the Board turned around and claimed that the 
 lm was not suitable to be exhibited and distributed in Malaysia. This incident 
suggests that,  rst, the Board is not independent and free from political pressure 
and second, the censors have no con dence in the decisions they make.53 Khoo 
Eng Yow, an independent  lm director and producer, felt that Malaysian censors 
are ‘too obeying’ and submissive to external pressures. The independence of 
censors was also raised by fellow  lm director James Lee, who noted that ‘it is 
their job at stake and to play safe, anything that they felt is a concern or will cause 
uproar, they will just censor or ban it’. Leonard Tee, a distributor, noted that the 
censors were not willing to bear any responsibility for the decisions they made 
and ‘if they don’t understand [the  lm], they will think that it is dangerous… and 
they will just ban it’.
Regarding the Home Minister’s discretionary power under section 26, Ahmad 
Puad Onah was of the opinion that the Minister should not be empowered to 
override censorship decisions made by the Board of Censors and the Appeal 
Committee: ‘I don’t agree that the Minister [should be] given that discretionary 
power to ban a  lm after the Appeal Committee has approved it’. This opinion is 
echoed by other interviewees like Khoo Eng Yow who deemed the exercise of 
such power as ‘not healthy’ while Amir Muhammad, whose  lm Lelaki Komunis 
Terakhir became a victim under this provision, remarked that judicial review is all 
the more needed to counter this seemingly unfettered discretion.
In Hong Kong, censors are appointed by the Chief Executive under the terms of 
civil service and their tenure of of ce lasts until the age of retirement, if there is no 
resignation or disciplinary termination.54 The  eldwork conducted suggests that the 
Hong Kong censors are in fact not subject to political pressure or interference. The 
Hong Kong interviewees found the members of the Panel of Censors and Board of 
Review to be ‘quali ed to carry out their duties’,55 ‘open-minded’,56 ‘effective’57 
and ‘approachable for discussions’.58 Some of the interviewees were also of the 
opinion that the way in which  lm censors were appointed was ‘ ne and 
acceptable’.59 Gordon Chan noted that the Hong Kong  lm censorship system was 
comparatively better than others because its decision-making entities were very 
well balanced. Chan elaborated that there were members of the public of different 
background, age and experience (in the Panel of Advisers) that provided their 
opinions of how the community would view certain  lm content and whether they 
needed to be censored. Then, there was also the group of professionals such as 
cultural leaders, academics, artists and experts in various  elds (in the Panel of 
Censors and the Board of Review) who provided their views and pointed to the 
direction in which Hong Kong society should be heading. Chan added:
At times you will encounter sensitive issues or controversial content in  lms 
and you will need this professional group to spearhead the trend.… They may 

86 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
 nd the content to be controversial but nevertheless agree [that it should be 
released] because “this is the right time to bring it up and discuss about it”… 
or they may stop it because they think “it shouldn’t be done or there should 
be different standards”.
In addition, unlike the Malaysian Film Censorship Act 2002, the Hong Kong Film 
Censorship Ordinance does not confer wide discretionary power on any of the 
decision-making entities.
In Australia, the full time members of the Classi cation Board and members 
of the Classi cation Review Board are appointed by the Governor General based 
on the recommendation made by the Commonwealth Minister after consultation 
with state and territory ministers. The candidates are selected through a merit-
based selection process. Before an appointment is made, regard is given to the 
desirability of having the membership of the Boards broadly representative of the 
Australian community. The appointment of a classi er is for a time period as 
speci ed in the instrument of appointment and the circumstances under which an 
appointment may be terminated are expressly provided for in the Classi cation 
(Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.60 Such circumstances 
include physical or mental incapacity, absence from duty (except on leave of 
absence) for a certain period of time, or failure to disclose interest in relation to a 
matter under consideration.
Only two of the Australian  lm practitioners interviewed for this book had 
issues with the suitability of classi ers. Richard J. Frankland, an indigenous 
 lmmaker, had doubts concerning the suitability of the classi ers because ‘they 
were talking from their cultural shape and not from the cultural shape of all 
Australians’.61 On the composition of the decision-making entities, Frankland 
commented: ‘They need to go through intense cultural indigenous programs. 
They need to know about the variance in other cultures. I think they are utilizing 
their powers very much based on the Euro-centric upper-middle class perspective.’ 
The other interviewee – Peter Campbell, a distributor – was disappointed with the 
members of the Classi cation Review Board that he had encountered during the 
appeal process of 9 Songs (Michael Winterbottom, 2004), a  lm which contains 
explicit sexual content that his company distributes, because he had found them to 
have a ‘precast judgment’ on the  lm.62
Apart from Frankland and Campbell, the other Australian interviewees were 
satis ed with the appointment to, and composition of, the Classi cation Board 
and the Classi cation Review Board.63 For example, Ray Lawrence was of the 
opinion that ‘the censorship board should consist of intelligent people who 
should be able to see the difference between something that has artistic, social 
and cultural merits rather than just slop. And I think, in the main they do… ’,64 
while Greg Denning, an executive at Icon Film Distribution Australia, thought 
that Australia had ‘a system in place which is representative of the community. 
The fact that we have very few instances where there is public outrage about a 
classi cation decision says that… very rarely people feel that they [the classi ers] 
have got it wrong.’65 This view is echoed by Jan Chapman, producer of the 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 87
critically acclaimed  lm The Piano (Jane Campion, 1993), who noted that the 
Board consisted of a cross section of the people who were representative of the 
Australian community.66
It is noteworthy that there is no provision in the Classi cation (Publications, 
Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 that confers wide discretionary power on 
any of the entities involved in the making of classi cation decisions. More 
importantly, unlike the Malaysian Minister, the Australian Minister is not 
empowered to override decisions made by the classi ers.
The exemption of  lms from censorship
Section 2(2)(a) of the Malaysian Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that the Act 
shall not apply to any  lm sponsored by the Malaysian Government, while 
section 28 empowers the Home Minister to exempt any  lm from censorship. 
These provisions appear to be supporting a double standard in  lm censorship 
and were criticized by the interviewees. When referred to these provisions, 
U-Wei Haji Saari responded that they sounded ‘dubious’ and that it was 
‘irresponsible’ for someone to be given the complete power to exempt  lms from 
censorship at his or her discretion. Amir Muhammad questioned the rationale 
and necessity of having such a wide power resting on a single individual. Saw 
Teong Hin was of the opinion that the power to exempt certain  lms from 
censorship was ‘not fair’ because it was akin to claiming that ‘anything that I [the 
government] do is morally upright and good and everything others do is suspect’67 
while Khoo Eng Yow thought that every  lm should be subjected to the same 
censorship process.
In Hong Kong, the Film Censorship Authority is empowered to exempt certain 
classes of  lm from censorship.68 However, unlike the Malaysian Home Minister, 
the Film Censorship Authority does not have carte blanche power to exempt any 
 lm from undergoing the censorship process. Only  lms that fall within ‘the 
classes or description of  lms’ as set out in the second schedule to the Film 
Censorship Regulations may be exempted and they include cultural, educational, 
instructional, promotional, sports, travelogues, musical and religious  lms.69 The 
classes of  lm that may be exempted are clearly stipulated in legislation and there 
was no dissatisfaction or complaint at all from the Hong Kong interviewees that 
the power to exempt  lms had been abused.
In Australia, the 13 types of  lm entitled to exemption from classi cation are 
stipulated under section 5B(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and 
Computer Games) Act 1995 and they include business, scienti c, educational, 
current affairs, sporting, musical presentation and religious  lms. The decision-
making entities are not empowered to exempt, at their discretion, any other types 
of  lm from classi cation. This is in marked contrast with the Malaysian Minister’s 
power to exempt any  lm from censorship at his discretion, a power which, if 
exercised, poses a challenge to the overall integrity of the  lm censorship system 
in Malaysia. It is worth noting that the Australian interviewees made no comment 
about the exemption of  lms from classi cation.

88 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
Matters to be taken into account by censors
The Malaysian Film Censorship Act 2002 does not stipulate the matters to be 
considered or taken into account by censors in the course of making censorship 
decisions. This omission means two important considerations, the artistic merit of 
the  lm and the prevailing community standards, which may otherwise have 
substantial impact on censorship decisions, could be left out of the decision-
making process.
Artistic merit of the  lm
Although most of the Malaysian interviewees agreed that the consideration of the 
artistic merit of a  lm would have substantial impact on the censorship decision, 
they were doubtful as to whether the censors were able to appreciate the artistic 
merit of the  lms they examined and let it in uence their decisions. For example, 
Amir Muhammad remarked that ‘the censors wouldn’t recognize it [artistic merit] 
even if it sat on their faces. I mean  lms like Brokeback Mountain (Ang Lee, 
2005) wouldn’t get past’ while Khoo Eng Yow thought that the decision-making 
process in Malaysia was ‘simplistic’ where censors did not think, consider or 
evaluate much when they were making censorship decisions.
In Hong Kong, the matters to be considered and taken into account by  lm 
censors are stipulated under section 10(2) and (3) of the Film Censorship 
Ordinance. One of the matters listed is ‘the artistic, educational, literary or 
scienti c merit of the  lm and its importance or value for cultural or social 
reasons’.70 The consideration of artistic merit appears to be able to offset content 
or portrayal that may otherwise cause the  lm to be banned or approved under a 
higher classi cation category. All of the Hong Kong interviewees agreed that 
consideration of the artistic merit of a  lm had substantial impact on the censorship 
decision to be made. Benny Chan said: ‘when a  lm has high artistic value, it is 
unlikely to be banned or subjected to excision’ while Patrick Tam noted that 
because of this consideration,  lms with strong sexual content or graphic violence 
were still released in Hong Kong, if the  lms had artistic merits.71
Although all the interviewees agreed that the consideration of artistic merit 
substantially affects a  lm’s censorship decision, not all of them agreed that 
artistic merit should be taken into account in the decision-making process. 
However, many more interviewees supported the consideration than those who 
did not. One of the interviewees who thought artistic merit should not affect 
censorship decisions was Kenneth Bi, who was of the opinion that  lms which 
were considered as artistic ‘should not get away with more’ compared to those 
which were considered to be devoid of such merit. Censors may possibly equate 
 lms with artistic merit and  lms made by established  lmmakers. Mabel 
Cheung was of the opinion that ‘censors could be biased to the more established 
or famous directors as opposed to a  lmmaker from nowhere’. Lo Chi Leung, 
who was of a similar view, illustrated his answer by referencing two Hong 
Kong directors:

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 89
If Ann Hui made a  lm that borders between Category IIB and Category III, 
it will be classi ed Category IIB because of the name Ann Hui, but if that  lm 
is made by Wong Jing, it will end up being classi ed Category III. It could be 
that biased.72
It would be unfair if censors were in uenced by the reputation of the  lmmakers 
in this way and not purely by the artistic merit of the  lm per se when making 
censorship decisions. The risk of that occurring is present, which underlines the 
importance of quali ed and competent people being appointed as censors to lessen 
this risk.
The matters to be taken into account by Australian classi ers when making 
 lm classi cation decisions are provided under section 11 of the Classi cation 
(Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995. One of such matters is ‘the 
literary, artistic or educational merit of the  lm’ and most of the Australian 
interviewees agreed that the taking into account of artistic merit of a  lm had 
substantial impact on the classi cation decision and that it should be so. Tony 
Ayers highlighted an example – Shortbus (John Cameron Mitchell, 2006) ‘which 
has explicit sexual content got an R rating rather than an X rating which allowed 
it to be distributed theatrically and certainly I think it is due to its artistic merits’; 
Rolf de Heer remarked that ‘I not only think so [that the consideration of artistic 
merit had substantial impact on classi cation decisions], I know so. Absolutely, 
yes!’; while Greg Denning noted that ‘when something is not gratuitous and if it 
is there for historical accuracy or is of artistic value and not just gore for gore’s 
sake or sex for sex’s sake, I do think that is taken into account’.
An example that illustrates the effect of the artistic merit of a  lm on its 
classi cation decision is the classi cation of the critically acclaimed  lm The 
Piano Teacher (Michael Haneke, 2001) with an R18+ category although it 
contains actual sexual activity. An exception to the general rule prescribed in the 
classi cation guidelines – that  lms depicting actual sex are to be classi ed 
X18+ which would bar the  lm from exhibition and distribution in most of the 
states and territories in Australia – was made by classi ers due to the artistic 
merits of the  lm.73
Current community standards
No systematic effort is carried out in Malaysia to ensure that censorship decisions 
made are re ective of current community standards. Censorship decisions appear 
to be made subjectively, based on the personal standards of the censors. Most of 
the Malaysian interviewees were of the opinion that  lm censorship decisions 
should be made based on the standards currently prevailing in the community. 
U-Wei Haji Saari, for example, thought that it was sensible to do so because 
‘society and values change, meanings change and so we must also change and 
grow or else we will be stuck in a time capsule’.74 The director also agreed that the 
Malaysian censors made censorship decisions based on their subjective views and 
they did not take current community standards into account:

90 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
That is what happened to me. The person who censored my  lm feels that it 
is offensive to her, so it does not matter whether the public feels that the  lm 
is OK… They don’t think of the public and I don’t think there is any survey 
that has been done [on] what is the tolerance level or what offends the 
public… it is just that a few people were appointed by somebody to make 
decisions, important decisions on one of the most important art forms in 
Malaysia… it is so bizarre!
In Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian Film and Literature, it was observed 
that ‘the censorship board perceives itself to be the moral and national guardian of 
Malaysian society’ and that the Board of Censors is ‘arbitrary in its choice of targets 
and uneven in carrying out its goal’.75 This view was echoed by another writer who 
commented that ‘the trouble with censorship in Malaysia is that it is arbitrary and 
left to the individuals who  ll our censorship board. Decisions are based on what 
the individual feels is right or wrong and they are not accountable for it’.76
The situation is different in Hong Kong as the censorship guidelines expressly 
provide that ‘the aim of the censors should be to re ect contemporary public 
attitudes towards censorship standards’.77 This aim is achieved in two ways. First, 
regular public opinion surveys on  lm censorship standards are conducted to 
gauge the extent their decisions re ect community standards. Second, members of 
the Panel of Advisers (which comprises members drawn from the community 
representing people of different age, gender and profession) are assigned to 
provide opinions to censors in the decision-making process.
The Hong Kong interviewees were satis ed with the approach in which censorship 
decisions were made and they agreed that  lm censorship decisions should be made 
objectively based on current community standards as opposed to the censors’ 
subjective personal standards. As Mabel Cheung puts it, ‘ lm censorship decisions 
should be made based on the current atmosphere of the society, they should be very 
close to the opinion that prevails in the public’. Two interviewees however, suggested 
that a combination of professionals’ views and community standards would be ideal. 
Benny Chan was of the opinion that under certain circumstances, censorship 
decisions should not be made based solely on the community’s standards because it 
might be important to also take into account experts or professionals’ views of the 
effect of the  lm concerned – ‘whether it will adversely affect young children or 
in uence the community’.78 Gordon Chan who shared the same opinion noted:
While we factor in what the community thinks about  lm, we also need 
professionals and scholars to make sure that we can have it [the release of 
 lm] in a positive way and move ahead. The general audience tends to be 
more conservative, so for the society to evolve or for any culture to move 
forward, we need scholars, artists and leaders to lead the way. So I think the 
balance between their views is very important.
In Australia, there are two provisions that require classi ers to take into account 
community standards when they classify  lms. The  rst is section 11 of the 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 91
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 which 
provides that classi ers must take into account, amongst other things, ‘the 
standards of morality, decency and propriety generally accepted by reasonable 
adults’ while the second provision is found in the National Classi cation Code 
which sets out four principles for classi cation, one of which reads:
Classi cation decisions are to give effect, as far as possible, to the following 
principles:
… (d) the need to take into account community concerns about (i) 
depictions that condone or incite violence, particularly sexual violence; 
and (ii) the portrayal of persons in a demeaning manner.
Two major efforts are being undertaken to ensure classi cation decisions are in line 
with community standards. The  rst effort is  lling the Classi cation Board and 
Classi cation Review Board with members who are broadly representative of the 
Australian community and the second effort is the establishment of the Community 
Assessment Panel (CAP), a scheme introduced to gauge how accurately the 
classi ers’ decisions re ect the prevailing community standards. Most of the 
Australian interviewees agreed that classi cation decisions should be made by 
taking into account the community standards as opposed to classi ers’ own 
standards and they noted that  lm classi cation decisions in Australia were being 
made by taking into account such standards. Jan Chapman, for example, observed 
that the  lm classi cation standards in Australia had become more liberal over the 
years and that there was more understanding on the part of the classi ers in the 
standards acceptable by the society particularly on sexuality and sexual contents.
Censorship guidelines
As discussed in Chapter 4, substantial defects were found in the Malaysian Film 
Censorship Guidelines 1993. For ease of discussion and comparison, the 
interviewees’ opinions of the guidelines will be discussed on a jurisdiction-by-
jurisdiction basis under two subheadings: ‘Clarity of provisions’ and ‘Context; 
degree, intensity and realism of presentation; and limits of the categories’.
The Malaysian Film Censorship Guidelines 1993
The Malaysian interviewees were not involved in the drafting of the Film 
Censorship Guidelines 1993 in that they were not invited to discuss or submit 
their opinions when the guidelines are being drawn up by the government.
CLARITY OF PROVISIONS
Almost every Malaysian interviewee agreed that the Film Censorship Guidelines 
1993 lacked clarity. They described the Guidelines as ‘ridiculous and broad 
enough that you can read anything into it’,79 ‘outdated’,80 ‘too general, does not 

92 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
give an idea of what can and cannot be done, vague and not descriptive’.81 The 
interviewees were also of the opinion that the Guidelines were not coherently 
applied, resulting in inconsistent censorship decisions. Yasmin Ahmad described 
the application of the Guidelines as ‘haphazard’ and ‘at the whims of whoever is 
in charge’. Ahmad Puad Onah felt that there was a double standard in its 
applications, noting ‘we do get the feeling that “why is this movie allowed but not 
that movie?”’ while Shuhaimi Baba was of the opinion that the application of the 
Guidelines was more lenient on foreign  lms compared to local  lms, particularly 
those made by Muslim  lmmakers. She noted, for example, that kissing scenes 
are permitted in foreign  lms but not in  lms made by Malaysian  lmmakers. 
Shuhaimi Baba’s view was shared by Aziz M. Osman where he questioned why 
imported horror and fantasy  lms were allowed to be screened in Malaysia 
whereas local  lms featuring ghosts and spirits ended up being banned by censors.
The incoherence of application was not only apparent between the inconsistent 
decisions made on different  lms but also between decisions made on the same 
 lm. For example,  lms like Gone in Sixty Seconds (Dominic Sena, 2000) and 
Ocean’s Eleven (Steven Soderbergh, 2001) – just to highlight a few – were not 
approved for exhibition in cinemas but were subsequently approved for distribution 
on DVD and broadcasted on television. An even more absurd censorship decision 
was made on the  lm Kami (Effendee Mazlan, 2008) where the Board of Censors 
required a line of dialogue in the  lm (which contains the Malay word ‘palat’, 
meaning ‘penis’) to be removed before approval for exhibition was granted but the 
Board had earlier approved the  lm’s publicity materials which contained exactly 
the same word.82 It is puzzling how such decisions could be made by the censors.
Incoherence of application and the resulting inconsistencies in censorship 
decisions appear to have their root in vague guidelines which allow censors to 
interpret and apply them in ways that they deem  t. This has a very negative 
impact on the Malaysian  lm industry because ‘it is hard for  lmmakers, producers 
and distributors to gauge how their  lms will end up being censored… and that is 
bad for business, bad for people who invest in  lms as a business proposition’.83
CONTEXT; DEGREE, INTENSITY AND REALISM OF PRESENTATION; 
AND LIMITS OF THE CATEGORIES
In relation to contextual justi cation, the main concern amongst the Malaysian 
interviewees was that  lm censors did not consider the  lm under examination as 
a whole when they were making censorship decisions. Censors often viewed a 
 lm as ‘bits and pieces’ and not a connected whole. For example, if there was a 
shot or a scene that contained contentious content or portrayal, the shot or scene 
must be altered (normally by way of excision) even though it was justi able in the 
context of the  lm as a whole, or was crucial to the story and presentation of the 
 lm. U-Wei Haji Saari noted that:84
[The censors] don’t see the  lm as a whole… they don’t see it as  uid. They 
will just see the lines, for example they will say ‘this line offended me… that 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 93
line makes me feel uneasy, so have to be removed!’ Or ‘that shot of a woman 
sitting berkemban85 taking a bath that I am uncomfortable with, take it out’.
The director added that this censorship approach caused problems to  lmmakers 
because it affected not only the narrative, but also the aesthetic aspects of a  lm.86
In addition, unlike the guidelines applied in Hong Kong and Australia, the 
Malaysian Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 do not require censors to take into 
account the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of a censorship element. 
The guidelines also do not set out the limits of censorship elements under the 
applicable classi cation categories.
Compared to the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship guidelines, the 
Malaysian guidelines prohibit many more types of  lm, content and portrayal. 
There are four censorship elements prescribed in the guidelines – ideology and 
politics, religion, socio-culture and order and decorum, which are further divided 
into sub-categories and rules. Because of these extensive restrictions, the 
Malaysian interviewees felt that they were artistically and/or commercially 
constrained and that their freedom of expression was impeded.87
The Hong Kong Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors
In comparison with the Malaysian Film Censorship Guidelines 1993, the Hong 
Kong Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors appears to be much better on 
paper. This was con rmed by almost every Hong Kong  lm practitioner 
interviewed for the book.88 They were satis ed with the provisions of the 
Guidelines as well as their application by censors. Gordon Chan, for example, 
noted that ‘the reason why we did not have censorship problems is that the 
censors have very good guidelines and they are also open-minded’. The 
interviews conducted in Hong Kong also revealed that  lm practitioners were 
invited to discuss and comment on the draft guidelines before they were 
introduced in December 1999. Wellington Fung, for example, stated that: 
‘there was a very thorough discussion on where the lines are supposed to be 
drawn’ while Gordon Chan noted that ‘there were a lot of discussions… the 
whole censorship system that exists now was established after a series of 
discussions and debates and I think that is why it is acceptable to the  lm 
industry and  lmmakers’.
CLARITY OF PROVISIONS
The provisions in the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors are clear, precise 
and well structured. The clarity of the provisions helps  lm practitioners know 
beforehand which category his or her  lm will end up being classi ed in before 
they embark on the production of their  lm. Lo Chi Leung, for example, noted 
that ‘I will know whether my  lm will be classi ed Category II or Category III 
and we [Lo and his producers] could decide before shooting began whether we 
want the  lm to go down the Category II path or the Category III path’ while 

94 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
Benny Chan noted that ‘the guidelines are very clear, so there is no problem for 
me to differentiate what types of content fall within which classi cation 
categories’. Mabel Cheung, one of the leading Hong Kong female directors, also 
shared the same opinion: ‘the censorship guidelines are clear, so I will know 
before I make the  lm whether it will fall into Category III or otherwise. I know 
exactly what classi cation I will get’.
In addition, most of the Hong Kong interviewees were of the opinion that the 
guidelines were coherently applied. Only two interviewees, Winnie Tsang and Lo 
Chi Leung, pointed out that there was incoherence in the guidelines’ application 
in regard to the censorship element of language. Both Tsang and Lo highlighted 
that the censors tended to classify local Cantonese  lms containing coarse 
language with a higher classi cation category (Category III) compared to the 
foreign English language  lms (Category IIB) although the expletives used were 
of similar meaning in both types of  lm.89
CONTEXT; DEGREE, INTENSITY AND REALISM OF PRESENTATION; 
AND LIMITS OF THE CATEGORIES
The Hong Kong guidelines allow censors to approve  lms containing censorship 
elements or contentious content for exhibition and distribution, if such content is 
justi able in the context of the  lm as a whole. The guidelines also prescribe the 
limits of each of the censorship elements under every classi cation category. The 
limits are set based on the degree, intensity and realism to which these elements 
are presented in a  lm.
There are six censorship elements prescribed in the guidelines – cruelty, 
torture or violence; horror and shock; disability; sex and nudity; language; and 
offensive behaviour and criminality. Although these six censorship elements 
are in the guidelines, the Hong Kong interviewees did not feel they were 
artistically or commercially constrained because they were not barred from 
producing (or acquiring the rights to)  lms containing those elements. The 
censorship elements were prescribed mainly for classi cation of  lms into 
appropriate categories and, as noted in Chapter 3, these censorship elements 
were not absolutely prohibited, unlike those prescribed in the Malaysian Film 
Censorship Guidelines 1993.
The Australian Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games
Most of the Australian interviewees did not have any strong opinions about the 
Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games which were 
introduced in 2003 after extensive discussions and consultations with members of 
the  lm fraternity and the public. The  eldwork revealed that the interviewees 
were not very familiar with the guidelines and that they only had a broad idea of 
what is permissible within the ‘censorship boundaries’. The interviewees, 
particularly the directors, intimated that they rarely referred to the guidelines 
when they made their  lms.

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 95
CLARITY OF PROVISIONS
The provisions in the Guidelines are clear and the key words and phrases used 
therein are well de ned, presumably to avoid inconsistent interpretations by 
classi ers that will subsequently cause problems to  lm practitioners in pursuing 
their  lm productions and acquisitions. There were no negative comments voiced 
by the Australian interviewees over the clarity of the Guidelines. Some 
interviewees even commended the clarity of its provisions and noted that they 
knew which classi cation category their  lms would be classi ed in.90
Additionally, most of the Australian interviewees were of the opinion that the 
guidelines were coherently applied. For example, Tony Ayres noted that the 
classi ers were consistent in the application of the Guidelines while Jan Chapman 
observed that the Guidelines were ‘coherently applied’ and that the  lms she 
produced ‘were classi ed very much in the way we expected’.
CONTEXT; DEGREE, INTENSITY AND REALISM OF PRESENTATION; 
AND LIMITS OF THE CATEGORIES
In making a classi cation decision, classi ers are required to determine the overall 
impact of the  lm. The impact is to be assessed by considering the treatment of the 
classi able elements; the degree, realism and intensity of their presentation; and 
the cumulative effect of all the elements that appear in the  lm. Classi ers are also 
required to consider whether the elements (as they appear in a  lm) are justi ed in 
the context of the  lm as a whole. The limits of contents suitable for each 
classi cation category are also clearly prescribed in the Guidelines.
There are six classi able elements provided in the Guidelines – themes, 
violence, sex, language, drug use and nudity. Although apparently higher in 
number (of the elements) compared to those listed in the Malaysian guidelines 
(four censorship elements), the Australian interviewees disclosed that they did not 
feel artistically or commercially constrained by the provisions. This is because, 
similar to the situation in Hong Kong, these elements are not prohibited outright. 
They are provided mainly for classi cation purposes. It was striking that there 
was no concern at all about the classi cation guidelines expressed by the Australian 
interviewees unlike their Malaysian counterparts.
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
Alteration to  lms and restricted categories
In Malaysia, the Board of Censors is empowered to require alteration to be made 
before a  lm is approved for public exhibition91 and the word ‘alteration’ is 
de ned in the Film Censorship Act 2002 as to include excision, addition and 
reconstruction of scenes, dialogues, sound or subtitles.92 Alteration will not only 
affect the  lm’s artistic integrity, the exercise of the power to require alteration to 
be made also encroaches on  lmmakers’ right to freedom of expression. Although 
in practice the Board will seek consent from the  lm’s owner before any alteration 

96 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
is made, this does not allow the  lm practitioner concerned any other option 
because, if consent to alter is withheld, approval for the  lm’s exhibition and 
distribution will be refused.93 In short, it is ‘mandatory’ for a  lm practitioner to 
consent to the required alteration if he or she wishes to have the  lm released in 
Malaysia. Khoo Eng Yow commented that in a situation where alteration was 
required by the Board ‘the  lmmakers are actually helpless… you cannot do 
anything because if you do not consent, you cannot show your  lm’. Shuhaimi 
Baba, in reference to her 1995  lm Ringgit Kasyorga (Dollar to Heaven) – a  lm 
which explores the themes of corruption and abuse of power among the Malaysian 
elites – noted that she had to allow substantial alterations to be made so that the 
 lm could be released,94 while Saw Teong Hin noted that ‘you have to abide by it, 
otherwise you can’t get your  lm into the cinemas’. This is particularly so for 
those whose  lm’s market is con ned to Malaysia.95
U-Wei Haji Saari, many of whose  lms have been required by the censors to be 
altered, was ‘upset’ and ‘completely annoyed’ with the exercise of such power. His 
 rst  lm Perempuan, Isteri & … (Wife, Woman & Whore, 1993) – about a woman 
sold into prostitution who wanted revenge on the man responsible – had to undergo 
extensive excision in addition to having part of its title deleted.96 Two scenes from 
his Festival de Cannes’ Directors’ Fortnight bound  lm Kaki Bakar (The Arsonist, 
1995) – a  lm about a Javanese man in Malaysia who commits acts of arson after 
feeling mistreated due to social inequalities – had to be excised. And Jogho 
(Champion, 1997) – a  lm about vengeance set in a bull- ghting community – had 
18 cuts made to it. U- Wei felt that the alterations ‘destroyed not only the rhythm 
but also the overall narration and aesthetic’ of his  lms (‘it makes the  lm jumpy’). 
He was particularly upset because the censors involved had acted as if they were 
‘cleaning up’ his  lms (‘they try to clean it up, try to halal it’97), which suggested 
that his  lms were ‘dirty’, ‘immoral’ and ‘unhealthy’. The  lmmaker added:
Who are these people? I don’t know their background. I don’t trust them.… 
Are they cultured? I don’t think so.… They don’t even tell you who they are 
and these invisible people just butchered your work. It takes you  ve years to 
do a  lm from thinking to  nishing up and they tamper with it in the matter 
of two hours. That is not fair, that is wrong!
Shuhaimi Baba has also had similar experiences with the censors. She was 
required to excise many scenes from her  lm Ringgit Kassyorga in order to get the 
approval to release it: ‘I had to take out so many scenes that the  lm didn’t make 
sense anymore… and I didn’t have enough money to do re-shoots, so whatever 
little that I re-shot couldn’t help the  lm’. Ahmad Puad Onah was of the opinion 
that censors should not be empowered to require alteration to be made to  lms. 
The  lm producer appeared to have concerns for both  nancial and artistic 
considerations as he said:
We should not, just to get an approval [for exhibition] from them, have to 
reshoot or do away with certain scenes or [have to] create new ones… I don’t 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 97
think they should be given that power… because it will cost us more money.… 
When we make a  lm, we have already considered all the aspects and we 
wanted the  lm to be in a certain way. Alteration will change this, so I don’t 
think censors should be allowed to require us to make alterations.
Like many others in Malaysia, Tsai Ming-liang’s I Don’t Want to Sleep Alone 
(2006) – a  lm set in Kuala Lumpur about a migrant worker nursing an injured 
drifter he found on the street – also suffered the same fate of having to undergo 
alterations. The Appeal Committee required  ve scenes to be excised and some of 
the subtitles to be deleted98 before approval for exhibition was granted. Tsai noted 
that ‘they just use their power to order excisions to be made and when they do so, 
audiences will only get to see an incomplete work, an injured  lm’.
Alteration to  lms may also cause  nancial losses to  lm practitioners.99 For 
example, Amok (Adman Salleh, 1995) was subjected to extensive alteration where 
ten scenes were required to be removed from the  lm. Because of the severe 
excisions (which the  lm’s producer, Ruhani Abdul Rahman, described as 
‘horrible’), ‘the story, message and appeal of the  lm are lost, people who watch 
it could not understand the  lm and I lost money!’100
All of the Malaysian interviewees were of the opinion that once a  lm was 
classi ed with a restricted category, alteration should not be required to be made 
to the  lm. For example, Amir Muhammad noted that ‘if a  lm is rated 18 and 
above, it should be released uncut’. Ahmad Puad Onah, who also prefers  lms to 
be released intact, was of the opinion that ‘when they classify a  lm for 18 and 
above but still insist that scenes are cut, then there is no point in the classi cation’. 
U-Wei Haji Saari also favoured  lms to be released in their entirety and preferred 
classi cation over censoring the content of  lms. He noted: ‘I don’t believe in 
censoring anybody’s work. I don’t believe in censoring whatever you want to say 
but I believe in “censoring” the audience’.101
In Hong Kong, censors are empowered to require excision to be made to a  lm 
before an approval for exhibition and distribution is granted.102 However, it must 
be stressed that Hong Kong censors can only require excision to be made, not other 
forms of alteration as in Malaysia. It is equally important to point out that the 
interviews conducted in Hong Kong revealed that, in practice, censors very rarely 
require excision to be made to  lms.103 The statutory power to do so is exercised, 
if ever, only in extreme cases where even the restricted classi cation of Category 
III could not accommodate the contents.104 Gordon Chan noted that the censors 
would only require excision to be made ‘if they think those materials cannot be 
shown even under Category III… for example, if it is too excessive or explicit’. 
Although Chan is not in favour of the exercise of such power, he saw the justi cation 
for it and pointed out that most of the time where excision was required, the 
decision did re ect the opinion of the public. However, Chan stressed that none of 
the  lms that he was involved in as director or producer or both (amounting to over 
35 feature  lms) had ever been required to be excised by the Hong Kong censors 
and that ‘I was always given the classi cation category that I hoped for.’ Terence 
Chang, the producer of John Woo’s  lms in Hong Kong and Hollywood, noted 

98 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
that ‘I never had to do any alteration to my  lms in Hong Kong to secure a particular 
category, although we did cut out some blood-spilling shots to change Mission: 
Impossible II from R to PG in the United States.’105 According to Patrick Tam, 
what normally happens in Hong Kong where a  lm falls between the Category IIB 
and Category III classi cations is:
They [the censors] will only say ‘you need to remove this, if not it will be 
Category III’. It is up to you whether you want to cut it or not. They never 
impose that you must… You make your own decision because they never 
force you to do anything. So, this is a kind of advice and normally, the  lm 
investors will ask the director to trim it to avoid the  lm from being categorized 
as Category III so that they wouldn’t lose that much at the box of ce.
However, Tam did caution that ‘unjusti ed censorship or excisions will de nitely 
affect the creative completeness or totality of vision that the  lmmaker chooses to 
present to his or her audiences’.
In Australia, the Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board are 
not empowered to require alteration to be made to  lms submitted to them for 
classi cation purposes. The classi ers only determine the classi cation category 
and the consumer advice to be given to a submitted  lm. However, if the classi ers 
 nd that the  lm contains content or portrayals that are prohibited by the 
classi cation law106 or guidelines,107 they may refuse classi cation (the RC 
category), which means that the  lm is banned in Australia. Greg Denning 
summarized the issue of alteration to  lms in the country as follows:
Classi ers do not have the power to require alteration to be made to submitted 
 lms. They can only recommend the classi cation category.… They will also 
give you the speci cs of what scenes or what contents pushed the  lm into the 
next level of classi cation. So, if you are looking to edit the  lm down, they 
may give you guidance on that.
Discussion with censors regarding classi cation category
Related closely to the issue of alteration to  lms is the issue of determination of 
classi cation category. There is no provision in the Film Censorship Act 2002 
enabling  lm practitioners in Malaysia to discuss with censors the classi cation 
category to be given to their  lm. All of the Malaysian interviewees thought the 
opportunity to discuss classi cation issues with censors is important. The lack of a 
formal channel to do so could encourage abuse of power and the  eldwork carried 
out in Malaysia suggests that certain prominent producers receive ‘better deals’ 
compared to independent practitioners.108 The former often have opportunities to 
negotiate with censors for a ‘better censorship decision’ whereas the opportunity 
to do so is not available to the less established practitioners.109
Every Malaysian interviewee, in particular the producers and distributors, 
agreed that the classi cation category a  lm receives affected its commercial 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 99
viability. They were of the opinion that a restricted category will affect box of ce 
receipts as audiences under the age of 18 – which constitutes a huge pool of cinema-
goers – would be barred from having access to the  lm. Since the classi cation 
category a  lm receives affects its commercial viability,  lm practitioners should 
be given equal opportunities to negotiate with the censors regarding  the classi cation 
they desire for their  lms. In relation to the issue of alteration, some of the Malaysian 
interviewees, especially the producers, were willing to make excision to their  lms 
in order to secure a particular classi cation – the always targeted ‘U’ classi cation 
– which would allow the  lm to be viewed by all levels of society. For example, 
Ruhani Abdul Rahman noted that ‘it is important to get a ‘U’ [classi cation] here 
as you will then get more audiences’, while Ahmad Puah Onah disclosed that his 
priority when producing a  lm was to make it ‘suitable for the general audience’ 
because ‘I want the widest audience to watch it.’110
In Hong Kong, when a  lm is submitted to the censorship authority, it is to be 
accompanied by a statement as to the classi cation category which is sought for 
the  lm. The censorship guidelines provide that censors should accommodate, as 
far as possible, the classi cation sought and if that is not possible, advice may be 
given as to the excision that can be made to the  lm to secure the desired 
classi cation category.111 All of the Hong Kong interviewees agreed that the 
classi cation category a  lm received affected its commercial viability. Wellington 
Fung, for example, noted that ‘when I produce a  lm, I don’t go for Category III 
because I prefer to have more audience’. Fung added that when he was an 
executive producer at Cinema City, ‘we always went for Category I so that the 
whole family could get into the cinema’. Nansun Shi, a fellow  lm producer and 
co-founder of Film Workshop, noted that ‘it is unavoidable that a  lm with 
restricted classi cation will have much smaller audiences in Hong Kong’, while 
Bill Kong noted that Category I and Category IIA are the best as they are ‘for all 
ages, watchable by all people’. The interviewees also agreed that the opportunity 
to discuss classi cation categories with the censors is very important.
The importance of securing the right classi cation category was also evident 
when most of the interviewees disclosed that they would agree to excision being 
made to their  lms in order to secure a particular classi cation. Benny Chan said: 
If my  lm is classi ed Category III, it will affect its commercial viability and 
therefore, I will re-edit the  lm so that it will get a Category II classi cation. 
Categories IIA and IIB are the most favoured categories in Hong Kong in 
terms of the marketability of a  lm.
Wellington Fung described the compromise made in removing certain content 
from a  lm in order to get a lower classi cation as ‘a sensible commercial 
decision’ while Bill Kong, arguably the most successful  lm producer working in 
Hong Kong today, said that his company, Edko Films, did make alterations to 
their  lms ‘to avoid getting Category III’. Another example is Lo Chi Leung who 
removed a shot from his  lm Double Tap (2000) in order for the  lm to be 
classi ed Category IIB:

100 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
The excised shot is just a few seconds long, not the entire scene. I excised it 
because otherwise it will be classi ed Category III and therefore, those under 
18 will not be allowed to watch it and this will greatly affect the box of ce 
of the  lm.
On the contrary, Mabel Cheung noted that she would not alter her  lm in order to 
secure a lower classi cation if she thought that the content (that pushed the  lm 
into a higher classi cation) was necessary to the  lm. Cheung said: 
The censorship guidelines are clear, so I will know before I make my  lm 
whether it will fall under Category III or not.… I know that and if I still shoot 
it, that means I must have done it for a reason. For example, I think that the 
love scene is necessary for the story or maybe the foul language is necessary 
in my  lm about triad society. If I cut out the love scenes or foul language, it 
will not be the same  lm anymore.… But if it is just one line or a shot that 
gets the  lm into trouble, maybe I will consider [excising it].
As in Malaysia, the relevant legislation in Australia does not make provision for 
 lm practitioners to indicate, or discuss with classi ers, the classi cation category 
to be given to their  lm. This omission, on paper, would appear to be able to affect 
a  lm’s potential in the market as all of the Australian interviewees agreed that the 
classi cation category received for a  lm would affect its box of ce performance. 
For example, Greg Denning pointed out that:
Obviously if you have a family  lm, you would want a G or a PG, if you have 
a  lm that is targeted at people under 15 years old, you wouldn’t want 
anything more than an M classi cation... sometimes for certain  lms, like 
horror  lms, you would want an MA15+ because the truth is, people might 
not want to see an M rated horror movie... so it very much depends on the 
genre of the  lm.
The admissions by most of the interviewees that they are willing to make alterations 
to their  lms in order to secure a particular classi cation also underlined the 
importance of having the ‘right classi cation’.112 Most of the Australian interviewees 
were also of the opinion that the opportunity to discuss with classi ers is important 
because they would be adversely affected if their  lms were classi ed in a restricted 
category. The importance of the opportunity to discuss with classi ers was stressed 
by many interviewees including Ray Lawrence who stated that ‘the opportunity to 
do so is so important that it should be [provided] in the guidelines.’
The provision of reasons for decisions
In Malaysia, the provision of reasons for censorship decision to  lm practitioners 
is very much dependent on the panel of censors assigned to examine the  lm 
concerned. This is so, even though it is expressly provided under the Film 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 101
Censorship Act 2002 that when censors approve a  lm for exhibition subject to 
alteration, or when approval for exhibition is refused, they must furnish in writing 
their reasons for requiring such alteration or for the refusal.113 The Malaysian 
interviews con rmed the fact that the Board of Censors and Appeal Committee 
rarely furnish  lm practitioners with written reasons for the decisions they make. 
What is normally provided to  lm practitioners is the time code of the scenes (the 
running time) to be excised and little else. U-Wei Haji Saari, for example, noted 
that the censors ‘don’t provide the reasons, they just give the points where it [a 
scene or shot] has to be taken out’. Most of the Malaysian interviewees also 
revealed that they did encounter dif culties in their attempts to obtain censorship 
reasons from the Board of Censors. For example, when asked whether dif culties 
had been encountered in obtaining reasons, Yasmin Ahmad replied: ‘Yes, for 
Sepet. They don’t feel as if they owe you an explanation … they are just too lazy 
to provide you with an explanation or reasons!’ Shuhaimi Baba also encountered 
problems in obtaining reasons for decisions from the censors. In reference to 
Ringgit Kasyorga, the director-producer stated that the censors just asked her to 
‘take this out, take that out from this minute to that minute’. No reasons were 
given to her, only the running time of the scenes that had to be removed from the 
 lm. Lorna Tee noted that: 
In Malaysia, you will never get feedback as to why it is censored and their 
decisions are  nal… you don’t get a letter stating why certain contents are 
censored, they just let you know what to take out by describing the scenes that 
must be removed... it is never the reasons.
On the rare occasions where reasons were provided,  lm practitioners found these 
reasons to be ‘brief and inadequate’ (for example, ‘this  lm is not suitable for 
Malaysian audiences’),114 ‘juvenile’,115 ‘shallow’116 and ‘laughable and bizarre’.117 
The quality (or the lack of it) of the reasons given by the Malaysian censors can 
be illustrated by the experience that the director-producer and the distributor of 
the  lm I Don’t Want to Sleep Alone had with the Board of Censors. This  lm was 
initially banned by the Board (later approved for exhibition by the Appeal 
Committee subject to  ve scenes being excised from the  lm) and the reasons 
given included:118
1 
the  lm portrayed an image of Malaysia which is different from the one 
projected by the government’s tourism campaign to promote the Visit 
Malaysia Year 2007 program;
2 
the  lm dealt with the haze issue;119
3 
the  lm portrayed Malaysia as being populated by many migrant workers; and
4 
the  lm contained scenes where there is a lot of rubbish on the streets, giving 
the impression that the country is dirty.120
No further comment is needed here to make the case that it is a very poorly 
reasoned censorship decision.

102 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
In Hong Kong, censors are required under the Film Censorship Ordinance to 
provide reasons for the censorship decisions they make.121 All of the Hong Kong 
interviewees responded positively that they never encountered any dif culty in 
obtaining reasons for censorship decisions.122 Additionally, there were also no 
complaints or dissatisfaction expressed over the quality or rationality of the 
reasons provided.
In Australia, although there is no express provision in the Classi cation 
(Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 requiring the classi ers to 
provide reasons for their decisions, all of the Australian interviewees reported that 
they had not encountered any dif culty in obtaining reasons for the classi cation 
decisions made on their  lms. There was no problem at all in obtaining the 
reasoning behind why a determination was made.123 When queried further on the 
quality of the reasons provided, some of the interviewees commented that ‘they 
gave us descriptions of why they came to their decisions but we do not necessarily 
agree with them’.124
It is likely that the practice of providing reasons to  lm practitioners is partly 
due to good administrative practice on the part of the decision-making entities and 
partly due to the in uence of section 13 of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial 
Review) Act 1977 which provides that any person who is entitled to apply for 
judicial review of any decisions reviewable under section 5 of the same Act may 
request the decision-maker for a statement of reasons for the decision.
Appeal against censorship decisions
There are two concerns in regard to appeal against  lm censorship decisions:  rst, 
the potential adverse effect of members of the public having the right to appeal 
against censorship decisions and second, not having the right to make oral 
representations during the appeal process.
Appeal by members of the public
In Malaysia, members of the public are not afforded an express right under the 
Film Censorship Act 2002 to appeal against decisions made by the Board of 
Censors. There was a split in opinion amongst the Malaysian interviewees as to 
whether members of the public should be given the right to appeal. Those in favour 
of the public having such a right were of the view that they would not experience 
any problems if that right were exercised.125 Interviewees who were not in favour 
of granting members of the public the right to appeal thought that it could be 
abused to sabotage  lms.126 Yasmin Ahmad, who experienced unwarranted 
criticism of her  lms from the Malay media, was sure that there were people who 
would attempt to undermine certain  lmmakers by stopping their  lms from being 
released. Ruhani Abdul Rahman, who was of the same opinion, added that such a 
right would create more problems for  lm practitioners because there would 
always be people with ulterior motives who wanted  lms produced by certain 
individuals or companies to be banned or, at least, encounter censorship issues.

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 103
In Hong Kong, a person who is aggrieved by the exhibition or distribution of a 
 lm can appeal against the censorship decision.127 All of the Hong Kong 
interviewees were of the opinion that in an open and democratic society, members 
of the public should have the right to appeal against censorship decisions. The 
interviewees did not foresee any adverse effects from the exercise of such a right, 
having faith in the wisdom of the Board of Review to deal with such appeals 
appropriately. For example, Mabel Cheung noted that ‘I do not know of any  lm 
that, because of the complaint or appeal made [by a member of the public], its 
classi cation category was changed. In Hong Kong, I have never heard of that’.
In Australia, there are four categories of person who can appeal against a 
classi cation decision, one of which is ‘a person aggrieved by the decision’. The 
term ‘person aggrieved’ is de ned as someone who can demonstrate an interest in 
the subject matter of the  lm in question that extends beyond that of an ordinary 
member of the public. Opinions were evenly split amongst the Australian 
interviewees as to whether this category of person should be afforded the right to 
appeal. Peter Campbell, who thought that members of the public should not have 
the right to appeal, said that ‘they have the choice to go see it or not’. Campbell had 
to undergo two ‘battles’ with the Review Board because the initial classi cation 
decisions on two  lms – Irreversible (Gaspar Noe, 2002) and 9 Songs (Michael 
Winterbottom, 2004), both containing strong sex scenes, which his company 
distributed – were appealed against by individuals who purported to represent 
community interest groups or organizations.128 Campbell disclosed that these 
individuals were given credence by the Review Board although they had objected 
to those  lms without even having seen them. Because of the appeals, Campbell 
had to go through a lot of trouble to get the  lms released. The distributor also 
pointed out that subsequent to the appeal, the same individuals lobbied the South 
Australian Attorney General to call for the banning of the  lm 9 Songs and ‘that 
was pushed through with great pressure’ in South Australia.129 The banning of the 
 lm in that state ‘cost us a fortune and it nearly wiped us out [of business]’.130 Greg 
Denning, a fellow practitioner in the distribution sector, was also of the opinion 
that allowing the public to appeal would ‘become very burdensome and, in practice, 
it can potentially be a nightmare’. This view was also shared by Joel Pearlman, 
noting that the ability of members of the public to appeal against classi cation 
decisions could ‘create a lot of chaos’ that could ‘lead to practical challenges’.
The right to make oral representations
Film practitioners in Malaysia have no statutory right to make oral representations 
to members of the Appeal Committee when they appeal against censorship 
decisions made by the Board of Censors. All of the Malaysian interviewees agreed 
that it is very important that such a right be guaranteed in the law because without 
an express provision, the discretion lies with the Committee and this has caused 
favouritism practices where only certain  lm practitioners are given the 
opportunity to make oral representations. The interviewees considered the 
opportunity to have access to the Committee to argue their case vital as it would 

104 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
affect the outcome of the appeal positively. For example, Yasmin Ahmad noted 
that she managed to convince the Committee (during the appeal process) to revoke 
some of the excisions required by the Board on her  lm Sepet. Most of the 
Malaysian interviewees also expressed the wish that the right to make oral 
representations is provided under the Film Censorship Act 2002.
In stark contrast, Hong Kong  lm practitioners are entitled to make both oral 
and written representations to the Board of Review when the censorship decision 
made on their  lm has been appealed against by themselves, by the Film 
Censorship Authority or by a member of the public. Although they had not 
personally needed to appeal,131 all of the Hong Kong interviewees thought that the 
right to make oral representations is very important (and some said necessary) as 
it would have a positive effect on the outcome of the appeal.132
In Australia, the classi cation law does not provide  lm practitioners with an 
express right to make oral representations before the Classi cation Review Board 
when they appeal against a decision made by the Classi cation Board.133 Like 
their Malaysian and Hong Kong counterparts, the Australian interviewees were 
also of the opinion that the opportunity to make oral representations at the appeal 
stage is very important.134 Although such a right is not expressly provided by 
statute, several interviewees who had gone through the appeal process reported 
that they were given ample opportunity to do so before the Review Board.135
Although  lm practitioners are afforded the opportunity to make oral 
representations, not every interviewee was entirely satis ed with what they were 
allowed to submit before the Review Board. The frustration highlighted was that 
 lm practitioners are not allowed to reference previous classi cation decisions 
during their submission:136
We are not allowed to reference any previous decisions or any  lms that have 
been classi ed in the past. To give you an example, if I got a horror  lm that 
got up to appeal that I think it should be classi ed MA15+ but is given an 
R18+, I would love to be able to go in with a list of previous horror  lms that 
contain similar content that were classi ed MA15+. You are essentially asked 
to consider every previous decision irrelevant.… We are not allowed to 
speci cally reference any of those  lms. It doesn’t really enable you to bring 
a concise case before the appeal board. I guess what that means to a distributor 
is that there is a high degree of uncertainty when you go to appeal as well as 
a very high cost.
Availability of judicial review
The Malaysian interviewees were of the opinion that they should have the right to 
apply for judicial review to challenge  lm censorship decisions. All of the 
interviewees agreed that judicial review is vital in view of the existing censorship 
system. Tsai Ming-liang, for example, noted that the availability and awareness of 
judicial review would make censors ‘more cautious when they are making 
censorship decisions’, while Amir Muhammad said that judicial review is needed 

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 105
to counter the wide discretionary powers wielded by censors and the Home 
Minister. However, due to factors such as the cost and time involved in an 
application; the lack of con dence in the judiciary and the administration of 
justice; and the foreseeable repercussions of an application on the applicant- lm 
practitioner should the censors harbour a grudge, most of the Malaysian 
interviewees would not be prepared to mount a challenge in court even if they 
were dissatis ed with the censorship decision made on their  lm.137
The issue of availability of judicial review and whether it is the best option to 
solve censorship problems is further examined in Chapter 6 where the book focuses 
on the principles, the remedies and the viability of judicial review applications 
under common law in general and under Malaysian jurisprudence in particular.
It is notable that all of the Hong Kong interviewees believed that the availability 
of judicial review is important in a jurisdiction with a state-based censorship 
system. However, some of these interviewees, for example Benny Chan and 
Gordon Chan, went on to emphasize that it is very unlikely that they would need to 
have recourse to it because the Hong Kong  lm censorship system works very well.
All of the Australian interviewees also stated that the availability of judicial 
review is important (and some said necessary), in a  lm censorship system. 
Judicial review applications challenging classi cation decisions have been  led in 
Australia under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 before 
and after the introduction of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995. These are discussed in Chapter 6.
At the end of every interview, the interviewees were asked whether there is any 
reform to the  lm censorship law, guidelines and process that they hoped to see 
take place. The Malaysian interviewees, in general, expressed the hope that they 
would have more freedom for creative expression. This commonly held aspiration 
was encapsulated by Tsai Ming-liang, who noted that ‘with all these censorship 
restrictions, there is no freedom to be creative. There is no space for artists in 
Malaysia to pursue their creative works and to develop!’, and Aziz M. Osman, who 
hoped that ‘changes will be made to the censorship system so that  lmmakers will 
have more freedom… so that when we work, we will only give priority to the 
material itself rather than [the consideration of] “will it be approved by the censors”’.
More speci cally, the Malaysian interviewees wanted members of the Board 
of Censors and the Appeal Committee to be carefully selected so that only suitable 
and competent individuals are appointed as censors.138 U-Wei Haji Saari, 
forthrightly commented that ‘only intelligent people should be in the censorship 
board!’ while Ahmad Puad Onah and Ruhani Abdul Rahman proposed the 
composition of the Board and the Committee should include people with  lm 
knowledge or  lmmaking experience and that the Home Minister should not just 
‘give out the jobs to retirees’.139 Some of the interviewees also hoped changes 
would be made to the mode of appointment (to be more transparent and inclusive) 
and the security of tenure of censors so that they would be able to make decisions 
independently from political in uence or pressure.140 The interviewees, particularly 
the directors, also suggested that classi cation of  lm is the way forward for the 

106 The practitioners’ opinions and experiences
Malaysian system. They wanted  lms to be classi ed, not censored, so that  lms 
could be distributed and exhibited in their intended version without any alteration 
if they were classi ed in a restricted category.141 Tsai Ming-liang, for example, 
stressed that ‘there should be classi cation categories based on age, not morals. A 
good classi cation system is justi able and at the same time will provide  lm 
practitioners with more creative space’. In regard to the censorship guidelines, the 
interviewees hoped that an overhaul would be made – which would include clearer 
and more precise provisions – with their participation sought in the process. The 
interviewees would like the right to make oral representations at the appeal stage 
provided in the law and judicial review made available to them, to be resorted to 
when the need arises.
As noted above, the Hong Kong interviewees were satis ed with the  lm 
censorship system and were of the opinion that it worked very well. When asked 
what reforms to the system they hoped to see take place, most of the interviewees 
were of the opinion that change was not necessary. Only two suggestions were 
made in the 12 interviews conducted with Hong Kong  lm practitioners. First, 
Mabel Cheung suggested that the application of the censorship guidelines could 
be more lenient in relation to language. Second, Cheung, Patrick Tam and Lo Chi 
Leung proposed that it would be better if the number of censors assigned to 
examine a  lm could be increased, so that it would not be a single censor examining 
a  lm and making the decision. These issues are further discussed in Chapter 7.
The Australian interviewees were also satis ed with their country’s  lm 
classi cation system and most could not suggest any changes to it. Rolf de Heer, 
for example, answered ‘there are none that I can think of’ when queried whether 
there are any reforms to the classi cation law, guidelines and process that he 
would like to see. However, two of the interviewees raised concerns regarding the 
reclassi cation of  lms.142 They considered that once a  lm was classi ed, it 
should remain so and there should not be any reclassi cation exercises. A  lm 
distributor and an exhibitor hoped that ‘advertising approval to trailers [could be 
given] based on the content of the trailer and not based on what the  lm’s 
classi cation is’.143 Lastly, it was suggested by an interviewee-distributor that  lm 
practitioners should be allowed to make reference to past classi cation decisions 
when they appealed against a classi cation decision so that they could present a 
concise argument before the Classi cation Review Board. These issues are further 
discussed in Chapter 7.
Summary
The  eldwork conducted in Malaysia con rmed the problems and concerns raised 
by the key issues of the censorship system identi ed in Chapter 4, while the 
comparative  eldwork conducted in Hong Kong and Australia strongly suggested 
that the Malaysian  lm censorship system should be reformed to promote the 
artistic vibrancy and commercial viability of the country’s  lm industry. To 
summarize the foregoing discussions in this chapter, there are eight areas of 
concern that should be addressed in the Malaysian  lm censorship system:

The practitioners’ opinions and experiences 107
1 
the suitability, competence and independence of  lm censors in carrying out 
their duties as well as the Home Minister’s discretionary power to ban  lms;
2 
the Home Minister’s power to exempt a  lm from censorship at his absolute 
discretion;
3 
the omission of provisions in the law and guidelines requiring the artistic 
merit of a  lm, as well as the prevailing community standards, to be taken 
into account in the process of making censorship decisions;
4 
the defective Film Censorship Guidelines 1993, application of which has 
resulted in inconsistent censorship decisions and has impeded  lm practitioners’ 
freedom of expression;
5 
the power of censors to require alteration to be made to  lms and the non- 
availability of a formal channel where every  lm practitioner may discuss 
classi cation categories with the censors;
6 
the non-provision of, or the lack of rational, reasons for censorship decisions;
7 
the possible abuse of the opportunity to appeal against censorship decisions 
by members of the public and the lack of an express right to make oral 
representations at the appeal stage of a censorship process; and
8 
the availability and viability of judicial review applications in challenging 
 lm censorship decisions.
Over the course of the research, a small number of concerns were also identi ed 
in the Hong Kong and Australian systems. These concerns are discussed in 
Chapter 7.

6 
Judicial review of  lm 
censorship decisions
Introduction
Earlier chapters of this book have compared the  lm censorship system in 
Malaysia with the systems in Hong Kong and Australia as set out in the laws, 
guidelines and processes (Chapter 3); examined the key issues that arise from 
these systems (Chapter 4); and analysed the opinions of  lm practitioners on those 
issues (Chapter 5).1 This has shown that the Malaysian  lm censorship system 
constitutes one of the factors that affects the artistic vibrancy and commercial 
viability of the country’s  lm industry. As explained in Chapter 1, the  nal part of 
the book comprises this and the following chapter, each considering an alternative 
to deal with the adverse effects of the Malaysian  lm censorship system. This 
chapter will explore the possibilities of judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 
while the next chapter proposes reforms to the system itself. The book is primarily 
concerned with the Malaysian  lm censorship system and, hence, the focus of 
discussion and analyses in this chapter is mainly on judicial review in the 
Malaysian context. References to the jurisprudence of other common law 
jurisdictions are made when relevant and necessary.
Judicial review is a process by which the court exercises its supervisory 
jurisdiction over the proceedings and decisions of public bodies or authorities. 
Since  lm censorship is a matter under the purview of the government (and thus 
within the public domain), judicial review appears to be the only legal channel 
that  lm practitioners can have resort to, as they are not able to commence a court 
action against censorship authorities under the law of tort or law of contract in the 
event that they are aggrieved by the censorship decisions made about their  lms. 
Therefore, it is important to investigate the potential of this branch of public law 
as a possible alternative to law reforms.
There has not been any application for judicial review challenging  lm 
censorship decisions in Malaysia and Hong Kong but there have been numerous 
such applications in Australia. The fact that judicial review is not utilized in 
Malaysia and Hong Kong does not mean that it cannot be an important or effective 
measure. The awareness of its availability as well as effectiveness may ‘cast a 
shadow’ on censorship authorities to perform their duties with more care as their 
decisions may be liable to be challenged and quashed in court. In principle, this 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 109
awareness will encourage a more careful and thorough decision-making process, 
resulting in sounder  lm censorship decisions. Matthew Groves, an administrative 
law scholar, is of the view that judicial review ‘clearly has the potential to affect 
the ultimate or substantive outcome of administrative decision-making’,2 but 
since the empirical research on the relationship and impact of judicial review upon 
public authority decision-making has yet to produce a de nite picture of the 
effects of the law, it may only be stated up until this point that judicial review does 
have an impact and it is heavily dependent on the context of the jurisdiction 
concerned and the matter under review.3 Additionally,  lm practitioners 
interviewed for this book generally agreed that judicial review is vital in a state-
based  lm censorship system and many of them would be prepared to use it in 
particular circumstances.4 Therefore, the following discussion and analyses are 
not only of academic interest but also serve practical purposes.
This chapter will  rst lay out the basic common law principles of judicial 
review, including its basis, objectives and scope. The development of the law 
that has taken place in Malaysia will then be discussed. This section of the 
chapter will establish that  lm censorship decisions in Malaysia (as well as in 
Hong Kong and Australia) are susceptible to judicial review and it will be 
followed by a discussion of the grounds on which  lm practitioners can rely to 
challenge censorship decisions. It will be demonstrated by actual and hypothetical 
examples that the conventional grounds of judicial review are suf cient to deal 
with censorship issues. Subsequently, the chapter will discuss the issue of 
availability of judicial review to  lm practitioners. Despite the many obstacles 
such as ouster clauses, locus standi and other rules and practices, this section of 
the chapter will establish that judicial review is available to  lm practitioners. 
There is no absolute legal impediment for a  lm practitioner seeking public law 
remedies from the courts. The possible outcome of a successful judicial review 
application will be examined by exploring the various remedies at the courts’ 
disposal. This section will establish that given the right judicial approach,  lm 
practitioners would be able to obtain adequate and effective remedies against 
censorship authorities in response to their grievances. The  nal section of the 
chapter will seek to answer the pertinent question of whether judicial review 
application is the best option available to  lm practitioners. Despite the 
desirability of judicial review in theory, in the current climate, it is not the best 
option in Malaysia because of three factors: the cost and time it involves, the 
current state of the judiciary and the possible repercussions on the  lm practitioner 
concerned if a judicial review application were to be made. Although not the best 
option, all of the interviewees were of the opinion that the availability of judicial 
review is still very important.
The de nition and basis of judicial review
Judicial review, which is an essential component of the rule of law,5 is the process 
by which the High Court exercises its supervisory jurisdiction over the proceedings 
and decisions of inferior courts, tribunals and other bodies or persons who carry 

110 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
out quasi-judicial functions or the performance of public acts or duties. This 
jurisdiction was originally derived from the common law and exercised by the 
prerogative writs of mandamus, certiorari and prohibition but it is now conferred 
and regulated by the statutes and rules of court.6
Judicial review provides the means by which judicial control of administrative 
action is exercised and the subject matter of every judicial review is either a decision 
made by some person or body of persons or a refusal by him or her to make a 
decision.7 In the case of Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil 
Service (hereinafter referred to as ‘the GCHQ case’),8 Lord Diplock noted that:9
For a decision to be susceptible to judicial review, the decision-maker must 
be empowered by public law (and not merely, as in arbitration, by agreement 
between private parties) to make decisions that, if validly made, will lead to 
administrative action or abstention from action by an authority endowed by 
law with executive powers.
Lord Diplock also noted that the ultimate source of the decision-making power is 
‘nearly always nowadays a statute or subordinate legislation’.10
The basis of judicial review is the doctrine of ultra vires or excess of jurisdiction.11 
This doctrine allows courts to strike down decisions made by authorities exercising 
public functions which they have no power or jurisdiction to make.12 No authority 
whether administrative, legislative or quasi-judicial can exceed the power given to 
it and any decision taken in excess of its powers is invalid.13
Application for judicial review may also heighten awareness of its potential 
impact and this awareness may in turn promote higher standards of public 
administration, especially in decision-making processes.
The scope and principles of judicial review
Generally, a body of persons or authority is subjected to judicial review if the duty 
that is being carried out is a public duty or a duty with ‘public element’.14 The 
scope of judicial review therefore includes decisions made by inferior courts or 
tribunals and decisions made by administrative bodies or their of cers that involve 
public law. The traditional test for determining whether a body of persons or 
authority is subject to judicial review is the source of its power – whether the 
power is derived from statute or prerogative.15 If the source of power is a statute 
or subordinate legislation, then it will most likely be amenable to judicial review. 
However, this is not the sole test, as pointed out by Lloyd LJ in the case of R v 
Panel on Take Over and Mergers, Ex parte Data n plc where Lloyd LJ noted that 
it is equally important to look at ‘the nature of the power’ because:16 ‘If the body 
in question is exercising public law functions, or if the exercise of its functions 
have public law consequences, then that may… be suf cient to bring the body 
within the reach of judicial review.’
If a body of persons or authority is established under legislation and the decision 
made by that body or authority under its statutory power has a public element, it 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 111
will be susceptible to judicial review. The  lm censorship decision-making entities 
in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia are established under legislative instruments 
(the Film Censorship Act 2002, the Film Censorship Ordinance and the 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 respectively) 
and the decisions they make under their respective statutory powers have public 
elements and consequences. Thus, they are well within the scope of judicial review.
The conventional principles of judicial review were stated in the case of Chief 
Constable of the North Wales Police v Evans17 where the House of Lords held that 
judicial review is supervisory in nature where the court neither probes into the 
merits of the decision nor substitutes its own decision for that of the body or 
authority concerned. Thus, judicial review is concerned not with the merits of the 
decision in respect of which the application is made, but with the decision-making 
process itself.18
The duty of the court is therefore to con ne itself to the issue of legality and 
its concern is whether the decision-making entity has exceeded its powers, 
committed an error of law, committed a breach of the rules of natural justice, 
made a decision which no reasonable decision-maker could have reached or 
abused its powers.19 The approach adopted by the court is to quash the challenged 
decision (if there is a ground to do so) and remit the matter back to the original 
decision-maker to be reconsidered.
The courts in Malaysia have adhered to these conventional principles as 
practiced by the English courts.20 They have, in numerous cases, referred to and 
cited with approval the common law principles and scope of judicial review.21 
However, with judicial activism, the conventional principles that judicial review 
is concerned with the decision-making process and not the merits of the decision 
itself and that the court, acting in its supervisory jurisdiction, does not substitute 
its own decision for that of the original decision-maker have been departed from 
in appropriate circumstances. Since the mid-1990s, judicial review in Malaysia 
has developed beyond its ‘supervisory functions’; in suitable cases, review on 
the merits of the decision has been carried out. The courts also do not limit 
themselves to quashing the challenged decisions and remitting them back to the 
original decision-makers but have advanced further to substitute their own 
decisions for those of the decision-makers. This approach is to be preferred in 
cases where fundamental liberties are breached because if judicial review is 
con ned to only scrutinising the decision-making process (and not the merits of 
the decision itself), ‘the result of a successful judicial review application is often 
that the decision-maker has merely to  nd a more acceptable process for reaching 
the same result’.22
Two Malaysian cases illustrate the point. In the case of Tan Tek Seng v 
Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan,23 the appellant, who was a school 
headmaster, was found guilty of the offence of criminal breach of trust. Following 
the  nding of guilt, the state education department recommended to the  rst 
respondent (the Education Service Commission) that the appellant should 
continue in service but suffer a reduction in rank as a punishment. The  rst 
respondent did not accept the recommendation and without being afforded an 

112 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
opportunity to be heard, the appellant was dismissed. The appellant sought 
numerous declarations from the court, one of which was to declare that his 
dismissal was null and void. The Court of Appeal held, amongst other things, 
that ‘the requirement of fairness which is the essence of article 8(1) when read 
with article 5(1) [of the Malaysian Federal Constitution] ensures not only that a 
fair procedure is adopted but also that a fair and just punishment is imposed 
according to the facts of a particular case’.24 The Court of Appeal was of the 
view that dismissal was too severe a punishment to impose upon the appellant, 
it was disproportionate in the circumstances of the case and that some lesser 
punishment ought to have been imposed. The court then made an order 
substituting the punishment of dismissal with that of the punishment of reduction 
in rank of the appellant.25
In the case of Rama Chandran R v The Industrial Court of Malaysia,26 the 
appellant’s service was terminated by his employer and the dispute was 
subsequently heard in the Industrial Court. The appellant contended that his 
dismissal was without just cause and excuse, and that it was an act of victimization. 
The Industrial Court however ruled that the appellant had been dismissed with 
just cause and excuse. On appeal to the Federal Court, it was held that the 
Industrial Court Chairman had not addressed his mind to the issue of bias raised 
by the appellant, which was the crux of his complaint. The Industrial Court had 
therefore committed an error which went to its jurisdiction and the decision was 
quashed. The central issue that arose in the Federal Court was whether the extent 
of the court’s powers in review jurisdiction includes the power to make 
consequential orders for fair compensation in favour of the appellant instead of 
remitting the matter back to the Industrial Court. The Federal Court stated that 
sending the case back to the Industrial Court would be time-consuming and 
would involve the appellant in continued and prolonged litigation which would 
cause him harm and injustice. The Federal Court held that, in appropriate 
circumstances, it had the power not merely to quash the Industrial Court’s 
decision but to go on to make a  nding that an employee has been dismissed from 
service without just cause or excuse and, where necessary, proceed to award fair 
compensation. The Federal Court then assessed the amount of compensation and 
awarded the sum to the appellant.
The above cases show that, under appropriate circumstances, the courts 
substitute their own decisions for those of the original decision-makers. It must be 
pointed out that these cases are industrial relations matters and, since there has 
never been any judicial review application challenging a  lm censorship decision 
in Malaysia, it is dif cult to conclude with certainty that the courts would adopt a 
similar approach to  lm censorship decisions. However, it appears that there is no 
compelling reason as to why the courts would not adopt the same approach in  lm 
censorship matters to quash censorship decisions made by the Board of Censors, 
the Appeal Committee or the Home Minister and proceed to decide on the matter 
without reverting it back to the original decision-maker. The court may also make 
consequential orders and the remedies that could be granted are discussed further 
on in this chapter.

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 113
The grounds of judicial review
In 1985, the various conventional grounds upon which judicial review may be 
made were conveniently reformulated by the House of Lords in the landmark 
GCHQ case27 where Lord Diplock simpli ed and narrowed down the grounds into 
three headings in the following classic dictum:28
Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when without reiterating 
any analysis of the steps by which the development has come about, one can 
conveniently classify under three heads the grounds upon which administrative 
action is subject to control by judicial review. The  rst ground I would call 
‘illegality’, the second ‘irrationality’ and the third ‘procedural impropriety’. 
That is not to say that further development on a case by case basis may not in 
course of time add further grounds. I have in mind particularly the possible 
adoption in the future of the principle of ‘proportionality’29
By ‘illegality’ as a ground for judicial review I mean that the decision-maker 
must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-making power and 
must give effect to it… By ‘irrationality’ I mean what can by now be succinctly 
referred to as ‘Wednesbury unreasonableness’ (Associated Provincial Picture 
Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation [1948] 1 KB 223). It applies to a decision 
which is so outrageous in its de ance of logic or of accepted moral standards that 
no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could 
have arrived at it… I have described the third head as ‘procedural impropriety’ 
rather than failure to observe basic rules of natural justice or failure to act with 
procedural fairness towards the person who will be affected by the decision. 
This is because susceptibility to judicial review under this head covers also 
failure by an administrative tribunal to observe procedural rules that are expressly 
laid down in the legislative instrument by which its jurisdiction is conferred, 
even where such failure does not involve any denial of natural justice.30
Under ‘illegality’, the question that the court will ask is whether the decision-
maker strayed outside the power or purposes de ned by the governing legislation. 
Under ‘irrationality’, the question is whether the power under which the decision-
maker acts has been improperly exercised, while under ‘procedural impropriety’, 
the question is whether the decision made was procedurally unfair.31 These 
grounds of review are not exhaustive,32 they may overlap33 and they are convenient 
groupings or headings.
The grounds mentioned above are for judicial review of administrative actions 
in exercising discretionary powers and they will be discussed separately below in 
relation to  lm censorship.34
Illegality
Illegality arises where the decision-making entity acts without or in excess of its 
jurisdiction or power. A decision is illegal if it contravenes or exceeds the terms 

114 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
of the power which authorizes the making of the decision or if it pursues an 
objective other than that for which the power to make the decision was conferred.35 
In deciding whether a decision is illegal, the court will construe the content and 
scope of the legislation empowering the making of the decision to determine 
whether the decision falls within its ‘four corners’.36
In regard to  lm censorship, four common errors may be committed by censors 
that would render the censorship decision illegal. The  rst is where censors make 
a decision which they are not empowered to make under the  lm censorship 
legislation. An actual decision may be highlighted here as an illustration. In 2008, 
a  lm entitled Malaysian Gods (Amir Muhammad) was approved by the Board of 
Censors under section 10(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 but in addition to the 
approval granted, a prohibition was imposed on the said  lm from being exhibited 
or distributed to the public.37 This is ‘illegal’ as the Board is not empowered under 
the governing law to make such decision. The Act only empowers the Board to 
make three types of censorship decision: approve the  lm for exhibition without 
any alteration (section 10(1)(a)), approve the  lm for exhibition with such 
alteration as it may require (section 10(1)(b)) or refuse to approve the  lm for 
exhibition (section 10(1)(c)). The Board is not empowered to approve a  lm but at 
the same time bar its exhibition and distribution in the country.
The second error is where censors exercise the discretionary powers conferred 
on them for an ‘extraneous’, ‘improper’ or ‘ulterior’ purpose. If a power is granted 
for one purpose but is exercised for a different purpose, that power has not been 
validly exercised.38 It is apparent from the  eldwork conducted in Malaysia that 
this error is at times committed by censors. U-Wei Haji Saari noted that the 
censors will ban a  lm or require scenes to be excised when they feel the content 
is offensive to them (or made them feel uncomfortable) regardless of whether 
such content is in fact prohibited or not and without regard to whether the content 
is acceptable to society.39 Fellow  lm director James Lee discovered that the 
censors ‘will just ban’ a  lm if they feel its release will be a subject of complaints 
by certain quarters of society40 while  lm distributor Leonard Tee remarked that 
‘if the censors don’t understand the  lm, they will think that it is “dangerous” and 
they will just ban it’.41 These are examples where censors exercise the discretionary 
power conferred on them for an ‘extraneous’ or ‘improper’ purpose. A hypothetical 
example may also be included here. It is plausible that a  lm could be refused 
approval for exhibition by censors or the Home Minister under the pretext that its 
exhibition would be ‘contrary to public interest’42 where in fact the  lm is banned 
because it contains content that is critical of the government.
The third error is where the exercise of the discretionary power is based on 
irrelevant considerations or where the decision is made without due regard to 
relevant considerations. In a decision-making process involving the exercise of 
discretionary power, the decision-maker must take into account considerations 
which are relevant to the objectives of the legislation in question while ignoring 
considerations that are irrelevant.43 If the exercise of a discretionary power was 
in uenced by considerations that cannot lawfully be taken into account, that 
power has not been validly exercised.44 The in uence of irrelevant considerations 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 115
or immaterial factors will be apparent if the decision-maker has set them out as 
reasons for the decision. In cases where the reasons for decision are not provided 
and there is no material to show what considerations in uenced the decision-
maker, the court may determine whether such in uence is to be inferred from the 
surrounding circumstances.45 If the in uence of irrelevant consideration is 
established, it is not necessary to prove that such consideration was the sole or 
dominant in uence. It is suf cient to prove that the in uence was material or 
substantial.46 If it is alleged that relevant considerations have not been taken into 
account, the court will assess the actual or potential importance of the relevant 
considerations that were overlooked.47 A case in point is the banning of Lelaki 
Komunis Terakhir (The Last Communist) in 2006 by the Home Minister where, 
subsequent to making his decision, the Minister disclosed to the press that he had 
considered the fact that it was insensitive to release the  lm at a time when the 
United Malays National Organization (which has long been the governing political 
party in Malaysia and in which the Minister served as its Secretary General at the 
material time) was celebrating its sixtieth anniversary and that the  lm did not 
show enough violence or portrayals of violent acts to reinforce the perception that 
communists are violent people.48 These two irrelevant considerations were taken 
into account in making the decision to ban the  lm while not having regard to 
relevant considerations, such as the fact that the  lm had been approved without 
any cut and classi ed ‘U’ (suitable for viewing by all levels of society) by the 
Board of Censors, and the consideration of whether excision of certain content of 
the  lm would suf ce instead of an outright banning of the entire  lm.
The fourth error is where there is non-exercise of discretion on the part of the 
censors in making a decision. A decision-making entity exercising discretionary 
powers is obligated to apply its mind to the facts, merits and circumstances of each 
case that comes before it for decision and it must not allow another unauthorized 
person or entity to decide the matter on its behalf. Film censors must also not fetter 
their own discretion and must not act under dictation or act mechanically by relying 
on instructions or ‘opinions’ of another entity without exercising independent 
judgment.49 If this principle is not observed, the ensuing decision may be liable to 
be quashed under the ground of illegality. An example of this situation may be the 
withdrawal of the release of Bruce Almighty (Tom Shadyac, 2003) from Malaysian 
cinemas. The  lm is a comedy about a television reporter who complains about life 
and ends up being given the power by God to control the universe. It was initially 
approved for exhibition (and promotional activities were ongoing to promote the 
upcoming release of the  lm) but was subsequently withdrawn in an abrupt manner. 
There was circumstantial evidence that the decision of the Board of Censors to 
withdraw its approval was ‘in uenced’ by statements and ‘opinions’ issued by 
other government departments on the suitability of releasing the  lm in Malaysia.50
Irrationality
‘Irrationality’ is also sometimes referred to as ‘unreasonableness’ and these terms 
are used interchangeably. The famous formulation of this ground can be found in 

116 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
the case of Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation51 
where Lord Greene held that the court can interfere if a decision is ‘so unreasonable 
that no reasonable authority could ever come to it’52 In the case of R v Secretary 
of State for the Environment, Ex parte Nottinghamshire County Council,53 the 
House of Lords held that the threshold of unreasonableness was to be ‘extreme’ 
and it was formulated to include decisions which are so absurd or outrageous in 
their de ance of logic or of accepted moral standards that the decision-maker 
must have taken leave of his senses.
Irrationality or unreasonableness is also used to denote extreme behaviour, for 
example acting in bad faith (mala  de) or a decision which is ‘perverse’ or 
‘absurd’.54 A decision may also be held to be unreasonable if it is unduly oppressive 
as it subjects the affected parties to excessive hardship or to unnecessary 
infringement of their rights.55 A decision is also irrational if it lacks ostensible logic 
or comprehensible justi cation. Other instances of irrational or unreasonable 
decisions include decisions that are made in an arbitrary fashion, decisions made in 
the absence of logical connection between the evidence and the ostensible reasons 
for the decision as well as decisions made without evidence to support them.56 The 
Home Minister’s arbitrary banning of Lelaki Komunis Terakhir again serves as an 
example for this ground of judicial review. Besides the outright banning of a  lm, 
censorship by way of excision without intelligible justi cation may also render 
such decision liable to be quashed under this ground.
Procedural impropriety
‘Procedural impropriety’ arises where the decision-maker has acted without 
complying with mandatory procedural rules laid down in the legislation 
empowering the making of the decision or has failed to observe the rules of natural 
justice. The term ‘natural justice’57 is being increasingly replaced by a general 
duty to act fairly,58 which is a key element of procedural propriety.59 Whether 
fairness is required and what is involved in order to achieve it in a decision-making 
process is for the court to decide as a matter of law, not for the decision-making 
entity to decide as a matter of discretion.60 There is a presumption that procedural 
fairness is required whenever the exercise of a power adversely affects an 
individual’s rights protected by common law or by legislation.61 When a mandatory 
procedure is laid down in the legislation, it must be followed by the decision-
maker in the process of making a decision62 and the court may, on an application 
for judicial review, decide on the extent to which the legislative procedure has 
been ful lled. If the procedure is not followed, the ensuing decision may be 
quashed under the ground of ‘procedural impropriety’.
The two most important principles under the ground of ‘procedural impropriety’ 
(or rather ‘procedural fairness’) in regard to  lm censorship are the right to an oral 
hearing and the right to a reasoned decision. A person who is entitled to be heard 
orally63 or who is given an oral hearing as a matter of discretion must be allowed 
an adequate opportunity to present his or her case.64 It is of course important for 
 lm practitioners to be able to make oral representations to censors as well as to 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 117
members of the Appeal Committee before their  lms are banned or subject to 
excision. The importance of making oral representations was highlighted and 
stressed by  lm practitioners interviewed for this book65 but unfortunately, the 
right is not guaranteed under the Film Censorship Act 2002.
As regards the right to reasoned decision, in common law there is no general duty 
on the part of the decision-maker to provide reasons for the decisions they make. 
However, under certain circumstances such a duty may exist and failure on the part 
of the decision-maker to provide reasons may give grounds for challenging the 
decision made on the ground of procedural impropriety.66 These circumstances would 
include situations when reasons for a decision are expressly or impliedly required by 
legislation, where the relevant legislation provides a right to appeal and reasons are 
needed so as to enable the affected person to exercise effectively that right of appeal 
or where natural justice or fairness itself requires that reasons be given.67
If the  lm censorship legislation provides that  lm practitioners are entitled to 
an oral hearing or to make oral representations in an appeal against censorship 
decisions or they are entitled to reasoned censorship decisions, failure on the part 
of the censors to so provide will give rise to this ground of challenge and the 
decision in question may be liable to be quashed by the court. As discussed in 
Chapter 4, section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that if the 
Board of Censors approves a  lm subject to alteration being made or refuses to 
approve a  lm for exhibition, written reasons must be given to the owner of the 
 lm concerned. A Malaysian  lm practitioner whose  lm was banned or approved 
subject to alteration but was not furnished with written reasons for the censorship 
decision may use this ground to challenge the decision-making process in which 
the decision was made.68
Proportionality
In view of the development of the law in Malaysia, this ground of judicial review 
may be discussed under two separate sub-headings: common law proportionality, 
which originated from the English courts, and constitutional review proportionality, 
which is a part of the Malaysian administrative law jurisprudence based on the 
Federal Constitution and inspired by Indian jurisprudence – both of which could be 
open to  lm practitioners to challenge censorship decisions that are ‘disproportionate’.69
Common law proportionality
‘Proportionality’ was suggested by Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case70 as the 
possible fourth ground of judicial review in English law. The principle of 
proportionality requires that administrative measures must not be more drastic 
than is necessary for attaining the desired result and it requires the court to 
determine whether the decision made or action taken was really needed.71 The 
reluctance of the English courts to accept proportionality as a ground of judicial 
review is based on the view that it lowers the threshold of judicial intervention and 
involves the courts in considering the merits of the decision challenged.72 

118 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
Nevertheless, proportionality has in fact been applied, albeit under limited 
circumstances, since the 1950s by the English courts in numerous cases including 
R v Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, Ex parte Shaw73 and R v 
Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council, Ex parte Hook.74
Constitutional review proportionality
Constitutional review proportionality as a ground of judicial review was  rst 
introduced in Malaysia in the case of Tan Tek Seng v Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan 
Pendidikan75 where the Court of Appeal utilized provisions of the Federal 
Constitution76 to rule that fair procedure must be adopted in a decision-making 
process and that actions taken or decisions made by authorities must be 
proportionate in the circumstances of the case. The main constitutional provision 
that the Malaysian courts rely on for this unique ground is article 8(1) which 
reads: ‘All persons are equal before the law and entitled to the equal protection of 
the law’.77 In the case of Dr Mohd Nasir bin Hashim v Menteri Dalam Negeri 
Malaysia,78 the Court of Appeal took the opportunity to elucidate the principle as 
it has been used by the Malaysian courts:79
[Article 8] guarantees fairness of all forms of State action… [The court] must 
also bear in mind the principle of substantive proportionality that art 8(1) 
imports… In other words, not only must the legislative or executive response 
to a state of affairs be objectively fair, it must also be proportionate to the 
object sought to be achieved. This is sometimes referred to as ‘the doctrine of 
rational nexus’. A court is therefore entitled to strike down State action on the 
ground that it is disproportionate to the object sought to be achieved.80
In  lm censorship matters, proportionality could be relied upon as a ground to 
challenge refusals of approval for exhibition and distribution of  lms. A decision 
to refuse approval (that is, to ban) a  lm due to speci c and identi able content in 
the  lm may be found to be disproportionate to the objective sought to be achieved 
by the censors if a less drastic decision could be made, such as requiring the 
objectionable content to be excised from the  lm before approval is granted. This 
is because it may not always be necessary to ban a  lm simply because it contains 
content that is prohibited under the censorship guidelines. For example, the Hong 
Kong Board of Review could be understood to have acted ‘proportionately’ by not 
banning the French  lm Irreversible (Gaspar Noe, 2002) but approving it for 
exhibition subject to age restriction and minor excisions to be made to the  lm. In 
Hong Kong and Australia, there are many such examples.
The availability of judicial review to  lm practitioners: 
the  lter mechanisms
The availability of judicial review to an applicant in Malaysia is generally subject 
to  ve considerations. They are:

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 119
1 
whether the application is time-barred;81
2 
whether the decision sought to be challenged by the application is reviewable 
and therefore justiciable;
3 
whether the judicial review jurisdiction of the court is ousted by an effective 
ouster clause;
4 
whether the applicant has the required standing to make the application; and
5 
whether the rule of exhaustion of alternative remedies operates (in the 
circumstances of the case) to bar the application.
On the  rst consideration, Order 53 rule 3(6) of the Rules of the High Court 1980 
prescribes that an application for judicial review should be made promptly and in 
any case within 40 days after the date when the grounds for the application  rst 
arose or when the decision is  rst communicated to the applicant. The time period 
of 40 days may be extended by the court if there is an application for extension of 
time supported by good and valid reasons.
On the second consideration,  lm censorship is neither an unreviewable 
discretion nor a non-justiciable issue in Malaysia.82 ‘Justiciability’, as explained 
in the Judicial Review of Administrative Action, means:83
In the judicial review context, it should refer to the government decisions 
which should be immune from judicial review, either totally or partially, for 
political reasons or because the courts are ill-equipped to engage in the 
review, even though the review is not on the merits. Some areas of government 
decision-making are best left to other branches of government for political 
reasons. These include treaty making, proroguing and dissolving of 
parliament, making peace, and conduct of international relations. There might 
well be aspects of activities in these areas which are properly susceptible to 
judicial review, but there will be a natural judicial reluctance to get involved, 
even at the margins of judicial review.
Having examined the  rst two considerations, the discussion will now turn to the 
remaining three – the effect of ouster clause, the standing requirement and the rule 
of exhaustion of alternative remedies.
The effect of ouster clauses
Ouster clauses, otherwise known as privative or  nality clauses, are widely used 
in Malaysian legislation. It is a legislative trend to insert such a clause into 
statutes to make administrative decisions or actions ‘court-proof’. There are a 
variety of ouster clauses, some declare the administrative decisions to be ‘ nal’ 
or ‘conclusive’, like section 23(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002;84 some 
declare that the decision is not subject to an ‘appeal’ or ‘review’ in any court as 
in section 48 of the Act.85 There are also ouster clauses which go further and seek 
to bar the courts from ‘reviewing, calling into question, and quashing’ an 
administrative decision.

120 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
The leading common law case in this area is Anisminic Ltd v Foreign 
Compensation Commission,86 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Anisminic case’) 
where the House of Lords restricted the scope of an ouster clause by giving a wide 
and liberal interpretation to the concept of ‘excess of jurisdiction’. This case is 
important in two aspects. First, it diluted the ef cacy of ouster clauses by con ning 
their protection to non-jurisdictional errors. Second, it extended the scope of 
jurisdictional errors. The House of Lords construed ‘jurisdictional errors’ broadly 
as to include errors of law therein87 and it practically rendered obsolete the 
technical distinction between ‘error of law going to jurisdiction’ and ‘error of law 
within jurisdiction’.88
In Malaysia, until the case of South East Asia Fire Bricks Sdn Bhd v Non  
Metallic Mineral Products Mfg Employees Union89 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 
Fire Bricks case’) in 1980, judicial interpretations on the effect of ouster clauses 
did not show a uniform approach.90 Some judges interpreted such clauses 
restrictively, while others did so liberally. However, no ouster clause was taken to 
exclude completely judicial review of administrative action.91 The general 
approach taken was that an ouster clause would not oust the supervisory 
jurisdiction of the court to review a decision on the grounds of jurisdictional error 
as well as error on the face of the record.92 However, in 1980, the Privy Council’s 
decision in the Fire Bricks case changed the Malaysian courts’ earlier approach 
and perpetuated the error of law and error of jurisdiction dichotomy. It was, in 
effect, a step back from the Anisminic case for Malaysia. The Privy Council’s 
ruling in the Fire Bricks case was accepted and applied by the Malaysian courts in 
a series of cases where, in most of them, the courts have refused to review 
administrative decisions on the ground of error of law.
Fortunately, in 1995 the Court of Appeal in the case of Syarikat Kenderaan 
Melayu Kelantan Bhd v Transport Workers’ Union93 took the step of departing 
from the rule of stare decisis. The court refused to be bound by the decision of the 
Privy Council in the Fire Bricks case on the issue of the scope of judicial review 
in the face of an ouster clause. The Court of Appeal held that an inferior tribunal 
or other public decision-making authority, whether exercising a quasi-judicial or 
administrative function, has no jurisdiction to commit an error of law, whether the 
error is jurisdictional or not. Since the body under review has no jurisdiction to 
commit an error of law, its decision will not be immune from judicial review even 
in the face of an ouster clause, howsoever widely drafted the clause may be.94 The 
Court ruled to ‘abolish’ the distinction between an error of law and an error of 
jurisdiction set out in the Fire Bricks case. Consequently, all errors of law are now 
reviewable by the High Court, substantially enlarging the scope of judicial review.
The proposition in the Syarikat Kenderaan Melayu Kelantan Bhd case in 
regard to the error of law concept – which draws from a broad understanding of 
Anisminic – has been accepted by the apex court in Malaysia in the cases of 
Kumpulan Perangsang Selangor Bhd v Zaid bin Hj Mohd Noh95 and Hoh Kiang 
Ngan v Mahkamah Perusahaan Malaysia.96 The current judicial position on the 
effect of ouster clauses is that the High Court need not ascertain whether an error 
of law committed by the decision-making entity goes to jurisdiction or not. An 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 121
error of law, whether jurisdictional or otherwise, becomes reviewable even in the 
presence of an ouster clause. Therefore, sections 23(2) and 48 of the Film 
Censorship Act 2002 would not effectively oust the courts’ jurisdiction to review 
 lm censorship decisions if the decision challenged is tainted with error or errors 
of law. Whenever an error of law is committed by the decision-making entities, no 
ouster clause, however widely drafted, may exclude judicial review of the decision 
made and the cases make clear that errors of law include such matters as the 
decision-maker taking into account irrelevant considerations; or omitting to take 
into account relevant considerations; or when the decision-maker misconstrues 
the relevant statutory provision; or misapplies the principle of the law.
The locus standi requirement
The purpose of the locus standi rule is to resolve the con ict between two 
competing aspects of public interest: the desirability of encouraging individuals to 
participate in the enforcement of law and the undesirability of encouraging 
‘professional’ litigants or meddlesome interlopers invoking the jurisdiction of the 
courts in matters in which they are not concerned.97 Before the year 2000, there 
was no express provision governing the locus standi requirement of judicial 
review application in Malaysia. The Rules of the High Court 1980 and the Courts 
of Judicature Act 1964 were silent as regards the issue of standing of a judicial 
review applicant. The rule as to locus standi has therefore evolved over time 
through the courts.98 A case which is relevant to both  lm censorship and locus 
standi is George John v Goh Eng Wah Bros Filem Sdn Bhd,99 where the applicant 
sought leave to apply for a certiorari to quash the censors’ decision in approving 
the publicity materials of a  lm entitled Happy Bigamist (Anthony Chan, 1987) 
which depicted a person living happily with two wives in one house.100 The High 
Court took a liberal stand on the locus standi requirement and in holding that the 
applicant had the required standing to  le the application, stated that: ‘In order to 
have locus standi to invoke the jurisdiction of judicial review, the applicant should 
claim, if not a legal or equitable right, at least suf cient interest in respect of the 
matter to be litigated’.101
When the Rules of the High Court 1980 were amended in 2000, the existing 
Order 53 (which provides for the rules of application for judicial review) was 
replaced with a completely new Order 53. The locus standi requirement is now 
provided under rule 2(4) and it reads: ‘Any person who is adversely affected by 
the decision of any public authority shall be entitled to make the application’. The 
Court of Appeal in the case of QSR Brands v Suruhanjaya Sekuriti102 pointed out 
that the phrase ‘adversely affected’ in Order 53 rule 2(4) should be construed in a 
 exible manner and held that:103
If the court is satis ed that the applicant has neither a suf cient personal 
interest in the legality of the impugned action… nor is the application a public 
interest litigation, then leave may safely be refused on the ground that the 
applicant is not a person ‘adversely affected’.

122 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
In  lm censorship matters, locus standi or standing will not be an issue if the 
application for judicial review is made by the affected  lm practitioner – the  lm’s 
director, producer, distributor or exhibitor – because they have personal interest in 
the decision. Furthermore, when a decision to ban a  lm is taken or when a 
censorship decision is made in an ultra vires manner, the fundamental liberties of 
the  lm practitioner concerned as guaranteed under articles 5 and 10 of the Malaysian 
Federal Constitution are infringed104 and their interests in the  lm are affected. The 
 lm practitioner concerned will be ‘adversely affected’ and thus have the required 
locus standi to move the court by way of an application for judicial review.
The rule of exhaustion of alternative remedies
Must alternative remedies be exhausted before recourse may be had to judicial 
review? The courts in exercising their discretion will not normally make judicial 
review available to an applicant where there is an alternative remedy by way of 
appeal.105 However, in deciding whether or not to disallow judicial review on the 
ground of non-exhaustion of existing alternative remedies, the court will consider 
the ef cacy, bene t, convenience and adequacy of the alternative remedies 
available to the applicant. The existence of an appeal provision in the relevant 
legislation is therefore not a conclusive ground to refuse judicial review.106
There is no law requiring an applicant to exhaust all alternative remedies before 
an application for judicial review can be commenced.107 The Court of Appeal in 
the case of QSR Brands v Suruhanjaya Sekuriti,108 held that the existence of an 
alternative remedy available to the litigant would not on its own bar the court from 
hearing a judicial review. The approach is that the court will take into account the 
availability of the alternative remedy when deciding whether to grant the relief 
sought. The decided cases show that the rule of exhaustion of alternative remedies 
is not an absolute rule in Malaysia. It is not always the case that the court will not 
grant judicial review where an alternative remedy exists. Judicial review will be 
granted if the alternative remedy is not as effective, ef cacious or convenient as 
judicial review.109 It will also be granted if the application will resolve the issue 
directly and expeditiously,110 if the case raises important public law issues111 or if 
the applicant can demonstrate that the decision challenged is ultra vires, if there is 
blatant failure to perform a statutory duty or if there is an abuse of power or a 
breach of the principles of natural justice.112
In regard to  lm censorship, the rule will come into play when a  lm 
practitioner applies for judicial review to challenge the Board of Censors’ 
decision without  rst appealing to the Appeal Committee. It is very likely that the 
court will dismiss the application unless the applicant- lm practitioner can 
demonstrate illegality, abuse of power or a breach of the rules of natural justice; 
or that the application will resolve the issue directly, expeditiously, or effectively; 
or that the case raises important public law issues. Therefore, in such a situation, 
the  lm practitioner concerned would do better by  rst exhausting the appeal 
procedure provided under the Film Censorship Act 2002 before  ling an 
application for judicial review.

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 123
Remedies available under judicial review application: 
what can the applicant- lm practitioner achieve?
The superior courts in Malaysia have two types of power in judicial review 
matters. The  rst is the inherent powers of the High Court based on common law 
and the second is the additional powers of the High Court granted under 
paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Courts of Judicature Act 1964 read together 
with section 25(2).113
From these powers, the courts have at their disposal a wide variety of remedies, 
which may be grouped into two categories: the common law remedies and the 
additional powers remedies. The Courts of Judicature Act 1964,114 the Rules of the 
High Court 1980115 and the Speci c Relief Act 1950116 are applicable to the grant 
of judicial review remedies to successful applicant- lm practitioners.
Common law remedies
The common law remedies are comprised of orders or writs of habeas corpus, 
mandamus, certiorari, quo warranto, and prohibition (the prerogative writ 
remedies), as well as declaration, injunction, monetary compensation and damages 
(the non-writ remedies). In an application for judicial review challenging a  lm 
censorship decision, the court may grant the following common law remedies:
1 
Certiorari, to quash the decision if it is made in excess of jurisdiction, in 
breach of the rules of natural justice, or where there is an error of law or abuse 
of power. When this remedy is granted, the court may direct the censorship 
authority concerned to reconsider the matter afresh. Certiorari is the most 
commonly sought writ and is the principal means of invoking judicial review 
over any authority determining the rights of the people.117 It appears to be the 
most effective common law remedy for  lm practitioners challenging a 
censorship decision that is illegal, irrational, unfair or disproportionate.
2 
Mandamus, to compel the decision-making entities to perform their duty, or 
to keep the entities within the limits of their jurisdiction. When discretion is 
vested in an authority by law, and that authority does not exercise, or abuses, 
the discretion, mandamus can be issued to compel the authority concerned to 
exercise its discretion properly and in accordance to law.118 A  lm practitioner 
may apply for an order of mandamus to compel censors to perform their duty 
expeditiously if there is unnecessary delay in the making of a censorship 
decision. This is to avoid  lms from being held-up over a long period of time 
by the censors concerned.119
3 
Declaration, to declare that a censorship decision is null, void and of no 
effect. However, a declaration merely declares the position of the law under 
a set of facts and does not quash the decision in question. A declaration has 
no coercive force, but it may effectively undermine the enforceability of a 
challenged decision.120 This remedy may also be sought to declare certain 
censorship guidelines or practices to be invalid.

124 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
Additional powers of the High Court: the moulding of relief
The additional powers of the High Court are much wider and more dynamic than 
its inherent powers. Paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Courts of Judicature Act 
1964 read in conjunction with section 25(2) of the same Act121 provides that the 
High Court shall have the following additional powers:
Power to issue to any person or authority directions, orders or writs, including 
writs of the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto, 
and certiorari, or any others, for the enforcement of the rights conferred by 
Part II of the Constitution, or for any of them, or for any other purpose.122
The Federal Court in the case of Rama Chandran R v The Industrial Court of 
Malaysia123 held that since paragraph 1 carries the caption ‘Additional Powers of 
High Court’, the powers granted therein are therefore over and above those 
inherent powers already enjoyed by the High Court.124
Paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Courts of Judicature Act 1964 is couched in 
comprehensive phraseology and therefore confers wide powers on the High 
Court.125 The language used to describe the nature of the power, the purpose for 
which, and the person or authority against whom, it can be exercised, encompasses 
many areas and prescribes a lot of power to the court. Although the provision 
carries the caption ‘Additional Powers of the High Court’, the Court of Appeal 
and the Federal Court also enjoy the powers stipulated therein.126 Under paragraph 
1, the courts can issue writs in the nature of prerogative writs as understood under 
the common law, but the scope is much wider than that as the use of the phrase 
‘writs, including writs of the nature of’ does not equate the writs that can be 
issued in Malaysia with those in England (or other common law jurisdictions 
without a similar provision). The High Court can also issue directions, orders or 
writs other than the prerogative writs. The phrase ‘or any others’ empowers the 
court to grant other remedies besides writs and this would include declaratory and 
injunctive relief. The phrase ‘directions, orders’ then allows the High Court to 
mould consequential relief after having disposed of the main remedy or remedies 
sought.127 It enables the court to mould the relief (remedy) to suit the factual 
matrix of each case, and such powers can be utilized for the enforcement of rights, 
may it be fundamental rights or any other rights. Therefore, instead of only 
quashing a  lm censorship decision (with an order of certiorari) and remitting it 
back to the censorship decision-making entities to reconsider the matter afresh, 
the court can go a step further to mould the relief according to the needs of the 
situation or the applicant. It needs to be stressed that the moulding of judicial 
relief is a salient feature of the additional powers of the High Court and orders as 
well as directions may be made against ‘any person or authority’ and not limited 
to public authorities only.
The concept of moulding of relief was introduced in Malaysia in the case of 
Hong Leong Equipment Sdn Bhd v Liew Fook Chuan128 where the Court of Appeal, 
after basing itself on the similarity between article 226(1) of the Indian Constitution 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 125
and paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Courts of Judicature Act 1964, held that in 
the  eld of public law remedies, the High Court is not con ned to the grant of usual 
prerogative orders known to the English common law, but is at liberty to fashion 
appropriate remedy to suit the circumstances of the case. Sri Ram JCA stated:129
It is plain that Parliament intended that the High Court should be empowered 
to grant relief which is ordinarily beyond the scope of the usual public law 
remedies. That intention  nds expression in the word ‘including’ which has 
been interposed between the phrase ‘directions, orders or writs’ and the phrase 
‘writs of the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto 
and certiorari, or any others’. So too, the phrase ‘or for any other purpose’, 
with which the paragraph concludes, makes clear the wide area in which the 
remedies are to operate. These matters, in my judgment, re ect the conferment 
of a wide power upon the High Court in the matter of public law remedies.
The additional powers may be utilized by the superior courts over and above their 
inherent powers in an application for judicial review challenging  lm censorship 
decision. It is argued here that the courts, sourcing their additional powers from 
paragraph 1, may:
1 
order the Board of Censors, the Appeal Committee or the Home Minister to 
reconsider their decision based upon directions issued by the court;
2 
direct the Board, the Committee or the Minister to review or to make a fresh 
decision within a prescribe timeframe;
3 
order the Film Control Division of the Home Ministry to pay the applicant-
 lm practitioner compensation or damages if an approval for exhibition and 
distribution of a  lm is subsequently revoked without justi cation and such 
revocation has caused  nancial losses to the  lm practitioner concerned;
4 
order the Board, the Committee or the Minister to restore (or return) excised 
parts of the  lm submitted to the  lm practitioner concerned;
5 
overturn the censorship decision made by the Board, the Committee or the 
Minister if the court  nds the decision is tainted with illegality or irrationality, 
or is made under an unfair procedure or is disproportionate with the object 
sought to be achieved;
6 
make its own censorship decision about the  lm concerned.
The combination of the two categories of powers, inherent and additional powers, 
ensures that the applicant- lm practitioner will obtain from the court remedy or 
remedies that are adequate and appropriate to the circumstances of the case.
Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions: the best option?
It appears that there have been no judicial review applications challenging  lm 
censorship decisions in Malaysia and Hong Kong. In Australia, there have been a 
number of such applications but only two of them are directly relevant to the 

126 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
scope of this book130 – Village Roadshow Corporation Ltd v Sheehan131 and 
Family Voice Australia v Members of the Classi cation Review Board.132 In the 
former case, the applicant sought judicial review to challenge the Board of 
Review’s decision in con rming the Censorship Board’s decision to classify the 
 lm Full Metal Jacket (Stanley Kubrick, 1987) for restricted exhibition (that is, an 
‘R’ category)133 under the Film and Video Tape Classi cation Act 1984 (NSW), 
and the respondent’s personal decision not to reconvene the Board of Review to 
consider its decision further following a written request by the applicant. The 
applicant was the distributor of the  lm and the respondent chaired the Board of 
Review. The applicant argued that the Board of Review had failed to take into 
account relevant considerations (that is, the suitability of the  lm for viewing by 
persons between the ages of 15 and 17 years) and that the members of the Board 
of Review had ‘slavishly followed’ the classi cation guidelines and had not 
applied themselves to the merits of the case. Both grounds failed as the Federal 
Court found that there was no evidence that the Board of Review had failed to take 
into account whether the  lm was suitable for viewing by persons between the 
ages of 15 and 17 years and there was also no evidence to suggest that the Board 
of Review had abdicated its responsibility to make an independent decision in the 
matter. However, the court was of the opinion that the respondent’s personal 
decision not to submit to the Board of Review the applicant’s request to reconsider 
the matter (with new evidence said to support it, like the censorship decisions on 
the  lm in New Zealand and the United Kingdom which gave the  lm lower 
classi cation categories) had deprived the applicant of an opportunity for a full 
and fair determination of its request for an ‘M’ classi cation of the  lm. The court 
proceeded to quash the decision of the respondent not to permit the Board of 
Review to reconsider its decision. The court then ordered the Board of Review to 
reconsider the matter. However, the subsequent reconsideration did not result in a 
change of the  lm’s earlier ‘R’ classi cation.
In the latter case, the applicant – Family Voice Australia – sought judicial 
review (under section 5 of the Administrative Decision (Judicial Review) Act 
1977) of the Classi cation Review Board’s decision to classify a modi ed version 
of the  lm Salo o le 120 Giornate di Sodoma (Salo, Or the 120 Days of Sodom, Pier 
Paolo Pasolini, 1975)134 in DVD format along with additional materials (including 
documentary features and behind-the-scenes footage of the  lm in production) 
R18+ with the consumer advice: ‘Scenes of torture and degradation, sexual 
violence and nudity’.135 In arriving at its decision, the  ve-member panel of the 
Review Board found that the impact of the  lm was high (with portrayals of mental 
and physical violence, nudity and sexual violence) but justi ed by the historical, 
political and cultural context of the  lm as provided by the additional documentary 
material included in the DVD format that would ‘mitigate the level of potential 
community offence and the impact of the classi able elements to the extent that the 
 lm can be accommodated within the R18+ classi cation’.136 Family Voice 
Australia, in its application, contended that the Review Board’s decision was 
affected by an error of law and that the Review Board erred by failing to comply 
with the Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games as required 

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 127
under the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 and 
the National Classi cation Code. The applicant’s allegations included:
1 
The Review Board did not consider the cumulative effect of the individual 
classi able elements in the  lm.
2 
The Review Board failed to consider whether the depictions of cruelty and 
violence were detailed and of high impact.
3 
The Review Board erred in  nding that the sexual activity depicted in the  lm 
was permissible because of context.
4 
The Review Board failed to consider whether depictions of sexual violence in 
the  lm were gratuitous, exploitative or offensive.
The Federal Court held that the Review Board had appropriately directed its 
attention to, and considered each of the classi able elements in the  lm and 
subsequently made their decision to classify the  lm R18+. The judicial review 
application was dismissed as the Court was satis ed that the Review Board had 
considered all relevant issues, directed itself correctly as to the statutory criteria 
and applied the Act, the Code and the Guidelines without committing any error of 
law in the course of making the decision.
Although every Malaysian  lm practitioner interviewed for this research 
agreed that it is important to have the option of challenging  lm censorship 
decisions by way of judicial review, less than 50 per cent of them stated that they 
would be prepared to do so if dissatis ed with a decision. The Malaysian 
interviewees were reluctant to pursue judicial review as the solution to their 
censorship woes for three reasons:
1 
the cost and time involved in an application for judicial review;
2 
the lack of con dence in the judicial system; and
3 
the subsequent negative effects or repercussions of an application on the 
applicant- lm practitioner.
Ruhani Abdul Rahman thought it would be burdensome to incur extra expenses in 
addition to the large amount of money already spent on producing a  lm. 
Additionally, a judicial review application would take a long period of time to be 
disposed of by the court and the delay would cause the  lm to ‘be stuck there for 
years!’137 The producer also acknowledged that she could not afford to have her 
 lm ‘held up’ for a long period of time as it was imperative that the  lm be 
released for exhibition and distribution in order for her to recoup the investment, 
which was often made up of a combination of her production company’s capital 
and loans from  nancial institutions. U-Wei Haji Saari also agreed that the cost 
which would be incurred and the foreseeable delay caused by a judicial review 
application were prohibitive factors that would drive  lm practitioners away from 
this course of action.138 Khoo Eng Yow was of the opinion that it was an exercise 
in futility to challenge a censorship decision in court due to the current judicial 
climate in Malaysia. The lack of con dence in the impartiality of the courts, which 

128 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
the interviewee perceived to be biased in favour of the authorities and the 
government, is the main reason why he would not bother to pursue judicial review 
in the event he was aggrieved by a censorship decision.139 Leonard Tee, an 
independent  lm distributor, also shares the same opinion.140
The other factor that contributes to the reluctance of Malaysian  lm practitioners 
to pursue judicial review application is the subsequent effect that such application 
might have on them. The author’s impression, from the interviews conducted and 
from informal conversations with other  lm practitioners, is that most of the  lm 
practitioners in the Malaysian  lm industry have reservations about resorting to 
judicial review because they want to maintain a cordial relationship with the 
censors. They would not want that relationship to become confrontational because 
the hostility would cause more ‘problems’ for them in the future. Aziz M. Osman 
for example, admitted that he ‘would not dare’ to make an application for judicial 
review to challenge a censorship decision on his  lm even if he was dissatis ed 
with it.141 When probed further for the reasons behind his reluctance, Aziz stated 
that it was for his ‘survival’ in the  lm industry and further noted that he had 
learned his lesson in that there was no point in going against the censorship 
authorities.142 Even so, it was striking that the Malaysian interviewees believed it 
was important for the option of judicial review to be available.
Like their Malaysian counterparts, all of the Hong Kong interviewees were 
also of the opinion that the availability of judicial review is important. It is 
pertinent to note that the Hong Kong interviewees also expressed their satisfaction 
with censorship decisions and were of the view that the  lm censorship system in 
Hong Kong functions very well. Therefore, there would be hardly any occasions 
where it would be necessary for them to resort to judicial review.143 However, the 
interviewees appeared to be willing to do so in the unlikely event they were 
aggrieved by a censorship decision. Mabel Cheung, for example, stated that she 
would ‘do anything to  ght for my  lms if I think the [censorship] decision is not 
fair’144 while Patrick Tam said that the decision as to whether to apply for judicial 
review would depend on the situation:145
If it [the censorship] is very minor, I won’t take the trouble to go against it... 
But if it is unreasonable or damaging to the  lm, I will challenge it. The right 
to  le an application for judicial review is important especially if you think 
your  lm was unfairly treated or mistreated.
Tam’s position was shared by Kenneth Bi who noted that ‘it would depend on the 
 lm. If the  lm is about politics, yes! If it is just sex, like showing one breast as 
opposed to two, then I probably wouldn’t.146 Wellington Fung pointed out that 
when the consideration of whether to challenge a  lm censorship decision in court 
arises, ‘commercial judgment’ will inevitably favour options other than having 
resort to judicial review simply because it would ‘hold up the whole thing [the 
distribution and exhibition of the  lm concerned] where commercially, we will 
lose more’.147 Besides commercial considerations, no other reasons or factors 
were highlighted by the Hong Kong interviewees.

Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions 129
Similar to the Malaysian and Hong Kong interviewees, all of the Australian 
interviewees agree that the availability of judicial review is important. For 
example, Rolf de Heer noted that ‘it is extremely important that judicial review is 
available’ and that he would have recourse to it if he was dissatis ed with the 
classi cation decision passed on his  lm. However, the  lmmaker also said that it 
was unlikely that he would need to challenge classi cation decisions in court 
because the Australian system is not restrictive and that his interests in  lmmaking 
do not clash with it.148
The majority of the Australian interviewees were certain that they would have 
recourse to judicial review in the event they were dissatis ed with classi cation 
decisions about their  lms. For example, when asked whether he would  le a judicial 
review application if dissatis ed with the Classi cation Review Board’s decision, 
Ray Lawrence answered ‘of course, I would’ without any hesitation.149 Tony Ayres 
was of the opinion that ‘it will be an issue when a  lm goes from an MA to R 
[classi cation] because it affects the box of ce… If I was in that situation, I would 
have recourse to judicial review’.150 An interviewee who requested anonymity noted 
that ‘judicial review is of course important. If you take that away, you are giving 
total autocracy to the censors!’ In contrast, only three interviewees were unsure as to 
whether they would seek judicial remedies from the court. Richard J. Frankland, 
who was dissatis ed with the classi cation his  lm Stone Bros received, noted that 
he was not sure whether he would pursue judicial review because his production 
company had already lost a lot of money on the  lm and it was not certain whether 
it was feasible to incur further expenses to mount a court action. Greg Denning of 
Icon Film Distribution Australia noted that the time factor would be ‘very prohibitive’ 
because ‘normally we have release date, so we are up against time… the issue is 
whether we can get the judicial review application heard in time’.151 Peter Campbell 
noted that ‘it would depend on how much you had invested in the  lm. If you were 
involved in the  nancing, then you should… but now, as a distributor, there are so 
many  lms out there and so there is more choice. If it is going to be problematic, you 
should be more selective with the  lms that you are going to distribute’.152
In summary, although a successful applicant- lm practitioner could obtain 
appropriate and adequate remedies from the court, judicial review is still not the 
best option. It is likely to be slow and expensive and risks harming relations with 
the censors. Therefore, it would be more bene cial to the Malaysian  lm 
practitioners and industry if the  lm censorship system itself is reformed while 
judicial review is kept available as the  nal resort, as well as to in uence censors 
to carry out their duties legally, rationally, fairly and proportionately. Equally, this 
makes it valuable to understand the ways in which judicial review is available 
under the current Malaysian  lm censorship system, and the sorts of remedies that 
it could provide. Even if judicial review is not put into action in court, ‘the shadow 
of the law’ could affect  lm censors, potentially encouraging the making of better 
censorship decisions – both procedurally and substantively. At least, that is the 
clear understanding of the  lm practitioners interviewed as part of the research. 
Proposals for the reform of the Malaysian  lm censorship system will be the focus 
of the following chapter.

7 
Conclusion
 
Proposals for the reform of the 
Malaysian  lm censorship system 
and further research
Introduction
Having identi ed, discussed and established the areas of concern in the Malaysian 
 lm censorship system in Chapters 3 to 5 and considered, in Chapter 6, judicial 
review as an alternative to deal with challenges occasioned by  lm censorship, 
this chapter will propose changes to the system that are likely to promote the 
artistic vibrancy and commercial viability of the country’s  lm industry. The 
proposals made are primarily aimed at providing greater transparency and 
accountability to the  lm censorship system, to reconcile the system with the free 
speech principle, as well as to improve the system to make it more responsive to 
the needs of  lm practitioners and conducive to the growth of the  lm industry.
In general, the proposals for reform involve amendments to the  lm censorship 
law, revision to the censorship guidelines and changes to the censorship process. 
The amendments to the Film Censorship Act 2002 will ensure transparency in the 
process of appointing decision-makers; structure and con ne the presently 
unconstrained discretionary powers of the decision-making entities; ensure  lm 
practitioners are furnished with written reasons for censorship decisions; and 
guarantee  lm practitioners the right to make oral representations at the appeal 
stage of a censorship process and the right to make judicial review applications. 
The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 were revised in March 2010, after  eldwork 
for this book was completed. However, the 2010 version of the guidelines did not 
signi cantly improve (or remove the ‘defects’ of) the earlier guidelines but appear 
to be even more vague and convoluted. Therefore, this chapter considers both 
versions of the guidelines in relation to possible future reform. The proposed 
revision to the guidelines entails clearer descriptions of the content that is 
prohibited in  lms; the requirement to take into account the context of a  lm as 
well as the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of censorship elements in 
the decision-making process; and a clear schedule setting out the limits of each 
censorship element under every classi cation category. And  nally, the proposed 
changes to the censorship process would do two further things:  rst, provide a 
formal channel for  lm practitioners to discuss with censors the issue of 
classi cation category and second, avoid unnecessary re-examination of  lms 
brought about by public complaints.

Conclusion 131
The eight areas of concern in the Malaysian  lm censorship system will be 
discussed separately, for each the discussion will begin with a statement about the 
issue or problem in that particular area as revealed in earlier chapters followed by 
the proposal for reform. All of the proposals are made based on analysis of the laws, 
guidelines, and processes as they are expressed on paper, the censorship practices 
in all three jurisdictions, the interviewees’ opinions of the issues and, where 
relevant, the literature about free speech as well as constitutional and administrative 
law principles. The chapter concludes by noting the areas of concern that arise in 
the two comparative jurisdictions, Hong Kong and Australia, for further research.
The areas of concern in the Malaysian  lm censorship system and 
proposals for reform
Decision-making entities
There are three concerns about the decision-making entities in Malaysia:  rst, the 
suitability and competence of the appointed  lm censors; second, the independence 
of  lm censors in making their decisions; and third, the Home Minister’s absolute 
discretionary power to ban  lms.
Suitability and competence of  lm censors
The suitability and competence of  lm censors is an issue of concern raised 
strongly by the Malaysian interviewees.1 They stated that they doubted the ability 
of the members of the Board of Censors and the Appeal Committee2 to make 
sensible, appropriate and credible censorship decisions because the members had 
little, if any, knowledge of  lm or experience in  lmmaking. The appointed  lm 
censors were also seen as not the best people to sit on the Board (or the Committee) 
because they could not understand and appreciate the artistic merits of  lms they 
examine;3 they were out of touch with contemporary audience standards;4 and did 
not care about the potential adverse effects of their decisions on the integrity of the 
 lms they examined.5 Additionally, the method, criteria and process of selection 
and appointment of  lm censors not being made public was a source of concern to 
the interviewees. Most  lm practitioners do not know the identity of the censors 
who will eventually be examining their  lms.
It is proposed that sections 4 and 22 of the Film Censorship Act 2002, which 
provide for the appointment of members of the Board and the Committee respectively, 
be amended to guarantee transparency in the selection and appointment processes. 
Suitable and competent members of the public should be given the opportunity to 
apply and be appointed as  lm censors, as in Hong Kong and Australia.6 Film 
practitioners should also be allowed to nominate individuals to be appointed to the 
Committee as, ideally, the  lm fraternity should have some representation in the 
decision-making entities. It is envisioned that a balanced composition of professionals 
and experts from various disciplines as well as people of diverse background, age 
and profession would be appointed as censors instead of only conservative former 

132 Conclusion
bureaucrats, which appears to be the current situation. Additionally, the appointments 
of  lm censors should be gazetted as occurs in the Hong Kong model7 to avoid 
anonymity.8 For Amir Muhammad, a censorship board should consist of a balanced 
mix of people: ‘the composition [of the Board] is odd in that everybody is old… and 
you  nd the oddest things being cut out… I think it should consist of a variety of 
people’. U-Wei Haji Saari was of the opinion that only individuals who are ‘open 
minded, sensitive and understand  lm as an art form should be appointed as 
censors’,9 Ruhani Abdul Rahman expressed hope that the Board would consist of 
more young censors (‘not only retirees!’) because the predominant  lm-goers in 
Malaysia are those between the ages of 16 to 40, a view shared by Shuhaimi Baba, 
while Saw Teong Hin hoped that the appointment of censors would be transparent 
so that  lm practitioners would know who was accountable for the decisions made.10 
The director described the present situation as ‘cloak and dagger’ as most  lm 
practitioners do not know who is in charge and ‘the goal post keeps shifting’.11
It is very important that only suitable and competent individuals are appointed 
as censors because they will be making determinative judgments on the availability 
or otherwise of  lms to the public. The  eldwork suggests that their decisions 
have serious repercussions on both the artistic and commercial viability of the  lm 
industry. For example, a decision to approve a  lm subject to alteration could 
‘destroy’ its narrative and aesthetic aspects as well as cause the  lm to lose its 
appeal to audiences. Therefore, it is crucial to have the right individuals involved 
in the decision-making entities. As discussed in Chapter 1, leading free speech 
theorists and writers, including Schauer and Barendt, emphasized the importance 
of who the person was making censorship decisions.12 Interviewees emphasized 
that there should be some members – at least on the Appeal Committee – with an 
understanding of cinema and an ability to consider  lm from artistic viewpoints in 
exercising judgment. It is worth noting again that the Hong Kong Board of Review 
always has at least one member who is a well-respected  gure from the  lm 
fraternity.13 However, despite there being no  lm practitioner sitting on the 
Classi cation Review Board in Australia, the Australian interviewees did not raise 
any concerns regarding this matter. It appears that other elements of the Australian 
system and the general competence of the censors underlie this. At the very least, 
 lm practitioners should be allowed to nominate candidates for the decision-
making bodies in a more transparent selection process, but the most important 
issue is obtaining a good range of competent people in the role.
By having the decision-making entities staffed with competent members, the 
censorship decisions made would be more credible and appropriate, and that 
would be bene cial to  lm practitioners and their Malaysian viewers. It would 
also remove one of the ‘disturbing features of administrative censorship’ as 
pointed out by Barendt.14
Independence of  lm censors
There is compelling evidence that  lm censors are not independent in making 
censorship decisions.15 This is primarily due to the ‘threat’ to security of tenure 

Conclusion 133
which places censors under some in uence of the Minister and the executive 
branch of government.16 Additionally, censors are ‘paid and accorded such 
allowances and privileges as may be determined by the Minister’.17 Thus, there is 
a strong incentive for censors to strive to conform to the government’s wishes and 
policies. This structural weakness, suggested by the legislative provisions,18 was 
con rmed in interviews. Khoo Eng Yow, for example, pointed out that the censors 
are ‘not independent’ and ‘politicians are affecting the censors too much… the 
censors just obey for the job’s sake. They are not in their own control’ while Amir 
Muhammad observed that:
The censors’ decisions re ect whatever the general political mood of the 
establishment is. If they feel like being liberal, they will do something liberal. 
If they feel like clamping down, they will clamp down on something. If they 
feel like pleasing certain people, they will do just that.
This is clearly inconsistent with the free speech principle’s requirement of ‘an 
impartial tribunal’.19 It is also a weakness that appears to have been avoided in 
both Hong Kong and Australia. In the former,  eldwork revealed that censors are 
not subject to political pressure or interference while in the latter, appointments 
can only be terminated under the circumstances prescribed in the statute and the 
interviewees raised no concern over this matter.20
To ensure the independence of  lm censors, their tenure must be secured and 
that can be achieved by setting a speci ed duration of appointment, with censors 
being ineligible for reappointment. In addition, there must be provisions in the 
Film Censorship Act 2002 (which could be enacted based on sections 65 and 83 
of the Australian Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995), stating expressly the circumstances under which members of the Board of 
Censors and the Appeal Committee can be removed. This would prevent arbitrary 
termination of appointment and minimize the threat to security of tenure. If these 
proposals are put in place, censors would have greater independence and ability to 
carry out their duties based on the law, guidelines and procedure, not according to 
the wishes or directives of the Minister or government. Although this change 
would not in itself create an ‘impartial tribunal’ and completely overcome the 
‘disturbing vices’ of government of cials being keen to censor materials critical 
of government,21 it would at least guarantee a higher degree of independence of 
the censors in making  lm censorship decisions.
Absolute discretionary power to ban  lms
The Home Minister is empowered under section 26 of the Film Censorship Act 
2002 to override decisions made by the Board of Censors and the Appeal Committee 
and to ban  lms at his or her absolute discretion.22 This ability to ban  lms is 
inconsistent with free speech principles and stands in stark contrast with the position 
in Hong Kong and Australia where, as discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, none of the 
decision-making entities is conferred with such a wide power. The exercise of this 

134 Conclusion
power would greatly affect the  lm practitioners concerned, particularly if the  lm 
involved was a local production. This is because a Malaysian  lm’s market is almost 
completely domestic:  lms are rarely released commercially overseas. Therefore, a 
ban under this provision would translate as the ‘death’ of the  lm in its commercial 
sense and this could possibly wipe out the production company as the capital 
invested to produce the  lm could not be recouped. The Malaysian interviewees 
were generally uncomfortable with the Minister wielding such a wide power.23
Although the discretion conferred on the Minister by section 26 is not unfettered 
in light of the Supreme Court judgment in the Persatuan Aliran Kesedaran 
Malaysia case,24 there could be instances where it would be very dif cult for an 
applicant- lm practitioner to challenge the decision because of the need to 
establish that the Minister had exercised his discretion wrongfully, unfairly, 
dishonestly or in bad faith.25 On top of that, as pointed out in Chapter 6, there are 
a number of other ‘hurdles’ that an applicant would have to overcome in pursuing 
an application for judicial review in addition to the necessity of having an 
independent and robust judiciary in applications challenging the exercise of 
discretionary powers by the executive. In relation to the discretionary power to 
ban  lms, the doctrinal materials, free speech concerns and the  eldwork all 
suggest that section 26 should be repealed and the power be removed.
The exemption of  lms from censorship
There are two provisions in the Film Censorship Act 2002 that allow  lms to be 
exempted from the censorship process. Section 2(2)(a) provides that the Act is 
not applicable to any  lm sponsored by the Malaysian Government while 
section 28 confers a blanket power on the Home Minister to exempt any  lm 
from censorship.
While raising similar free speech issues to those noted above about decision-
making entities, and causing dissatisfaction among Malaysian interviewees who 
questioned the rationale of having these provisions,26 sections 2(2)(a) and 28 also 
appear more problematic than the Hong Kong and Australian models. In each 
case, their systems allow some  lms to be exempted, but within clearly 
circumscribed limits.27 De ned categories of  lm, which could be expected to 
raise no issues about censorship, are exempted. They are  lms of the type such as 
educational, sporting, travelogue and musical.
All this suggests that sections 2(2)(a) and 28 should be repealed. To achieve 
fairness within the system, every  lm intended for exhibition and distribution 
should be subjected to the same process or requirement, regardless of the entity 
that produces the  lm, or is involved with it in other ways. However, for reasons 
of practicality and ef ciency, a new provision may be enacted so  lms that are 
innocuous in nature may be exempted from censorship. The types, categories or 
descriptions of such  lms must be expressly stated and reference may be made to 
the second schedule to the Hong Kong Film Censorship Regulations and section 
5B(1) of the Australian Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995 for useful examples of the approach.

Conclusion 135
Matters to be taken into account by censors
Film censors in Malaysia are not required to take into account two important 
matters in the course of making censorship decisions. These matters are the artistic 
merit of the  lm under examination and current community standards and attitudes 
toward  lm censorship, both of which if given due consideration would have 
signi cant impact on the decisions made.
Artistic merit of the  lm
Unlike the Hong Kong and Australian models, the Malaysian  lm censorship 
system does not require censors to take into account artistic merits in the censorship 
process.28 The omission of such a requirement has caused many critically 
acclaimed foreign and local  lms to be banned (or released subject to substantial 
alteration)29 and it also discourages local  lm practitioners from attempting to 
produce ‘serious and critical works’ which may at the same time necessarily 
contain contentious content.
Most of the interviewees (from all three jurisdictions) believed that the 
consideration of artistic merit does, or would, have signi cant impact on 
censorship decisions in that a  lm with high artistic value may be approved for 
exhibition and distribution subject to age restrictions although it contains content 
which otherwise may not be permissible or may be deemed objectionable.30 Even 
the Chairman of the Malaysian Board of Censors agrees with the author that the 
consideration of artistic merit is important but Malaysian  eldwork clearly suggest 
that the matter is not taken into account at all in the censorship process. Besides 
the approach adopted by the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship systems, 
it may be recalled that Anglo-American jurisprudence on obscenity law also 
emphasizes the consideration of literary or artistic merits in their tests to determine 
whether a work should be proscribed or otherwise.31 It is therefore proposed that 
a new provision be added to the Film Censorship Act 2002 stipulating that: ‘ lm 
censors, in making a censorship decision, shall take into account the artistic merit 
of the  lm under examination and its value for cultural or social reasons’ to avoid 
 lms with artistic, social or cultural values from being sti ed.32
Current community standards
Besides the omission of a provision requiring censors to take artistic merit into 
account, there is also no provision in the law or guidelines stipulating that 
censors must take into account current community standards while making 
censorship decisions. Fieldwork revealed that  lm censorship decisions are 
made based on censors’ subjective views or personal standards (and only 
partially guided by the censorship guidelines). In addition, as we have seen, the 
censors as an unvaried group are hardly representative of Malaysian society and 
no systematic effort is carried out to ensure that the decisions made are re ective 
of contemporary standards.

136 Conclusion
As discussed in Chapter 4, Hong Kong censors are required under paragraph 2 
of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors to take into account current 
community standards in the censorship process while their Australian counterparts 
are required to do so under section 11 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films 
and Computer Games) Act 1995. In Hong Kong, public opinion surveys on  lm 
censorship standards are conducted biennially to gauge community acceptance 
and tolerance to portrayals of nudity, sex, violence, horror as well as offensive 
language, behaviour and criminality in  lms. Besides surveys,  lm censors are 
assisted by the Panel of Advisers to ensure that their decisions are in touch with 
the standards of taste and decency accepted by the community. In Australia, the 
decision-making entities are staffed with members who are broadly representative 
of the community.33 Additionally, the Community Assessment Panel scheme and 
other research ensures that the decisions made follow closely the expectations of 
the society.
The majority of the interviewees were in favour of  lm censorship decisions 
being made based on current community standards as opposed to censors’ 
subjective views and standards.34 The interviewees’ opinions of this issue echoed 
each other and it may be suf cient to quote only one from each jurisdiction:
Film censorship decisions should be made based on current community 
standards… they shouldn’t be made based on censors’ personal standards. 
(Malaysia – Ahmad Puad Onah, 17 December 2008)
It [a  lm censorship decision] should be made based on the current atmosphere 
of the society… I think  lm censors should pay close attention to the opinion 
that prevails in the community. (Hong Kong – Mabel Cheung, 28 May 2009)
Classi cation decisions should be made based on the standards of the 
community we live in and their progression. (Australia – Ray Lawrence, 20 
August 2009)
Films are made for people to watch, they are meant for the audience. It would 
therefore be sensible for those making  lm censorship decisions to take account of 
the standards of those in the community who are likely to watch them. Since 
exhibition and distribution of  lms in Malaysia is concentrated in the larger cities 
and amongst youth, censorship decisions should take into account the standards of 
this section of the community and not the standards of the older generation living 
in rural areas of the country. It is proposed that a new provision be included in the 
censorship guidelines requiring censors to take into account the standards of the 
likely audience when making censorship decisions. Contemporary standards are to 
be considered, not standards of some past age, and therefore surveys should be 
carried out at regular intervals to ensure that censors are ‘in tune’ with the standards 
and expectations of the  lm-going community. This proposal is slightly different 
from the Hong Kong and Australian models as the former provides that ‘the aim of 
the censors should be to re ect contemporary public attitudes towards censorship 

Conclusion 137
standards’35 while the latter provides that ‘the standards of morality, decency and 
propriety accepted by reasonable adults’36 are to be taken into account. These 
provisions are more general in nature and do not emphasize the ‘standards of the 
likely audience’, which is the key point of this proposal.
It may be noted again that the English obscenity test has evolved from focusing 
on the effect of the publication (charged to be obscene) on the ‘most vulnerable 
members of the society’ (as in the Hicklin test)37 to ‘persons who are likely, in all 
circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter’ (as provided in the Obscene 
Publications Act),38 making the determination of obscenity centred on an assessment 
of a work’s likely effect on its primary audience.39 It may well be advocated that in 
 lm censorship, the standards of the likely audience should be the benchmark, not 
the most vulnerable members, the elderly and rural members, of Malaysian society 
who are very unlikely to purchase tickets to (and the DVD of) the  lm in question.
Censorship guidelines
As noted in Chapter 3, a new set of guidelines known as the Garis Panduan 
Penapisan Filem or Film Censorship Guidelines (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 
2010 Guidelines’) was introduced on 15 March 2010 to replace the Film 
Censorship Guidelines 1993.40 The 2010 Guidelines comprises seven parts and in 
its Introduction, it is stated that the guidelines are to be applied in accordance to 
the Film Censorship Act 2002, other relevant legislation in force, government 
policies and international covenants.
Part I of the 2010 Guidelines lays down the general principles of  lm censorship 
which are similar to those stated in the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993.41 In 
addition to the principles, Part I also provides the de nition of ‘ lm’, ‘ lm trailer’ 
and ‘ lm publicity material’, the matters to be taken into account by censors in the 
course of censoring  lms and the time frame within which a censorship decision 
is to be made. The matters that censors are required to take into account are similar 
to the eight questions stated under Part D of the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 
as discussed in the section on the process of the Malaysian  lm censorship system 
in Chapter 3. Artistic merit of the  lm and current community standards are not 
prescribed in the guidelines as matters to be taken into account by censors.
Part II, which is the main section of the 2010 Guidelines, contains provisions 
on the types of  lm, content and portrayal that may not be approved for distribution 
and exhibition in Malaysia. These provisions are divided into four censorship 
elements – ‘Public safety and public order’, ‘Religion’, ‘Socio-culture’ and 
‘Etiquette and decorum’42 – and they are vague, confusing and indeterminate. An 
example would be: ‘Film containing a religious theme, storyline, scene or dialogue 
is allowed. However, the following matters must be considered so that it will not 
cause controversy and raise doubt in the society.’43 This provision is then followed 
by a long list of matters, including ‘a belief that every religion is the same’ and ‘a 
belief in the concept of reincarnation’, for censors’ consideration.44 It is not at all 
clear from the provisions whether a  lm that portrays the concept of reincarnation 
that may cause controversy or contains a line of dialogue stating that ‘Allah and 

138 Conclusion
Jesus are one’ that may cause confusion amongst audiences, will be banned, or 
approved but classi ed in a restricted category, or approved subject to alteration 
being made. The effect of content that may cause controversy and raise doubts on 
the  lm’s censorship decision is not stated at all in the guidelines. This omission 
and the crucial determination of whether a particular content or portrayal may or 
may not ‘cause controversy and raise doubt in the society’ leaves too wide a 
discretion to the censors which could lead to the making of arbitrary and 
inconsistent censorship decisions. It appears that if the guidelines were read 
liberally, most content and portrayals in  lm would be permissible but censors 
may ‘choose’ to construe and apply the guidelines restrictively (or worse, 
irrationally, as they have proven themselves to be capable of) so as to prohibit 
 lms from being released in Malaysia.
Part III of the 2010 Guidelines deals with commercial, trailer and  lm publicity 
material, stating that prior approval from the Board of Censors must be obtained 
before it can be released. Part IV follows by providing that ‘coarse language is not 
encouraged in any  lm’.45 A list of profanity in Malay, English, Tamil, Hindi, 
Mandarin and Cantonese is appended but there is no instruction to censors as to 
how  lms containing coarse language are to be dealt with. The consequence of the 
use of expletives is also not stated at all, unlike the Hong Kong and the Australian 
guidelines where there are clear provisions as to how a  lm containing coarse 
language will be classi ed based on the context, type and frequency of the use of 
such language.
Part V then provides, in very broad terms, the types of  lm that will be banned 
and they are:
1 
 lms that contain themes or story lines that are incompatible with the 
Malaysian socio-cultural values;
2 
 lms that are seditious in nature;
3 
 lms that are anti-religion or insulting to the belief of a particular race or group;
4 
 lms containing content that is against government policies; and
5 
 lms that contain excessive violence and cruelty.
It is also expressly stated in Part V that every  lm to be released locally must respect 
Malaysia as a sovereign country. Films that insult Malaysia or are detrimental to its 
image will be prohibited. These provisions are loosely drafted and can therefore be 
interpreted in various ways, again leaving very wide discretion to the censors.
Part VI then provides for the submission of  lm to the Board of Censors. It also 
provides that any  lm owner who is dissatis ed with the Board’s decision may 
appeal to the Appeal Committee. Part VII, the  nal section of the 2010 Guidelines, 
provides for three classi cation categories – ‘U’,46 ‘PG13’47 and ‘18’48 – that are 
applicable in Malaysia.49 However, it omits to provide descriptions as to the scope 
and limits of content that are permissible under each category, as are provided in 
the Hong Kong and Australian guidelines.50
It is claimed in the Introduction section of the 2010 Guidelines that they were 
introduced with the aim of assisting  lm practitioners by providing them with a 

Conclusion 139
clear and comprehensible set of guidelines so that they are able to consider and 
pay attention to the censorship elements, content and portrayal that will be 
scrutinized by censors. Upon careful examination of the guidelines, it is apparent 
that little improvement has been made. Most of the provisions in the 2010 
Guidelines are similar to those in the 1993 version. Very few new provisions have 
been introduced. Only minor changes have been made to the wordings51 and 
sequence of arrangement of provisions under the four censorship elements.52 The 
guidelines still lack clarity as there has been no improvement at all in this regard 
compared to the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993.
An overall problem with the 2010 Guidelines is that provisions under every 
censorship element are preceded with a general statement which reads: ‘Film 
containing a public safety and public order [or a religious, socio-cultural or 
etiquette and decorum] theme, storyline, scene or dialogue is allowed. However, 
the following matters must be considered so that it will not cause controversy and 
raise doubt in the society’.53 Thereafter, a list of matters follows suit (under each 
of the four elements) for censors’ consideration. It appears from these provisions 
(particularly with the use of the phrase ‘is allowed’) that the Home Ministry 
attempted to draw up a ‘liberal and permissive looking’ set of guidelines instead 
of dictating the types of  lm, content and portrayal that are prohibited like the 
Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 did. However, the Ministry has failed and the 
resulting 2010 Guidelines, that appear to have been put together haphazardly and 
not well thought out, are far from desirable as they are now even more vague and 
indeterminate and have further widened the censors’ discretion in deciding 
whether a particular  lm or content will be approved for exhibition and distribution. 
The general statement that precedes every censorship element has made the 2010 
Guidelines indeterminate as discussed above. It is foreseeable that there will be 
more inconsistent decisions being made in the future.
The key weaknesses in these guidelines that need to be recti ed are in regard 
to the clarity of the provisions; the omission of provisions stipulating that context, 
degree, intensity and realism of presentation are to be taken into account; and the 
non-prescription of limits of the classi cation categories.
Clarity of provisions
As discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, the provisions in the Film Censorship Guidelines 
1993 (and the subsequent 2010 version) are vague, generalized and can be 
interpreted in many different ways.54 Indeed, it might appear that the guidelines 
are intentionally kept suf ciently ‘loose’ so that they can be utilized to prohibit 
 lms. Shuhaimi Baba, for example, commented that the guidelines ‘do not give an 
idea of what you can or cannot do… there is a lot of vagueness… [The guidelines] 
should describe and provide instances, like for example, [what amounts to a threat 
to] national security’ while Amir Muhammad found the guidelines to be ‘very 
vague’ and thus, ‘can be interpreted in many ways’.55 This defect has led to the 
making of inconsistent censorship decisions and ‘shifting grounds’, posing 
challenges to  lm practitioners unable to gauge how their  lms will end up being 

140 Conclusion
censored. As with obscenity laws in the United States (where the failure to 
formulate a clear standard that distinguished protected from unprotected speech 
chilled speech protected under the First Amendment)56 vague provisions in  lm 
censorship guidelines deter  lmmakers from producing content that might in fact 
be allowed under the censorship system.
It is proposed that the guidelines be revised to make the provisions suf ciently 
clear so that  lm practitioners can have greater knowledge of what content will run 
foul of the censors and will be better able to gauge which category their  lm falls 
within. Although vagueness is classically a weakness apparent in obscenity and 
indecency laws, the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship guidelines appear 
to be able to satisfactorily overcome the issue of vagueness and inconsistencies in 
censorship decisions.57 The degree to which this happens in the law and practice in 
Hong Kong and Australia for the vast majority of  lms,58 and the degree to which 
it fails to happen in Malaysia,59 is a key  nding of this book. The wider literature 
on obscenity would suggest that ambiguity is an intractable problem. However, in 
areas like  lm censorship, the experiences of Hong Kong and Australia show that 
meaningful speci city and lack of ambiguity can be achieved.
There is no reason why the Malaysian guidelines could not achieve a similar 
level of clarity and precision. The Hong Kong guidelines, for example, set out quite 
clearly what content as well as what degree and intensity of presentation will push a 
 lm from one classi cation category to another. The Australian guidelines also 
provide demarcation for each classi able element in every classi cation category 
and stipulate quite clearly the content and portrayal that will be refused classi cation. 
The advantages of having comparatively clear and well-de ned guidelines are 
apparent in Hong Kong and Australia. An equally clear and precise set of guidelines 
should be produced in Malaysia. It must be stressed that a person who invests 
resources in  lm production or acquisition must have clear guidance in advance, in 
addition to a line of reliable and consistent censorship decisions made in the past. As 
noted in Chapter 1, the application of ‘detailed and precise standards’ (along with 
other arrangements) would ‘meet many of the objections to censorship systems’.60
Context; degree, intensity and realism of presentation; and limits of the categories
Malaysian censors are not required to consider a  lm as a whole when they make 
a censorship decision. Generally, any shot, scene, dialogue or subtitle that is ruled 
out by the guidelines shall be altered (usually by way of excision) although such 
content is justi able within context. Censorship decisions in Malaysia are therefore 
made based on content severed from the context of the  lm. This was clear through 
interviews with  lm practitioners.61 The guidelines also do not require censors to 
take into account the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of a censorship 
element. Additionally, the limits of each classi cation category are not prescribed. 
Thus, what content will push a  lm into the next classi cation category is not 
made clear at all. These ‘defects’ were absent in the Hong Kong and Australian 
models where their guidelines require the context of a  lm to be taken into 
account; the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of a censorship element 

Conclusion 141
would affect the censorship decision; and the limit for each censorship element 
allowed under every applicable classi cation is clearly spelt out.62
It is proposed that provisions requiring censors to consider  lm as a whole and 
to allow contents that are justi ed in the context of the  lm (if such content is not 
gratuitous or of a high degree of impact to the extent that even a restricted category 
could not accommodate) to be included in the revised guidelines. A  lm must be 
viewed and examined as a whole. It should be considered in its entirety because 
context may justify the content that censors  nd objectionable. Provisions to the 
effect that the degree, intensity and realism of presentation of censorship elements 
shall be taken into account should also be included in the guidelines to play a 
decisive part in the decision-making process. The limit of each classi cation 
category must be expressly set out so that Malaysian  lm practitioners will have a 
clear idea (as their Hong Kong and Australian counterparts do) how their  lms 
will be classi ed.63
A very high number of prohibited types of  lm, content and portrayal are found 
in the Malaysian censorship guidelines. As a result, most of the interviewees felt 
constrained in their work. Such ‘prohibition’ impedes  lm practitioners’ creative 
expression and thus is an affront to the ‘free speech and autonomy’ principle.64 It 
may be argued that Malaysian  lm practitioners’ ‘self-determination and ful lment’ 
are inhibited because they are not free to express their ideas.65
It is proposed that the number of prohibited types of  lm, content and portrayals 
be reduced and at the same time, the classi cation approach of the Hong Kong and 
Australian models be adopted. In the two comparative jurisdictions, most of the 
censorship elements and content described in their guidelines are not prohibited 
outright, rather, they are there mainly for the purpose of classifying  lms into 
appropriate categories. Only certain types of  lm are prohibited and, as described 
in Chapter 4, they are rather limited in number. Such minimal prohibition may not 
be viewed as an encroachment on free speech rights: as Barendt observed, ‘most 
proponents of strong free speech guarantees concede that its exercise may be 
restricted in some circumstances’.66
Alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category
Although the Malaysian  lm censorship system has a restricted classi cation 
category,67  lms approved for exhibition are still subject to alteration and may not 
necessarily be released in their entirety even when classi ed as suitable for 
viewing by audiences aged 18 and above only. The majority of  lms released in 
Malaysia have undergone some form of alteration, most commonly by way of 
excision. In addition, there is no formal channel for  lm practitioners to discuss 
with censors the classi cation category to be given to their  lm. These issues are 
closely related in that most of the interviewees were of the opinion that when a 
 lm is classi ed in a restricted category, it should not be subjected to any alteration. 
The interviewees were also of the view that there is a need for an opportunity to 
discuss the classi cation category to be given to their  lm with censors because 
the classi cation a  lm receives affects its commercial viability.

142 Conclusion
Alteration to  lms and restricted category
Film censors in Malaysia are empowered under section 10(1)(b) of the Film 
Censorship Act 2002 to require alteration to be made before a  lm is approved for 
exhibition. As noted in Chapter 4, the word ‘alteration’ is de ned as to include 
excision, addition and reconstruction of scenes, dialogues, sound or subtitles.68
Although in practice consent from the  lm practitioner concerned is sought before 
any alteration is made, this procedure does not in any way provide  lm practitioners 
with a choice because if consent to alter is withheld, approval for exhibition will not 
be granted. Producer Ahmad Puad Onah recounted his experience in dealing with the 
censors over a  lm he co-produced and distributed entitled Kami (Effendee Mazlan, 
2008) where alterations were required to be made to the  lm by the Board of Censors. 
The producer noted that he  nally had to cave in (after an appeal to the Appeal 
Committee which af rmed the alterations required by the Board) because ‘we had to 
release the movie [as] we had already invested so much money in it’. As discussed 
earlier, a non-approval of a local  lm for exhibition would be a disaster for the  lm 
commercially and  lm practitioners cannot afford to let this happen.
The exercise of the power conferred under section 10(1)(b) could affect the 
 lm’s artistic integrity (in terms of narration, presentation and aesthetics) and the 
 lm’s commercial appeal.69 It also encroaches on the  lmmakers’ right to freedom 
of expression which the Federal Constitution guarantees70 and which the interviewees 
described, amongst other things, as ‘very important’.71 Additionally, excision (or 
alteration) could destroy a  lm’s purpose or distort its intended message, for 
example, by making violence seems less revolting or condemnable, and thus more 
acceptable, when a violent  lm (with an anti-violent message) is ‘toned down’ by 
the censors. Alteration to  lms also falls foul of the ‘free speech and autonomy’ 
rationale which sees speech or expression as having an inherent value and being an 
integral aspect of every individual’s right to self-determination and ful lment.72
All of the Malaysian interviewees were of the opinion that once a  lm is 
classi ed in a restricted category, the  lm should not be subjected to any alteration. 
For example, Amir Muhammad noted that ‘what we need now is age classi cation 
and then just leave the  lm alone’ while Lorna Tee was of the opinion that ‘when 
an adult pays to go to the cinema, he or she is making a conscious decision as to 
what to see… so it is not up to the government to claim that “we are doing this to 
protect the people.”’ The  lm censorship authorities could do better by only 
classifying  lms and providing consumer advice so that the public can be informed 
of the content and nature of the  lm and, as adult audiences, they should have the 
autonomy to choose what they want to see.
It is proposed that section 10(1)(b) which reads: ‘Having viewed a  lm submitted 
to it for censorship, the Board may approve the  lm for exhibition with such 
alteration as it may require’ be repealed and replaced with a new provision that 
allows  lm practitioners to elect whether to have their  lm classi ed in a restricted 
category (if the  lm contains content which warrants such classi cation) but 
released in its complete version, or to make the necessary alteration so that the  lm 
can be approved under a non-restricted category. What is preferable is an 

Conclusion 143
appropriate age classi cation, not alteration to a  lm’s content which will affect its 
artistic integrity and commercial appeal. The option as to whether or not to make 
an alteration should rest squarely with the  lm practitioner concerned. If a  lm 
contains content that pushes it into a restricted category, the  lm practitioner (who 
stands to be affected the most by the outcome) may choose whether such content 
ought to be removed so that the  lm could obtain a lower classi cation, or to retain 
such content but have the  lm classi ed in a restricted category. The proposed 
provision is not meant to advocate the possibility of releasing every  lm uncut if 
classi ed for audiences aged 18 and above. It is considered that there are certain 
types of content and portrayal that should be prohibited like those proscribed under 
the Hong Kong and Australian systems, for example, detailed depiction of sexual 
acts accompanied by offensive perversion (like necrophilia or bestiality); depiction 
that promotes, incites or instructs in the use of dangerous drugs; and depiction that 
instructs in, or promotes, matters of crime.73 Such proscriptions are reconcilable 
with free speech principles because even strong free speech proponents themselves 
concede that the exercise of free speech ‘may be restricted in some circumstances, 
for example, when it is likely to lead to imminent violence’.74
What is envisaged by this proposal is the possibility of the  lm practitioner 
concerned being able to elect whether to excise parts of the  lm to secure a lower 
rating, or to release their  lm in its entirety with a restricted classi cation category. 
It is essentially for the bene t of  lm practitioners to best market their  lms. 
Under this proposed provision, censors may suggest excision that could be made 
if they are of the opinion that this would result in the  lm being classi ed 
differently, which is the usual practice in Hong Kong. It is very rare for Hong 
Kong censors to require excision to be made to a  lm before approval for 
exhibition is granted, although they are empowered to do so. Normally, where a 
 lm falls between two classi cation categories, the censor will leave the option as 
to whether to excise a certain part of the  lm (so that it could obtain the lower 
classi cation) to the  lm practitioner concerned.75 In Australia, classi ers are not 
empowered to require alteration to be made to a  lm. However, they may refuse 
classi cation if a  lm contains content which is prohibited by the law or guidelines, 
though this very rarely occurs to  lms meant for public commercial release.
Discussion with censors on classi cation category
Film practitioners in Malaysia have no formal channel through which to discuss 
with censors the classi cation category to be given to their  lm. It is proposed that 
a provision that enables  lm practitioners to indicate the classi cation sought and 
then discuss it with the censors (if necessary) be included in the Film Censorship 
Act 2002. This new provision could be modelled along the lines of section 8(2) of 
the Hong Kong Film Censorship Ordinance and paragraphs 10 and 60 of the Hong 
Kong Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.76 It could be worded as follows:
When a  lm is submitted for censorship purposes, the  lm owner may state 
the classi cation category which is sought for the  lm and censors assigned 

144 Conclusion
to examine the  lm should, as far as possible, accommodate the classi cation 
sought. If that classi cation cannot be accommodated, the  lm practitioner 
concerned is to be given an opportunity to discuss with the censors as to the 
minimum alteration that should be made in order for the  lm to secure the 
desired classi cation.
This procedure is important as all of the Malaysian, Hong Kong and Australian 
interviewees agree that the classi cation category a  lm receives affects its 
commercial viability.77 For example, if the targeted market of a  lm is audiences 
in their early teens but the  lm is classi ed in a restricted category, the core 
audience will be ‘cut-off’, thereby severely affecting the box of ce takings of 
the  lm.
It is important that an express provision be included in the legislation because 
if the opportunity to discuss the decision is not guaranteed, it would be up to the 
censors’ discretion as to whether or not they will discuss it with the  lm practitioner 
concerned. As one of the interviewees puts it:78
It will be safer [if the opportunity to discuss the decision with censors is 
guaranteed under the law].… Most of the matters are up to their discretion 
and that is not good… but if they have to see you and discuss it when you are 
not happy [with their decision], that will be much better.
Fieldwork conducted in Malaysia revealed that some  lm practitioners were able 
to confer with censors while others were denied the opportunity to do so. 
Therefore, an express statutory provision is needed in order for every  lm 
practitioner to have the opportunity to discuss the classi cation category of their 
 lm with censors. This proposal provides equality of treatment between  lm 
practitioners and also natural justice – the right to be heard – to each of them.
The provision of reasons for decisions
Although section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002 provides that when the 
Board of Censors requires alteration to be made to a  lm or refuses to approve a 
 lm for exhibition the Board must furnish its reasons in writing,  eldwork revealed 
that the Board very rarely provides  lm practitioners with reasons for the decisions 
they make. It was also disclosed that Malaysian  lm practitioners encounter 
dif culties in obtaining reasons for censorship decisions from the Board. On the 
rare occasion where reasons were provided, the reasons were found to be not 
sensible, irrational and inadequate to address why the decision was taken.79 
Additionally, section 10(3) does not stipulate that the Board shall also provide 
reasons for classifying a  lm with a particular category. Neither does it require the 
Appeal Committee or the Home Minister to provide reasons for the decisions they 
make under the Act. In contrast,  eldwork conducted in the two comparative 
jurisdictions revealed that their  lm practitioners did not encounter any dif culty 
in obtaining reasons for the decisions made on their  lms.80

Conclusion 145
It is proposed that section 10(3) be amended, by expanding its scope, to provide 
that every censorship decision made by the Board, the Committee and the Minister 
under the Act must be accompanied by written reasons. Failure to do so would 
give rise to a ground for judicial review.81 Written reasons from the Board are 
important to  lm practitioners who want to appeal against the decision to the 
Committee while reasons from the Committee or the Minister are important if the 
decision is to be challenged in court as decisions are challengeable on the reasons 
provided by the decision-maker. It is pertinent to stress that administrative 
decisions (particularly those that affect fundamental rights) must always be 
justi ed on the basis of sound reasons. However, it may also be suggested here 
that the reasons required to be provided to  lm practitioners need not be very 
elaborate or minutely detailed (therefore the Film Control Division would not be 
able to argue that they were too understaffed to provide reasons, or that they were 
not always provided for the sake of ef ciency of the censorship process), but they 
must not be so brief (the most common one-liner being ‘this  lm is not suitable for 
Malaysian audiences’)82 as to fail to explain and justify the censors’ decision.
Appeal against censorship decisions
There are two issues of concern in regard to appeal against  lm censorship 
decisions. First, whether members of the public should be given the right to appeal 
and second, whether  lm practitioners should have the right to make oral 
representations during the appeal process.
Appeal by members of the public
Members of the public have no express right under the Film Censorship Act 2002 
to appeal against decisions made by the Board of Censors. The law only provides 
that the owner of a  lm who is aggrieved by the censorship decision may appeal 
to the Appeal Committee.83 Be that as it may, there have been numerous instances 
where public complaints have caused approved  lms to be re-examined, oftentimes 
resulting in the banning of those  lms.84 Although these instances are not appeals 
in the proper sense, it is an issue of concern amongst Malaysian  lm practitioners,85 
who question whether such ‘complaints’ should be looked into by the Appeal 
Committee (or the Home Minister) to the extent of reversing the initial decision. 
Film director Saw Teong Hin noted: ‘the problem is that when a  lm goes out 
there, all it needs is for one member of the public to write in and they [the censors] 
will pull the  lm back and review it’ while James Lee observed that ‘it takes very 
little effort to sabotage a  lm in Malaysia, you just need one or two people to 
complain and that’s it’. Therefore, there is a real danger of  lms being easily 
sabotaged when unsubstantiated complaints are given undue weight by the censors 
who appear to be ‘anxious about public criticisms’, which is one of the 
‘characteristic vices of prior restraints’ as noted by Barendt.86
It is suggested that once a censorship decision is made, complaints from the 
public should not automatically lead to a re-examination of the  lm concerned as 

146 Conclusion
in the Hong Kong and Australian models. Only the  lm practitioners concerned 
should have the right to appeal because they are the parties who are affected the 
most by the decision. Film censors should also be con dent of their decisions if 
they were founded on rational reasoning. The foundation of their decisions should 
not be easily shaken by some disgruntled voices of the public. This, again, 
underlines the importance of appointing suitable and competent individuals to be 
the decision-makers as discussed earlier in the chapter. Additionally, there are 
pitfalls in opening up censorship decisions to appeal by members of the public as it 
will create more problems for  lm practitioners. For example, complaints that lead 
to the pulling back of a  lm would disrupt its release and any subsequent banning 
or reclassi cation of the  lm with a higher classi cation category would adversely 
affect the  lm’s box of ce receipts. The artistic integrity of the  lm might also be 
affected if the re-examination resulted in a decision where alteration was required 
to be made to the  lm. If this happened often, individuals, lobby groups, campaigners 
or politicians would become disproportionately powerful in in uencing censorship 
decisions, thus challenging the overall functioning of the  lm censorship system.87
The right to make oral representations
Film practitioners in Malaysia do not have an express right to make oral representations 
at the appeal stage of a censorship process. In appealing to the Appeal Committee, a 
written notice of appeal must be lodged and that notice may contain the applicant-
 lm practitioner’s representation.88 Therefore,  lm practitioners are limited to 
making written representations only. This procedure lacks suf cient protections. 
Drastic decisions, such as the banning of a  lm or subjecting a  lm to alteration, must 
only be made after careful consideration of all relevant arguments and representations 
from parties affected by the decision. This is in contrast with the situation in Hong 
Kong where the Film Censorship Ordinance confers  lm practitioners with an 
express right to make both written and oral representations.89 Although the Australian 
law does not speci cally provide the right to make oral representations, the 
Classi cation Review Board declared it would hear, and in practice has heard, 
submissions from the applicant and parties with an interest in the decision.
It is proposed that a provision guaranteeing the right to make oral representations 
be added to the Film Censorship Act 2002. The provision should, in addition to 
guaranteeing such a right, also stipulate that the representations to be made may 
not be restricted (as had happened under the Australian system)90 so that  lm 
practitioners are able to make a comprehensive argument. This provision is 
important because the omission of a statutory right would deprive some  lm 
practitioners of the opportunity to effectively articulate their arguments to justify 
the content in their  lm that censors found objectionable. If the right is not 
expressly guaranteed in the law, it will be up to the discretion of the Committee as 
to whether to allow the  lm practitioner concerned to submit orally or otherwise 
and, even if  lm practitioners are allowed to do so, the Committee could then go 
on to determine what can and cannot be submitted before them.91 This discretion 
is not desirable as it may be abused to privilege certain parties and exclude others.92

Conclusion 147
All of the Malaysian interviewees were of the opinion that the right to make 
oral representations should be guaranteed in law so that it can be exercised when 
the need arises. The interviewees were also of the opinion that the opportunity to 
have access to the Appeal Committee to present their arguments was vital because 
it would affect the outcome of an appeal.93 For example, Shuhaimi Baba who had 
the opportunity to make oral representations noted that ‘I can see such a marked 
difference when you actually go there and discuss it with the Committee.’ It is 
noteworthy that all of the Hong Kong interviewees were of the opinion that the 
right to make oral representations was very important as it would have a positive 
effect on the outcome of an appeal. The Australian interviewees were also of 
similar opinion.94
Availability of judicial review
There are two ouster clauses in the Film Censorship Act 2002, sections 23(2) and 
48, which seek to bar judicial review application challenging decisions made 
under the Act.95 If these provisions are given their intended effect of shutting out 
the possibility of review,  lm practitioners will be left with no avenue to seek 
legal redress. As noted earlier, it would be disastrous to Malaysian  lm practitioners 
whose productions have been banned if that decision could not be challenged in 
court, because there appears to be no other outlet for them to recoup their 
investments, as local  lms are yet to be able to penetrate foreign markets.
It is therefore proposed that sections 23(2) and 48 be repealed as the rationale 
of having them is doubtful in the  rst place96 and second, their retention in the 
statute is a retrograde step for a country with a written constitution guaranteeing 
its citizens the right to freedom of expression.97 As discussed in Chapter 6, 
although the Malaysian courts have adopted the proposition laid down in the 
Anisminic case on the scope of judicial review in the face of an ouster clause, it is 
still advisable to have sections 23(2) and 48 repealed because the judicial trend 
tends to swing like a pendulum. The independence of the judiciary was a concern 
to the interviewees who were of the opinion that the courts were biased in favour 
of the executive and hence, the censorship authorities.98 There is the risk that the 
courts may revert back to interpreting ouster clauses widely (as the courts did 
once before in the 1980s) and rule that an applicant- lm practitioner is effectively 
barred from challenging a  lm censorship decision by way of judicial review.
There are no ouster clauses in the Hong Kong and Australian  lm censorship 
laws. All of the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees were of the opinion that 
the availability of judicial review was very important in a  lm censorship system, 
especially one which operated under the purview of the government.99 Additionally, 
most of the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees were certain that they would 
have recourse to judicial review in the (unlikely) event where they were dissatis ed 
with the censorship decision passed on their  lm. All of the Malaysian interviewees 
were also of the opinion that the availability of judicial review was crucial and that 
they should have the right to challenge  lm censorship decisions in court. Some 
interviewees even noted that they would be prepared to pursue a judicial review 

148 Conclusion
application if dissatis ed with the decision made on their  lm.100 Judicial review 
should be made available to serve as a ‘safety net’ to  lm practitioners in the event 
censorship authorities take the drastic step of banning their  lms, as has happened 
twice before to Amir Muhammad, where his  lms Lelaki Komunis Terakhir and 
Apa Khabar Orang Kampung were banned – the former by the Home Minister 
and the latter by both the Board of Censors and the Appeal Committee.
As elaborated in Chapter 6, judicial review can provide appropriate, adequate 
and effective remedies to a successful applicant. In addition, the availability of 
judicial review, even if not put into action, could also act as a ‘threat’ to the 
unaccountability and arbitrariness of the censors. Amir Muhammad’s experience 
could serve as an illustration here as the  lmmaker’s documentary Malaysian 
Gods (2008) was approved by the Board of Censors but at the same time slapped 
with an order prohibiting its exhibition. This arbitrary and illegal decision goes to 
substantiate the importance of having judicial review to seek redress. As Amir 
Muhammad noted, ‘we need it [judicial review], otherwise there will be these 
little Napoleons!’ The availability of judicial review and the shadow that it would 
cast on the decision-makers would encourage censorship decisions to be made 
properly, legally and rationally.
The areas of concern in the Hong Kong and Australian  lm 
censorship systems for further research
Even though the main focus of the book is to improve the Malaysian  lm 
censorship system, the research located  ve areas of concern in the Hong Kong 
and Australian models. In the former they are the double standards applied to 
treatment of coarse language between local and foreign  lms and the single-
censor panel arrangement, while in the latter, they are in regard to restrictions in 
 lm advertising, the inability to reference previous classi cation decisions during 
appeal and the power to reclassify  lms. These areas of concern merit further 
research and will now be discussed in turn.
The Hong Kong  lm censorship system
Censorship element: language
Although all of the Hong Kong interviewees were satis ed with the clarity of the 
provisions in the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors and were generally 
happy with its application, three interviewees did point out that there appeared to 
be a double standard when it came to the censorship element of language.101 One 
of these interviewees is Lo Chi Leung who questioned ‘why are foreign  lms 
containing the F words usually classi ed Category IIB while Hong Kong  lms 
with the word ‘tiu’ (meaning ‘fuck’ in Cantonese) end up being classi ed Category 
III? I think there is double standard as regards this treatment’.102 Besides the 
allegation of such double standard, two Hong Kong interviewees expressed hope 
that the standard on the use of coarse language, in general, would be further 

Conclusion 149
relaxed. For example, Mabel Cheung was of the opinion that censors should be 
more liberal because ‘language is the expression of characters, it makes them real 
and three dimensional… if you are depicting a triad boss or prostitute, I mean, 
they speak differently. So I think the standard [of the use of coarse language] had 
to be readjusted’.
Censorship panels
In Hong Kong, a submitted  lm is dealt with by a single censor assigned to 
examine the  lm by the Film Censorship Authority. In addition to assigning a 
censor, the Authority may also assign not less than two advisers to the  lm.103 
Although the censor is obliged to consult the assigned advisers (if any) before 
making his or her decision, the censor is not bound by the advisers’ opinions.104 
Therefore, censorship decisions appear to be made essentially by the censor alone 
and this could lack the bene t of deliberations between numerous censors which 
occur in Malaysia and Australia. The arrangement where only one censor is 
examining a  lm and subsequently making the censorship decision could pose 
problems to  lm practitioners as that particular censor could be a problematic one 
and, as such, will  nd many things that are objectionable about the  lm.
In contrast, under the Malaysian system,  lm censorship decisions are made by 
panels and, typically, a panel consisting of three or more members from the Board 
of Censors will be assigned to examine a  lm.105 There was no complaint amongst 
Malaysian interviewees over the prescribed number of censors to examine a  lm. 
In Australia, the Director of the Classi cation Board is empowered under section 
57 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 to 
give directions as to the constitution of the Board (in the form of a panel) to 
classify a  lm. Section 58 then provides that  ve members shall constitute the 
quorum for a meeting of the Board106 and matters arising therein will be determined 
by the majority vote.107 It is also provided that only members who have seen the 
 lm are allowed to vote.108 This procedure allows decisions to be made after 
deliberations between members of the panel and there were no concerns raised by 
the Australian interviewees regarding the panel arrangements, nor about its actual 
day-to-day practice.
Most of the Hong Kong interviewees were in favour of having more than one 
censor assigned to examine a  lm. Patrick Tam, for example, was of the opinion 
that the more censors assigned to make a censorship decision the better because 
then there could be ‘exchange of ideas where different perspectives or judgments 
will come through instead of having just one individual censor deciding’. Lo Chi 
Leung shares the same opinion and added that ‘when there is only one censor, [the 
decision made] could be subjective and biased’ while Mabel Cheung suggested that 
the number of censors ‘should be increased to at least three… or let the two advisers 
have voting power as well so that you will have the majority decision’. However, 
three interviewees held different views. They were of the opinion that the single-
censor panel arrangement contributed to a more ef cient and speedy censorship 
process.109 Wellington Fung, for example, noted that time was of the essence for 

150 Conclusion
Hong Kong  lm practitioners as they would normally have scheduled the release 
dates of their  lms in advance of their hectic production schedules. Fung added: ‘it 
all comes back to speed and ef ciency... time is really important for us. We send the 
 lm in [for censorship] and hope it will be done within a few days and get the 
business going… if it is a collective decision, then more time will be needed’.
The Australian  lm classi cation system
Film advertising
There is dissatisfaction amongst Australian interviewees (in particular the 
distributors and exhibitors) when it comes to  lm advertising. A  lm trailer is 
categorized on the basis of the  lm’s classi cation, not on the content of the trailer 
itself. Additionally, a trailer can only be screened together with a  lm which is of 
similar or a higher classi cation category. That is, if the trailer is for a  lm 
classi ed as MA15+, that trailer can only be screened with a  lm which is 
classi ed MA15+ or R18+.110 It cannot be screened with a G, PG or M rated  lm 
even if the trailer itself does not contain content that warrants a restricted 
classi cation. This rule has caused marketing and promotional challenges to  lm 
practitioners. Joel Pearlman, Managing Director of Roadshow Films, for example, 
described it as ‘constraints’ on  lm advertising, particularly for  lms classi ed in 
restricted categories.
An executive of a major exhibition and distribution company (who prefers to 
remain anonymous) described this issue as ‘the main area of concern in  lm 
publicity and marketing’. This interviewee pointed out that the Australian way of 
classifying trailers differs from most countries where a trailer is classi ed based on 
the content of the trailer itself, rather than on the feature  lm’s classi cation. Peter 
Campbell, a distributor, characterizes the approach as ‘nonsensical’ because the 
trailer itself does not necessarily contain content that is objectionable while Greg 
Denning of Icon Film Distribution was of the opinion that classifying a trailer 
based on its content ‘would be a fairer system’. Denning added: ‘If you have a PG 
rated family movie that you can cut a G rated trailer for it so that you can run it on 
other G rated products… I don’t see why we should be restricted in doing that’.
In regard to where a trailer can be screened, Campbell and Denning’s colleague 
in the distribution sector James Hewison commented:
What is limiting the marketing and therefore the visibility of a  lm before it 
goes into release is where a trailer can screen. If a  lm is rated R, then the 
trailer can only be screened with other  lms rated R and given that there are 
virtually no other  lms rated R released in the cinemas, then obviously the 
opportunity [of exposure] for that  lm will be very limited.
Richard J. Frankland whose  lm Stone Bros. (2009) was classi ed MA15+ said 
that because of this approach, his  lm’s trailer was not well circulated in cinemas, 
therefore limiting the  lm’s visibility.

Conclusion 151
In contrast,  lm trailers in Malaysia and Hong Kong are approved (or otherwise) 
based on the trailer’s content and there is no rule stipulating that a trailer can only 
be screened with a  lm which is of similar or a higher classi cation category. The 
Malaysian interviewees have not encountered any problem in obtaining approval 
for the publicity materials of their  lms and, hence, no concern was raised. Like 
their Malaysian counterparts, the Hong Kong interviewees have also not 
encountered any dif culty in obtaining  lm advertising approvals.
Appeal against classi cation decisions
Although  lm practitioners may make oral representations before the Classi cation 
Review Board during an appeal process, they are not allowed to reference other 
classi cation decisions. Greg Denning, who  nds this procedure to be ‘ awed’, 
noted that  lm practitioners are ‘not allowed to reference any previous decisions 
or any other  lms that have been classi ed in the past’. He added:
If I got a horror  lm that got up to appeal that I think it should be [classi ed] 
MA but is given an R, I would love to be able to go in with a list of previous 
horror  lms that contain similar content that were [classi ed] MA. You are 
essentially asked to consider every previous decision irrelevant! We are not 
allowed to speci cally reference any of those  lms. It doesn’t really enable 
you to bring a concise case before the Appeal Board. I guess what that means 
to a distributor is that there is a high degree of uncertainty when you go to 
appeal. My frustration comes from not being able to be speci c and say “OK, 
the scene where X character chops off the head of Y character is [classi ed] 
R, but here are four other  lms with the same contents but they received an 
MA and why are you giving us an R?” …to not be able to reference previous 
decisions just seems to be unfair.
Reclassi cation of  lms
In Australia, a classi ed  lm may be reclassi ed by the Classi cation Board after 
a period of two years commencing on the day on which the classi cation was 
made.111 The Board may reclassify a  lm at the request of the Minister or on its 
own initiative.112 If the Board intends to reclassify a  lm, its director must issue a 
notice of that intention to invite submissions about the matter.113
Since  lms may be reclassi ed, it is possible for a Refused Classi cation (RC) 
 lm to be classi ed (approved for exhibition and distribution) and vice versa.114 It 
is also possible for  lms to be reclassi ed with a different classi cation category. 
Therefore, depending on the classi cation a  lm receives, reclassi cation may 
work for the bene t or to the detriment of the  lm practitioners concerned. The 
opinions of the Australian interviewees were split on this area of concern. It 
appears that those who viewed reclassi cation as necessarily leading to a lower 
classi cation category were in favour of it115 while those who thought that 
reclassi cation would essentially result in restricting the classi cation were 

152 Conclusion
against it. Interviewees who did not object to reclassi cation of  lms were 
generally of the opinion that ‘it makes sense if you classify  lms based on 
community standards because community standards change and there are  lms 
that were classi ed R in the past which aren’t really R  lms now’116 and ‘[the 
practice of reclassi cation of  lms] is a sound one because community standards 
do change’.117 Interviewees who objected, like Peter Campbell, for example, was 
of the opinion that:
Once a  lm is classi ed, it should stay.118 It is ludicrous because if it has already 
been out there, why go back and try to ban it? All they are doing is just forcing 
a desire for others to buy it offshore… forcing sales away from the local market 
and making it harder for Australian distributors. They have just got to wake up 
to the fact that when people want it, they can still get it elsewhere.
Producer Jan Chapman was of the opinion that the Classi cation Board should 
only reclassify a  lm if the application to do so was made by the  lm practitioner 
concerned: ‘I don’t think they [the Board] should be able to do it if they change 
their minds [about their initial decision]’.
There is no provision in the Malaysian or the Hong Kong laws that provides for 
reclassi cation of  lms. Reclassi cation is therefore unique to the Australian system.
Conclusion
The proposals for reform to the Malaysian  lm censorship system that are 
discussed above involve important amendments to the law, further revision to the 
guidelines and changes to the censorship process. In light of the comparative 
experience in Hong Kong and Australia, it appears that the reformed system 
would be much more capable of promoting the artistic vibrancy and commercial 
viability of the Malaysian  lm industry. It will be more transparent and responsive 
to the needs of  lm practitioners as well as the audience, and at the same time 
reconcilable with the basic common law approach to free speech.
A reformed  lm censorship system would help to address the concerns of 
Malaysian  lm practitioners as encapsulated by Aziz M. Osman – ‘in every  lm 
that I wanted to make, I would always think “would the censorship board allow it 
to be shown to the public?”’; Ruhani Abdul Rahman – ‘we get short of ideas 
because we cannot do this, we cannot do that’; and U-Wei Haji Saari – ‘it is 
dif cult for me to get foreign producers to invest in my work because they know 
that it can be butchered, it can be censored!’. The proposals would help to create 
a better environment suitable for  lmmakers to develop and the industry to grow, 
for a greater variety of  lms to be produced locally and for fostering a more open, 
critical and cultured  lm-going public.

Notes
1 Introduction
 1  Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) (2010) History of the MPAA, Online. 
Available: http://www.mpaa.org/about/history (accessed 10 May 2010).
 2  British Board of Film Classi cation (2010) About the BBFC, Online. Available: http://
www.bbfc.co.uk/about (accessed 10 May 2010).
 3  In Australia, for example, a system of co regulation operates for television broadcasting 
where broadcasters are responsible for the classi cation of their programmes in 
compliance with the standards developed by the Australian Communications and Media 
Authority under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992. In Malaysia, the broadcasting of 
 lms on television is regulated under the Communications and Multimedia Act 1998 
while the Broadcasting Ordinance is the law applied in Hong Kong for the same purpose.
 4  Interview with Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 
2009).
 5  For example, Tsai’s Vive L’Amour was awarded the Golden Lion (Best Film) at the 
Venice Film Festival in 1994, What time is it there? garnered the Grand Jury Prize and 
the Best Director award at the Chicago International Film Festival in 2001, and The 
Wayward Cloud won three awards at the 2004 Berlin International Film Festival including 
the Berlin Bear for Outstanding Artistic Achievement while Tsai himself was conferred 
the distinction of Chevalier des Arts et Lettres by the French government in 2002.
 6  ‘Freedom of expression’ and ‘freedom of speech’ or ‘free speech’ are terms capable of 
conveying different meanings depending on the context, but they were often used 
interchangeably in the literature. See D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: 
Cases, Materials and Commentary, Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 22.
 7  L. McNamara, ‘Free Speech’ in D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd 
edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2007, p. 3. See also G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media 
Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, pp. 1 7.
 8  For a concise outline of the development of free speech and the emergence of a free 
press in England, see L. McNamara, ‘Free Speech’ in D. Butler and S. Rodrick, 
Australian Media Law (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2007, pp. 4 6.
 9  A. T. Kenyon, ‘What Conversation? Free Speech and Defamation Law’, Modern Law 
Review, 73(5) 2010, 697 720. Kenyon observed that these rationales are ‘generally shared 
across jurisdictions even though the laws regulating speech in them differ markedly’.
10  D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: Cases, Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 23.
11  Ibid.
12  See, for example, Justice Holmes’ dissenting judgment in Abrams v United States 
250 US 616 (1919) as well as Justice Brandies’ judgment in Whitney v California 274 
US 357 (1927).
13  G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, p. 3.

154 Notes
14  D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: Cases, Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 24. For criticisms on the free speech and 
truth rationale, see F. Schauer, ‘Free Speech in a World of Private Power’ in T. 
Campbell and W. Sadurski (eds), Freedom of Communication, Aldershot: Dartmouth, 
1994, p. 6, where Schauer asserted that inequalities in the ‘marketplace’ justify 
regulation to enhance the public discourse.
15  See A. Meiklejohn, Political Freedom: The Constitutional Powers of the People, New 
York: Harper, 1960 and R. Post, ‘Reconciling Theory and Doctrine in First Amendment 
Jurisprudence’ California Law Review, 88, 2000, 2353.
16  D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: Cases, Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 28.
17  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 
13. See also C. E. Baker, Human Liberty and Freedom of Speech, New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1989, where the free speech and autonomy rationale is articulated based 
on the concept of human liberty.
18  D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: Cases, Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 28.
19  L. McNamara, ‘Free Speech’ in D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd 
edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2007, p. 6.
20  Lord Goff in Attorney General v Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2) observed that Article 
10 of the ECHR ‘recognizes freedom of expression as a general right, but allows exceptions. 
In other words, freedom of expression is the rule and regulation of speech is the exception 
requiring justi cation’: [1990] 1 AC 109. See also D. Watkins, ‘Freedom of Artistic 
Expression and the Human Rights Act 1998’, Art, Antiquity and Law, 2005, pp. 147 73.
21  Article 19(3) of the ICCPR. Quali cations on the right to freedom of expression were 
also found in Article 10(2) of the ECHR. See the cases of Otto Preminger Institute v 
Austria (1994) 19 EHRR 34 and Wingrove v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 1.
22  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 7.
23  Cinema has enjoyed the First Amendment protection since the decision of Burstyn Inc. v 
Wilson where Justice Clark in delivering the unanimous judgment of the Supreme Court 
states that ‘the expression by means of motion pictures is included within the free speech 
and free press guarantee of the First and Fourteenth Amendments’: 343 US 495 (1952) 502.
24  See for example, Schenk v United States 249 US 47 (1919) and Brandenburg v Ohio 
395 US 444 (1969). See also S. Fish, ‘There’s No Such Thing as Free Speech, and It’s 
a Good Thing Too’ in H. A. Veeser (ed.), The Stanley Fish Reader, Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers, 1999, pp. 145  64, where it was asserted that free speech is not an absolute 
and inviolable principle under the First Amendment.
25  In Roth v United States and Alberts v California 354 US 476 (1957), the Supreme Court 
held that obscenity fell outside of the First Amendment protection because it was 
‘utterly without redeeming social importance’. See also the earlier case of Chaplinsky 
v New Hampshire 315 US 568 (1942) where Justice Murphy, in delivering the 
unanimous judgment of the Supreme Court, observed that: ‘It is well understood that 
the right to free speech is not absolute at all times and under all circumstances. There 
are certain well de ned and narrowly limited classes of speech, the prevention and 
punishment of which have never been thought to raise any constitutional problem. 
These include the lewd and obscene, the profane, the libellous, and the insulting or 
‘ ghting’ words  those which by their very utterance in ict injury or tend to incite an 
immediate breach of the peace. It has been well observed that such utterances are no 
essential part of any exposition of ideas, and are of such slight social value as a step to 
truth that any bene t that may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the social 
interest in order and morality’ (1942, 571 2).
26  See also S. M. Easton, The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the Right to Free 
Speech, London: Routledge, 1994, pp. 122 44 and E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd 
edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 355  63.

Notes 155
27  For example, the disputes between liberals (who generally argued that the consumption 
of pornography falls within ‘self regarding’ or ‘private sphere’ and thus, the individual 
adult has the right and ‘moral independence’ to decide) and some feminists, most notably 
Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin (who, in general, argued against 
pornography in relation to humiliation and harm against woman). See R. M. Dworkin, 
‘Is there a Right to Pornography?’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1, 1981, 177 where 
the right to consume pornography is defended on the basis of freedom to moral 
independence; C. MacKinnon, ‘Pornography, Civil Rights and Speech’, Harvard Civil 
Rights  Civil Liberties Law Review, 20, 1985, 1; A. Dworkin, ‘Against the Male Flood: 
Censorship, Pornography and Equality’ Harvard Women’s Law Journal, 8, 1985, 1; and 
F. Schauer, The Law of Obscenity, Washington: Bureau of National Affairs, 1976.
28  See Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills (1992) 177 CLR 1 and Australian Capital 
Television v Commonwealth (1992) 177 CLR 106. See also Lange v Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation (1997) 189 CLR 520, 559 and Coleman v Power [2004] 220 
CLR 1, 48 9.
29  See G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 
2007, pp. 194 7 and S. M. Easton, The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the 
Right to Free Speech, London: Routledge, 1994, pp. 124 9. For the historical origins 
of American obscenity law, see generally F. Schauer, The Law of Obscenity, 
Washington: Bureau of National Affairs, 1976.
30  S. Coldham, ‘Reports of the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship’, Modern 
Law Review, 43, 1980, pp. 306 7.
31  ‘Obscenity’ (or ‘obscene’) rather than ‘pornography’ is the usual term used in 
legislation. The former is wider in scope as it covers not only sexually explicit materials 
(as the latter does) but extends to materials encouraging violence and drug abuse. 
Robertson and Nicol observed that the obscenity laws and the arrangements for  lm 
censorship in England are directed against explicit sexual materials but the tests applied 
are wide enough to include materials that advocate violence or encourage the use of 
dangerous drugs. For example, ‘Video nasties’ that combine pornography with strong 
rape or terrifying scenes have been successfully prosecuted in England under obscenity 
laws. See G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 
2007, p. 192.
32  See E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005; G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 
2007; F. Schauer, The Law of Obscenity, Washington: Bureau of National Affairs, 
1976; D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook 
Co, 2007; N. Strossen, ‘A Feminist Critique of “The” Feminist Critique of Pornography’, 
Virginia Law Review, 79, 1993, 1103; and H. White, Anatomy of Censorship: Why the 
Censors Have it Wrong, Lanham: University Press of America, 1997. 
33  G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, p. 191.
34  Ibid. p. 221. See also Knuller (Publishing, Printing and Promotions) Ltd v Director of 
Public Prosecutions [1973] AC 435.
35  N. Strossen, ‘A Feminist Critique of “The” Feminist Critique of Pornography’, Virginia 
Law Review, 79, 1993, 1103.
36  F. Schauer, The Law of Obscenity, Washington: Bureau of National Affairs, 1976, p. 109.
37  H. White, Anatomy of Censorship: Why the Censors Have it Wrong, Lanham: University 
Press of America, 1997, p. 11. See also S. Bronitt and B. McSherry, Principles of 
Criminal Law (2nd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2005, pp. 616 7.
38  In this case, the Supreme Court de ned ‘obscenity’ as ‘material which deals with sex in 
a manner appealing to prurient interest’: Roth v United States 354 US 476 (1957) 487, 
per Brennan, J.
39  Ibid. 491.
40  Paris Adult Theatre v Slaton 413 US 49 (1973).
41  Ibid. 83.

156 Notes
42  Ginzberg v United States 383 US 463 (1966) 480.
43  Jacobellis v Ohio 378 US 184 (1964) 197. See Chief Justice Warren’s judgment at page 
199 where it was noted that: ‘although the Federal Government and virtually every state has 
had laws proscribing obscenity since the Union was formed, and although this Court has 
recently decided that obscenity is not within the protection of the First Amendment, neither 
courts or legislatures have been able to evolve a truly satisfactory de nition of obscenity’.
44  See paragraphs 9.20 and 9.21 of the Report of the Committee on Obscenity and Film 
Censorship (Cmnd 7772), London: HMSO, 1979.
45  P. Tackaberry and J. Hewitt, ‘Towards a New De nition of Obscenity for Canada: Did 
Butler really do it?’, Entertainment Law Review, 4(5), 1993, 152 5. In R v Butler 
[1992] 89 DLR (4th) 449, the Supreme Court of Canada held the obscenity provisions 
of the Canadian Criminal Code constitutional and formulated a new de nition of 
obscenity by emphasizing the concept of ‘harm’. Although the court conceded that a 
direct link between obscenity and harm to society may be dif cult, if not impossible, to 
establish, it focused on the harmful effects obscene contents may have on society as the 
justi cation to proscribe such materials.
46  G. J. Hawkins, ‘The Problem of Pornography’, Sydney Law Review, 5(2), 1966, 221 3. 
See also H. Whitmore, ‘Obscenity in Literature: Crime or Free Speech’, Sydney Law 
Review, 4(2), 1963, 179.
47  See T. A. O. Endicott, ‘The Impossibility of the Rule of Law’, Oxford Journal of Legal 
Studies, 19, 1999, 1 where it was noted that ‘vagueness is ineliminable from a legal 
system’ and that ‘legal systems necessarily have vague laws’.
48  See A. Ashworth, Principles of Criminal Law (6th edn), Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2009, pp. 63 6.
49  Jacobellis v Ohio 378 US 184 (1964).
50  Ibid. 199. Emphasis added.
51  For an exposition of the indecency test, see G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th 
edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, pp. 239 41 and R v Stanley [1965] 2 QB 327.
52  R v Hicklin (1868) LR 3 QB 360, 371.
53  In general, there are three principal grounds on which pornography is proscribed:  rst, 
the mass availability of pornographic material might affect moral attitudes of society; 
second, pornography causes harm to society; and third, pornography offends people. 
See E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005, pp. 370 81 for a discussion of the speci c harms (sexual crimes, harm to children 
and harm to women) said to be caused by pornography.
54  D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 
2007, p. 365.
55  Under this test, the defence of literary or artistic merit is not available to the defendant
publisher.
56  S. M. Easton, The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the Right to Free Speech, 
London: Routledge, 1994, p. 125.
57  G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, p. 
201. In Director of Public Prosecutions v Whyte [1972] 3 All ER 12, the House of Lords 
held that the magistrate or jury have to  rst ascertain who are the likely audience before 
considering whether the article in question is likely to deprave or corrupt them.
58  R v Calder & Boyars Ltd [1969] 1 QB 151.
59  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 
pp. 370 1.
60  Section 4 of the Obscene Publications Act in part, reads: ‘A person shall not be 
convicted of an offence … if it is proved that publication of the article in question is 
justi ed as being for the public good on the grounds that it is in the interest of science, 
literature, art or learning, or of other objects of general concern’.
61  S. M. Easton, The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the Right to Free Speech, 
London: Routledge, 1994, p. 125.

Notes 157
62  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 382.
63  Ibid. 383.
64  Ibid. 382.
65  The test approved earlier by the Supreme Court for identifying obscenity was ‘whether 
to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant 
theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to prurient interest’. See Roth v United 
States 354 US 476 (1957) 489.
66  Miller v California 413 US 15 (1973) 24. Thus, for a speech to be ‘obscene’ it has to 
satisfy the ‘tripartite test’ set out in this case. See B. Harris, ‘Censorship: A Comparative 
Approach Offering a New Theoretical Basis for Classi cation in Australia’, Canberra 
Law Review, 8, 2005, 25, 27.
67  F. Schauer, ‘The Ontology of Censorship’ in R. C. Post (ed.), Censorship and Silencing, Los 
Angeles: Getty Research Institute for the History of Art and the Humanities, 1998, p. 162.
68  Ibid. 163.
69  See E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005, p. 122.
70  Barendt argued that ‘the executive is not only determining conclusively whether an 
individual is free to speak, but it is also in effect deciding that that person is guilty of an 
offence if he publishes without the required permit. Under the constitutional principles of 
the separation of powers, these decisions should be taken by the courts’. See E. Barendt, 
Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 122. See also 
M. I. Meyerson, ‘The Neglected History of the Prior Restraint Doctrine: Rediscovering 
the Link between the First Amendment and Separations of Powers’, Indiana Law Review, 
34, 2001, 295.
71  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 124
2  The  lm industries in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia in their 
socio-legal context
 1  It is extremely dif cult, if not impossible, to satisfactorily compress the long and illustrious 
histories of the  lm industries into a mere few pages. Hence, for more detailed expositions 
of these industries and the  lms they produced, reference may be made to the following 
publications: H. A. Khan, The Malay Cinema, Selangor: National University of Malaysia 
Press, 1997 and W. van der Haide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and 
National Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002 for the Malaysian 
 lm industry; S. Teo, Hong Kong Cinema: The Extra Dimension, London: BFI Publishing, 
1997, D. Bordwell, Planet Hong Kong: Popular Cinema and the Art of Entertainment, 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2000 and K. Law and F. Bren, Hong Kong 
Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow Press, 2004 for the Hong Kong  lm 
industry; and D. Collins, Hollywood Down Under: Australians at the Movies  1896 to 
the Present Day, North Ryde: Angus & Robertson, 1987; S. Dermody and E. Jacka, The 
Screening of Australia: Anatomy of a Film Industry, Sydney: Currency Press, 1987, S. 
Murray (ed.) Australian Cinema, Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1994; and T. O’Regan, 
Australian National Cinema, London: Routledge, 1996 for the Australian  lm industry.
 2  The country is nominally headed by a King (known as the Yang di Pertuan Agong) 
who, in the exercise of most of his constitutional functions, acts in accordance with the 
advice of the Cabinet.
 3  Great Britain began to establish colonies and protectorates in the peninsular from the 
late eighteenth century.
 4  Singapore subsequently seceded from the Federation in 1965 and became an 
independent city state.
 5  For a concise history of Malaysia, see B. W. Andaya and L. Andaya, A History of 
Malaysia (2nd edn), London: Macmillan, 2001 and C. M. Turnbull, A History of 
Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1989.

158 Notes
 6  See A. Harding, Law, Government and the Constitution in Malaysia, Selangor, 
Malaysia: Lexis Nexis, 1996.
 7  It is worth noting that ‘censorship’ falls within federal legislative powers. See item 22 
of the Ninth Schedule to the Federal Constitution.
 8  United Nations Human Rights Council, Government of Malaysia (2009) National Report 
Submitted in Accordance with Paragraph 15(A) of the Annex to Human Rights Council 
Resolution 5/1: Malaysia, Online. Available: http://lib.ohchr.org/HRBodies/UPR/
Documents/Session4/MY/AHRC WG6 4 MYS 1 E. PDF (accessed 29 October 2010).
 9  See articles 5 to 13 of the Federal Constitution.
10  For detailed discussion of the Malaysian legal system, see M. A. Wu, The Malaysian 
Legal System (3rd edn), Selangor: Longman Malaysia, 2005 and W. A. Hamzah, 
Malaysian Legal System, Selangor: Oxford Fajar, 2009.
11  These include marriage and divorce, inheritance, custody of children and apostasy.
12  Article 122B of the Federal Constitution.
13  For further discussion of the jurisdiction of these Islamic courts, see F. S. Shuaib, Powers 
and Jurisdiction of Syariah Courts in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur: Lexis Nexis, 2003.
14  Malaysia, Commission of Enquiry on the Video Clip Recording of Images of a Person 
Purported to be an Advocate and Solicitor Speaking on the Telephone on matters 
regarding the Appointment of Judges, Final Report (2008), p. 175.
15  See Kuala Lumpur Bar Committee, ‘The Administration of Justice in Malaysia’ (2001) 
2 INSAF: The Journal of the Malaysian Bar, pp. 39 63.
16  Economic Planning Unit, Prime Minister’s Department Malaysia (2012) Population by 
Sex, Ethnic Group and Age, Online. Available: http://www.epu.gov.my/html/themes/
epu/images/ common/eco.stat/1.2.5pdf (accessed 12 January 2012).
17  See for example article 89 (reservation of land for Malays) and article 153 (reservation 
of quota in respect of civil service, permit, and etcetera for Malays and natives of Sabah 
and Sarawak) of the Federal Constitution. The National Economic Policy (NEP) was 
launched following the 13 May 1969 riot to increase the bumiputra’s share/equity in 
the country’s economy (to provide them with preferential treatment in education, 
employment and business, amongst others) and to eradicate poverty. See A. Whiting, 
‘Desecularising Malaysian Law?’ in Penelope Nicholson and Sarah Biddulph (eds), 
Examining Practice, Interrogating Theory: Comparative Legal Studies in Asia, Leiden: 
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2008, p. 224 and C. C. Gan, ‘Administrative Law and 
Judicialized Governance in Malaysia’ in T. Ginsburg and A. H. Y. Chen (eds), 
Administrative Law and Governance in Asia: Comparative Perspectives, London: 
Routledge, 2009, p. 257.
18  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2012) The World Factbook: 
Malaysia, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world factbook/
geos/my.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
19  Other religions and faiths made up the remaining 5.0 per cent: Central Intelligence 
Agency, United States of America (2010) The World Factbook: Malaysia, Online. 
Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world factbook/geos/my.html 
(accessed 27 October 2010).
20  See the landmark Supreme Court case of Che Omar Che Soh v Public Prosecutor 
[1988] 2 MLJ 55.
21  The Pan Malaysian Islamic Party has occasionally complained and called for  lm 
censorship decisions to be re evaluated. A recent example is the complaint and 
allegation by the party that Hantu Bonceng (Ahmad Idham, 2011), a  lm approved for 
exhibition by the Board of Censors without cuts, contained elements that insulted Islam 
and the Prophet Mohammed.
22  Article 152 of the Federal Constitution. See also the National Language Act 1963 (Act 32).
23  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2010) The World Factbook: 
Malaysia, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world factbook/
geos/my.html (accessed 27 October 2010).

Notes 159
24  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2012) The World Factbook: 
Malaysia, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world factbook/
geos/my.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
25  Hamzah Hussin as quoted by W. van der Heide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: 
Border Crossings and National Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 
2002, p. 105.
26  Ibid. p.118.
27  The same company that played a major role in Hong Kong as discussed in the overview 
of the Hong Kong  lm industry.
28  B. van der Heide, ‘Malaysian Movies: The Shaw Brothers Meet the Pandava Brothers 
in the Land Below the Wind’ in B. Bennett, J. Doyle and S. Nandan (eds), Crossing 
Cultures: Essays on Literature and Culture of the Asia Paci c, London: Skoob Books, 
1996, p. 101.
29  See H. Muthalib and T. C. Wong, ‘Malaysia: Gentle Winds of Change’ in A. Vasudev, 
L. Padgaonkar and R. Doraisamy (eds), Being and Becoming: The Cinemas of Asia, 
2002, pp. 301 28.
30  G. C. Khoo, Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian Film and Literature, 
Vancouver: UBC Press, 2006, p. 90.
31  B. van der Heide, ‘Malaysian Movies: The Shaw Brothers Meet the Pandava Brothers 
in the Land Below the Wind’ in B. Bennett, J. Doyle and S. Nandan (eds), Crossing 
Cultures: Essays on Literature and Culture of the Asia Paci c, London: Skoob Books, 
1996, p. 102.
32  Shaw Brothers/MFP was founded by brothers Run Run Shaw and Runme Shaw while 
Cathay Keris was formed by the partnership of Loke Wan Tho and Ho Ah Loke.
33  See generally, H. A. Khan, The Malay Cinema, Selangor: National University of 
Malaysia Press, 1997 and G. C. Khoo, Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian 
Film and Literature, Vancouver: UBC Press, 2006.
34  W. van der Heide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and National 
Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002, pp. 134 6.
35  M. Ahmad, ‘Colonial Policies, the Marketplace and the Malaysian Film Industry’ in L. 
Feilberg (ed.), Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences Sharing, 
Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, p. 17.
36  W. van der Heide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and National 
Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002, p. 117.
37  Ibid.
38  H. Muthalib and T. C. Wong, ‘Malaysia: Gentle Winds of Change’ in A. Vasudev, L. 
Padgaonkar and R. Doraisamy (eds), Being and Becoming: The Cinemas of Asia, 
2002, p. 306.
39  B. van der Heide, ‘Malaysian Movies: The Shaw Brothers Meet the Pandava Brothers 
in the Land Below the Wind’ in B. Bennett, J. Doyle and S. Nandan (eds), Crossing 
Cultures: Essays on Literature and Culture of the Asia Paci c, London: Skoob Books, 
1996, p. 107.
40  M. Ahmad, ‘Colonial Policies, the Marketplace and the Malaysian Film Industry’ in L. 
Feilberg (ed.), Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences Sharing, 
Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, p. 19.
41  W. van der Heide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and National 
Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002, p. 117.
42  The mushrooming of these production companies is attributable to the New Economic 
Policy introduced in 1971 to implement af rmative action for the bene t of the Malay
Bumiputeras.
43  H. Muthalib and T. C. Wong, ‘Malaysia: Gentle Winds of Change’ in A. Vasudev, L. 
Padgaonkar and R. Doraisamy (eds), Being and Becoming: The Cinemas of Asia, 
2002, p. 314.
44  Ibid., pp. 301 28.

160 Notes
45  For example, Sepet won the Best Asian Film award at the Tokyo International Film 
Festival in 2005 while Mukhsin won the Crystal Bear at the Berlin International Film 
Festival in 2007.
46  See W. van der Heide, Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and National 
Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002, p. 117.
47  Section 22 of the National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia Act 1981.
48  Compiled and adapted from National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2011) 
Message from the Director General, Online. Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?
mod  nas&sub perutusan (accessed 21 March 2011) and National Film Development 
Corporation of Malaysia (2011) Industry: Malaysian Film Industry Statistics, Online. 
Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?mod industry&sub   lemmalaysia (accessed 21 
March 2011).
49  National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2011) List of Cinemas, Online. 
Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?mod wajibtayang&sub pawagam (accessed 21 
March 2011).
50  N. Balaraman, ‘The Legislative System to Support Cinema: Instruments and Policies’ 
in L. Feilberg (ed.), Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences 
Sharing, Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, p. 13.
51  Adapted from National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2011) Industry: 
Malaysian Film Industry Statistics, Online. Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?
mod industry&sub  lemmalaysia (accessed 21 March 2011).
52  G. C. Khoo, Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian Film and Literature, Vancouver: 
UBC Press, 2006, p. 91.
53  The term ‘ lm industry’ was de ned in section 2 of the 1981 Act as to include ‘the 
activities of  lm production, distribution and exhibition carried out in Malaysia’.
54  N. Balaraman, ‘The Legislative System to Support Cinema: Instruments and Policies’ 
in L. Feilberg (ed.), Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences 
Sharing, Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, p. 13.
55  FINAS is, at present, operating under the purview of the Ministry of Information, 
Communication and Culture, while  lm censorship is placed under the control of the 
Home Ministry.
56  Emphasis added. See section 6(1) of the National Film Development Corporation of 
Malaysia Act 1981. Section 2 de ned ‘ lm production’ as to include ‘all activities 
related to the production or processing of  lms, or the recording or duplicating of video 
tapes, for viewing by the public or any class of the public’; ‘ lm distribution’ as to 
include ‘the renting, hiring and loaning of  lms produced abroad and the distribution of 
 lms produced locally’; and ‘ lm exhibition’ as ‘the screening of  lms for viewing by 
the public or any class of the public’.
57  National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2009) Wajib Tayang: Compulsory 
Screening Scheme, Online. Available: http:// nas.gov.my.index.php?mod wajibtayang 
(accessed 28 April 2009).
58  Ibid.
59  Ibid.
60  National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2009) Funding: Feature Film Loan 
Scheme, Online. Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?mod dana&sub pinjaman 
(accessed 28 April 2009).
61  National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia (2011) Message from the Director 
General, Online. Available: http:// nas.gov.my/index.php?mod  nas&sub perutusan 
(accessed 21 March 2011).
62  The British formally occupied the territories (of what is today the HKSAR) through a 
series of treaties entered into with China as results of the Opium Wars. For a concise 
history of Hong Kong, see Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region, Hong Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Services 
Department of the HKSAR, 2010, pp. 418 28; S. Tsang, A Modern History of Hong 

Notes 161
Kong, New York: I.B. Tauris, 2004; and C. Courtauld and M. Holdsworth, The Hong 
Kong Story, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1997.
63  United Nations Human Rights Council, People’s Republic of China (2009) National 
Report Submitted in Accordance with Paragraph 15(A) of the Annex to Human Rights 
Council Resolution 5/1: China, Online. Available: http://lib.ohchr.org/HRBodies/UPR/
Documents/Session4/CN/AHRCWG64CHN1E.pdf (accessed 29 October 2010).
     The transfer of sovereignty in 1997 of cially ended 156 years of British rule in 
Hong Kong.
64  Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
Hong Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Services Department of the 
HKSAR, 2010, p. 1.
65  Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2010) Government 
Structure, Online. Available: http://www.gov.hk/en/about/govdirectory/govstructure.htm 
(accessed 27 October 2010). The HKSAR government has the autonomy over  lm 
censorship and the PRC will not interfere or control the territory’s  lm industry.
66  See A. H. Chen, ‘The Concept of “One Country, Two Systems” and Its Application to 
Hong Kong’ in C. S. Hsu (ed.), Understanding China’s Legal System, New York: New 
York University Press, 2003, pp. 353 73.
67  See Chapter III of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
68  Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2010) Government 
Structure, Online. Available: http://www.gov.hk/en/about/govdirectory/govstructure.htm 
(accessed 27 October 2010).
69  See Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region, Hong Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Services Department of 
the HKSAR, 2010, p. 3.
70  Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
Hong Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Services Department of the 
HKSAR, 2010, p. 27.
71  Department of Justice of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2009) The 
Legal System in Hong Kong, Online. Available: http://www.doj.gov.hk/eng/legal/index.
htm (accessed 27 October 2010). For further discussion of the Hong Kong legal system, 
see P. Wesley Smith, An Introduction to the Hong Kong Legal System (3rd edn), Hong 
Kong: Oxford University Press, 1998. Reference may also be made to C. Shum, General 
Principles of Hong Kong Law, Hong Kong: Longman, 1992, in particular the  rst 
chapter entitled ‘The Nature and Sources of Hong Kong Law’. The laws of the PRC do 
not apply in HKSAR except those relating to defence and foreign affairs that are listed 
in Annex III to the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
72  Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2010) Government 
Structure, Online. Available: http://www.gov.hk/en/about/govdirectory/govstructure.htm 
(accessed 27 October 2010).
73  Department of Justice of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2009) The 
Legal System in Hong Kong, Online. Available: http://www.doj.gov.hk/eng/legal/
index.htm (accessed 27 October 2010).
74  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2010) The World Factbook: 
Hong Kong, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world
factbook/geos/hk.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
75  Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators for Asia and the Paci c 2010 (41st edn), 
Manilla: Asian Development Bank, 2010, p. 132.
76  Census and Statistics Department, Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region, (2007) 2006 By census, Online. Available: http://www.bycensus2006.gov.hk/
en/data/data3/ statisticaltables/index.htm#F1 (accessed 3 November 2010).
77  US Department of State (2010) Diplomacy in Action: International Religious Freedom 
Report 2010 (China), Online. Available: http://www.state.gov/drl/rls/irf/2010/148863.
htm#hong kong (accessed 19 September 2011).

162 Notes
 78  Article 32 of the Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
 79  Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 
Hong Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Services Department of the 
HKSAR, 2010, p. 22.
 80  Department of Justice of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (2009) The 
Legal System in Hong Kong, Online. Available: http://www.doj.gov.hk/eng/legal/
index.htm (accessed 27 October 2010).
 81  Census and Statistics Department, Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region (2010) The Four Key Industries in the Hong Kong Economy, Online. Available: 
http://www.censtatd.gov.hk/hongkongstatistics/four key industries/index.jsp (accessed 
3 November 2010).
 82  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2012) The World Factbook: 
Hong Kong, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world
factbook/geos/hk.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
 83  Ibid.
 84  K. Law and F. Bren, Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow 
Press, 2004, pp. 6 and 19.
 85  The origins of Hong Kong  lm production are still being debated among  lm 
historians today.
 86  F. Dannen and B. Long, Hong Kong Babylon: An Insider’s Guide to the Hollywood of 
the East, London: Faber and Faber, 1997, p. 9 and M. Scott, ‘100 Years of Hong Kong 
Cinema’, Screen International, Hong Kong, 20 March 2009, p. 14.
 87  E. Yau, ‘China’ in W. Luhr (ed.), World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987, 
p. 132.
 88  M. Scott, ‘100 Years of Hong Kong Cinema’, Screen International, Hong Kong, 20 
March 2009, p. 15.
 89  K. Law and F. Bren, Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow 
Press, 2004, p. xvi.
 90  Ibid. p. xvii.
 91  E. Yau, ‘China’ in W. Luhr (ed.), World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987, 
p. 132.
 92  Ibid. p. 133.
 93  Ibid.
 94  K. Law and F. Bren, Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow 
Press, 2004, p. 281.
 95  E. Yau, ‘China’ in W. Luhr (ed.), World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987, 
p. 133.
 96  M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese 
Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007, pp. 24 and 60. This set
up is often referred to as the ‘vertical integration system’ or the ‘fully integrated 
operations’ of production, distribution and exhibition of  lms.
 97  Ibid. p. 270.
 98  F. Dannen and B. Long, Hong Kong Babylon: An Insider’s Guide to the Hollywood of 
the East, London: Faber and Faber, 1997, p. 12.
 99  S. Chaudhuri, Contemporary World Cinema: Europe, the Middle East, East Asia and 
South Asia, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005, p. 120.
100  For example, Wong Kar Wai won the Best Director Award (for Happy Together) at 
the Festival de Cannes in 1997, Tsui Hark won the Future Film Digital Award (for 
Time and Tide) at the Venice Film Festival in 2000 and Ann Hui won the Jury Grand 
Prize (for Summer Snow) at the Berlin International Film Festival in 1995.
101  M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese 
Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007, p. 65.
102  Ibid. p. 62.

Notes 163
103  F. Dannen and B. Long, Hong Kong Babylon: An Insider’s Guide to the Hollywood of 
the East, London: Faber and Faber, 1997, p. 8.
104  See, for example, M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The 
Globalization of Chinese Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2007, F. Dannen and B. Long, Hong Kong Babylon: An Insider’s Guide to the 
Hollywood of the East, London: Faber and Faber, 1997, and K. Law and F. Bren, 
Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow Press, 2004.
105  M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese 
Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007, pp. 48 71.
106  Ibid. pp. 68 84.
107  Ibid. pp. 74 8.
108  Ibid. p. 78. See also S. Chaudhuri, Contemporary World Cinema: Europe, the Middle 
East, East Asia and South Asia, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005, p. 115.
109  See M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese 
Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007, p. 83 for a discussion 
of the effects of video piracy on  lm distribution.
110  K. Law and F. Bren, Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham: Scarecrow 
Press, 2004, p. xviii.
111  See S. Chaudhuri, Contemporary World Cinema: Europe, the Middle East, East Asia 
and South Asia, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005, p. 129.
112  M. Curtin, Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese 
Films and TV, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007, p. 251.
      See also C. T. Li, ‘Journal: Hong Kong’ (2004) Film Comment (September/October 
2004), Online. Available: http://www. lmlinc.com/fcm/9 10 2004/hongkongjournal.htm 
(accessed 14 May 2009).
113  See Tables 2.1 to 2.4.
114  Screen Australia (2012) Australia and the World: International Comparisons, Online. 
Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/research/statistics/acompinvestment.asp 
(accessed 1 June 2012).
115  Film Services Of ce (2011) The Hong Kong Film Industry, Online. Available: http://www.
fso create hk.gov.hk/accessibility/eng/guideto lming0201.cfm (accessed 6 May 2011).
116  Ibid.
117  Film Services Of ce (2008) About Us, Online. Available: http://www.fso tela.gov.hk/
accessibility/eng/aboutus.cfm (accessed 13 May 2009).
118  Film Services Of ce (2009) Establishment of the Hong Kong Film Development Council, 
Online. Available: http://www.fso tela.gov.hk/accessibility/eng/FDC 02.cfm (accessed 
13 May 2009).
119  Hong Kong Film Development Council (2009) Hong Kong Film New Action, Online. 
Available: http://www.fdc.gov.hk/NewAction/en/background/background.htm (accessed 
13 May 2009).
120  Film Services Of ce (2009) Film Development Fund, Online. Available: http://www.
fso  tela.gov.hk/accessibility/eng/ lmdevelopmentfund.cfm (accessed 13 May 2009).
121  An application for funds to  nance  lm production can be made by persons who have 
produced at least two  lms for theatrical release in the preceding ten years. A  lm 
director or producer with such experience may be engaged if the applicant himself 
does not meet this requirement. Additionally, the project in question must: (1) be a 
feature  lm intended for commercial exhibition in Hong Kong with a production 
budget not exceeding HKD$ 15 million; (2) be identi able as commercially viable; 
(3) have secured third party  nancing; (4) be able to obtain approval under the Film 
Censorship Ordinance for public exhibition; and (5) 50 per cent of its main cast and 
crew are Hong Kong residents.
122  Film Services Of ce (2009) Film Guarantee Fund Scheme, Online. Available: http://
www.fso tela.gov.hk/accessibility/eng/ lmguaranteefund.cfm (accessed 13 May 2009).
123  Ibid.

164 Notes
124  The land of Australia was inhabited by indigenous people (the Aboriginal and Torres 
Straits Islander peoples) long before the arrival of European settlers. Britain’s 
settlement of the land was initially through transportation of convicts to the penal 
colony in the late eighteenth century. For a concise history of Australia, see generally 
D. Denoon, P. Mein Smith and M. Wyndham, A History of Australia, New Zealand 
and the Paci c, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers, 2000 and S. Macintyre, A 
Concise History of Australia, Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
125  Australian Government Attorney General’s Department (2010) Universal Periodic 
Review  National Report Part II, Online. Available: http://www.ag.gov.au/www/
agd/nsf/Page/Humanrightsandantidiscrimination/InternationalHumanRightsUniversal
PeriodicReview/DraftNationalReport PartII (accessed 27 October 2010).
126  Australia is also a Commonwealth realm where the Queen is represented by the 
Governor General.
127  Australian Government Attorney General’s Department (2010) Universal Periodic 
Review  National Report Part II, Online. Available: http://www.ag.gov.au/www/
agd/nsf/Page/Humanrightsandantidiscrimination/InternationalHumanRightsUniversal
PeriodicReview/DraftNationalReport PartII (accessed 27 October 2010).
128  It is worth noting that  lm censorship is not listed under section 51 which provides for 
the legislative powers of the Commonwealth Parliament. See the discussion about the 
law in the Australian system discussed in Chapter 3.
129  For a thorough discussion of the Australian legal system, reference may be made to P. 
Vines, Law and Justice in Australia (2nd edn), Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 
2009; R. Hinchy, The Australian Legal System: History, Institutions and Method, 
Sydney: Pearson Australia, 2008; and D. J. Gifford, Understanding the Australian 
Legal System, Sydney: Cavendish, 1997.
130  Australian Government Attorney General’s Department (2009) The Courts, Online. 
Available: http://www.ag.gov.au/www/agd/agd.nsf/Page/LegalsystemandjusticeThe
Courts (accessed 27 October 2010).
131  Ibid.
132  Coleman v Power [2004] 220 CLR 1, 81 (Kirby J).
133  Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1997) 189 CLR 520, 561.
134  Coleman v Power [2004] 220 CLR 1.
135  See Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1997) 189 CLR 520, 567 8.
136  The phrase ‘in a manner’ was inserted by the High Court in Coleman v Power to substitute 
the phrase ‘the ful lment of’ in the test laid down in Lange v Australian Broadcasting 
Corporation to make the test clearer and to note that the court has a role to review whether 
the approach used in the legislation is reasonably appropriate and adapted.
137  Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation (1997) 189 CLR 520, 567.
138  Australian Bureau of Statistics (2010) Australian Demographic Statistics, Online. Available: 
http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@nsf/mf/3101.0 (accessed 15 December 2010).
139  Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators for Asia and the Paci c 2010 (41st edn), 
Manilla: Asian Development Bank, 2010, p. 132.
140  See section 116 of the Australian Constitution.
141  Australian Bureau of Statistics (2007) 2006 Census QuickStats: Australia, Online. 
Available: http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/ABSNavigation/prenav/LocationList?
newgeography Australia&level1 0&submitbutton View+QuickStats+ (accessed 4 
November 2010).
142  J. L. Bianco, Pluralist Nations: Pluralist Language Policies?, Australian Government 
Department of Immigration and Citizenship (2010), Online. Available: http://www.
immi.gov.au./media/publications/multicultural/confer/04/speech18b.htm (accessed 4 
November 2010). It was noted that: ‘In Australia, English has no de jure status but it 
is so entrenched as the common language that it is de facto the of cial language as 
well as the national language’.
143  The service sector of the economy includes education, tourism and  nancial services.

Notes 165
144  Central Intelligence Agency, United States of America (2012) The World Factbook: 
Australia, Online. Available: http://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the world factbook/
geos/as.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
145  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 3.
146  N. Rattigan, Images of Australia: 100 Films of the New Australian Cinema, Dallas: 
Southern Methodist University Press, 1991, p. 4 and J. Rayner, Contemporary 
Australian Cinema, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2000, p. 4.
147  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 3.
148  Ibid.
149  N. Rattigan, Images of Australia: 100 Films of the New Australian Cinema, Dallas: 
Southern Methodist University Press, 1991, p. 4.
150  Ibid. p. 5.
151  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 4.
152  See T. F. Sheckels, Celluloid Heroes Down Under: Australian Film, 1970 2000, Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 2002, pp. 1 9, J. Rayner, Contemporary Australian Cinema, Manchester: 
Manchester University Press, 2000, pp. 166 79, D. Gonski, Review of Commonwealth 
Assistance to the Film Industry, Canberra: Department of Communications and the Arts 
Australia, 1997, pp. 5 6. See also House of Representatives Standing Committee on 
Environment, Recreation and the Arts, Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, 
Report of the Moving Pictures Inquiry (1992) p.4 and House of Representatives Standing 
Committee on Communications, Information Technology and the Arts, Parliament of the 
Commonwealth of Australia, From Reel to Unreal: Future Opportunities for Australia’s 
Film, Animation, Special Effects and Electronic Games Industries (2004) p. xxvii.
153  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 4.
154  See generally N. Rattigan, Images of Australia: 100 Films of the New Australian 
Cinema, Dallas: Southern Methodist University Press, 1991.
155  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 5.
156  See N. McDonald, ‘Australia’ in W. Luhr (ed.) World Cinema Since 1945, New York: 
Ungar, 1987, pp. 35 61.
157  The name of the scheme came from the relevant tax provisions  Division 10BA of 
Part III of the Income Tax Act 1936.
158  J. Rayner, Contemporary Australian Cinema, Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 2000, p. 168.
159  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 5.
160  For example, Shine grossed more than US$ 89 million at the international box of ce. 
For more examples, see M. A. Reid, More Long Shots: Australian Cinema Successes 
in the 90s, Sydney: Australian Film Commission, 1999, p. 18.
161  T. F. Sheckels, Celluloid Heroes Down Under: Australian Film, 1970 2000, Westport, 
CT: Praeger, 2002, p. 223.
162  J. Rayner, Contemporary Australian Cinema, Manchester: Manchester University 
Press, 2000, p. 178.
163  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 6.
164  Figures include Australian co productions with overseas partners (averaging two co
productions per year): Adapted from Screen Australia (2010) Number of Feature Films 
Produced, Total Production Budgets and Spend in Australia, 1990/91  2008/09, 
Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/gtp/mpfeaturessummary.html 
(accessed 20 April 2011) and Screen Australia (2010) Australian Content: Box Of ce, 
1977 2009, Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/research/statistics/
boxof ceaustralianshare.asp (accessed 20 April 2011).
165  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 6.
166  R. Jones, ‘The Australian Film Distribution and Exhibition Industry and Competition 
Law and Policy’ in M. Alderson (ed.), Current Issues in Film Law, Sydney: Prospect 
Media, 2007, pp. 121 2.

166 Notes
167  Compiled and adapted from Screen Australia (2010) Number of Australian Cinema 
Admissions and Gross Box Of ce, Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.
au/gtp/ wcboadmission.html (accessed 20 April 2011) and Screen Australia (2010) Total 
Screens, Seating Capacity and Theatres in Australia, 1980 2009, Online.  Available: 
http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/gtp/wcsttotal.html (accessed 20 April 2011).
168  Screen Australia (2011) Australian Films at the Local Box Of ce in 2010, Online. 
Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/newsandevents/2011/mr110120boxof ce.
aspx (accessed 15 November 2010).
169  R. Jones, ‘The Australian Film Distribution and Exhibition Industry and Competition 
Law and Policy’ in M. Alderson (ed.), Current Issues in Film Law, Sydney: Prospect 
Media, 2007, p. 129.
170  See B. Hodsdon, Straight Roads and Crossed Lines: The Quest for Film Culture in 
Australia?, Shenton Park, WA: Bernt Porridge Group, 2001, pp. 43 50.
171  The Economics of Films and Television in Australia (published by the AFC in 1993) 
highlighted that ‘apart from the US, at least in the English speaking world, no 
signi cant national  lm industries would exist without government support’ while the 
Review of Commonwealth Assistance to the Film Industry noted that ‘Commonwealth 
assistance has been critical to the building and development of the industry to this level 
of expertise and quality’: D. Gonski, Review of Commonwealth Assistance to the Film 
Industry, Canberra: Department of Communications and the Arts Australia, 1997, p. 5.
      For a discussion of the government’s initiatives to support the  lm industry from 
the 1970s to 1990s, see I. Bertrand, ‘Finance’ in B. McFarlane, G. Mayer and I. 
Bertrand (eds), The Oxford Companion to Australian Film, Melbourne: Oxford 
University Press, 1999, pp. 156 9.
172  These incentives include tax rebates and location cash grants.
173  See Screen Australia (2010) Production Financing Programs, Online. Available: http://
www.screenaustralia.gov.au/industry support/Production.asp for details on eligibility, 
requirements and the selection criteria of Screen Australia’s production  nancing.
174  See Screen Australia (2011) Industry Support, Online. Available: http://www.
screenaustralia.gov.au/industrysupport/GWOverview.asp and Screen Australia (2011) 
Development Programs, Online, Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/ 
industrysupport/Development.asp for details of the four main development support 
programs provided and Screen Australia (2011) Marketing Support Programs, Online. 
Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/industry support/Marketing Support.asp 
for information on the marketing support provided by the agency.
175  Screen Australia works with its overseas counterparts to ensure ef cient administration 
in co production projects. A  lm approved as an of cial co production is regarded as 
a national production of each of the co producing countries and is therefore eligible 
for the incentives available in each of them. Australia had entered into co production 
treaties with the United Kingdom, Canada, Italy, Israel, Germany, China and 
Singapore to facilitate screen productions.
176  Screen Australia (2011) Producer Offset, Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.
gov.au/produceroffset/default.asp (accessed 1 June 2012).
177  The Division 10BA scheme was introduced to encourage private investment in  lm 
projects. Under this scheme, investors will acquire an interest in the copyright of the 
 lm they invested in as well as write off 150 per cent (subsequently reduced to 100 per 
cent) of capital expenditures in the  lm production.
178  Under this scheme, investors will receive a 100 per cent tax concession for buying 
shares in a FLIC company which will in turn invest in a slate of  lm productions.
179  See  Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008, p. 14.
180  Ibid.
181  Screen Australia (2011) Production Incentives Overview, Online. Available: http://
www.afc.gov.au/gtp/mptax.html (accessed 1 June 2012).
182  Ibid.

Notes 167
183  Ibid.
184  Ibid.
185  Malaysian  lms, if ever commercially distributed and exhibited abroad, are con ned 
to the Singaporean and Indonesian markets only.
186  Screen Australia (2010) Domestic Films’ Share of Box Of ce in Australia and Selected 
Other Countries, 2000 2009, Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/
gtp/acompboxof ceozshare.html (accessed 16 November 2010).
187  Screen Australia (2010) Top 20 Countries Ranked by Box Of ce Revenues, 2005 2009, 
Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/research/statistics/acompboxof ce.
asp (accessed 6 May 2011).
188  Screen Australia (2010) Top 20 Countries by Number of Cinema Admissions, 2005 2009, 
Online. Available: http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/research/statistics/acompadmissions.
asp (accessed 6 May 2011).
189  There are  lm market sidebars at Australian  lm festivals but their scale is comparatively 
modest compared to the ones held at the Hong Kong International Film Festival.
190  FINAS occasionally funds nationalistic  lm projects, for example 1957: Hati Malaya 
(1957: Heart of Malaya, Shuhaimi Baba, 2007) was made to commemorate the 50th 
anniversary of the nation’s independence.
3  Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: the laws, 
guidelines and processes
 1  For a concise history of the BBFC and the unique origins of the British  lm censorship 
system, see G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 2007, pp. 817 63, N. M. Hunnings, Film Censors and the Law, London: 
Allen & Unwin, 1967 and Appendix III (entitled ‘The Development of the Film 
Censorship System’) of the Report of the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship 
(Cmnd 7772), London: HMSO, 1979, pp. 190 5.
 2  See E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005, pp. 130 1 and G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet 
& Maxwell, 2007, pp. 34 5. The BBFC classi es  lms for cinema release on behalf of 
the local authorities which license cinemas and classi es videos and DVDs under the 
Video Recordings Act 1984.
 3  For example, in the predominantly Muslim Malaysia, the Malaysian guidelines prohibit 
 lms which give an anti God message that may affect the religious faith of its adherers, 
whereas the Hong Kong guidelines prohibit  lms glorifying the power of triads and 
membership of triad society.
 4  See section 53 of the Film Censorship Act 2002. Early legislation on the control of  lm 
exhibition and distribution were in the form of ordinances and enactments, enacted by the 
British Colonial Government. These regulations were enacted as the Cinematograph Films 
Ordinance No. 76 of 1952. This nomenclature was subsequently changed to Film (Censorship) 
Act 1952 and was enforced in West Malaysia (then Malaya) from 1 May 1954. It was later 
revised and published as Laws of Malaysia (Act 53) on 1 August 1971 and extended to East 
Malaysia. See S. S. Faruqi and S. Ramanathan, Mass Media Laws and Regulations in 
Malaysia, Singapore: Asian Media Information and Communication Centre, 1998, p. 67.
 5  Malaysia, Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 6 December 2001, p. 106 
(Chor Chee Heung, Deputy Minister of Home Affairs).
 6  Sections 1 to 3 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 7  Sections 7 to 10, 15, 19 and 20 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 8  Section 11 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 9  Sections 14, 16 and 17 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
10  Section 18 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
11  Sections 21 to 24 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
12  Section 25 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.

168 Notes
13  Section 26 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
14  Section 28 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
15  Section 27 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
16  The offences include possessing, exhibiting or distributing any  lm that has not been 
approved by the Board of Censors.
17  Section 43 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
18  Sections 53 to 56 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
19  Ministry of Home Affairs, Malaysia (2008) Explanatory Statement of the Film 
Censorship Act  2002, Online. Available: http://www.moha.gov.my/eng/3rdLevel.
asp?tt 32&parentid 587&content ID (accessed 11 March 2009).
20  See Chapter 7 for a discussion of, and criticism on, the new guidelines.
21  It is not uncommon in Malaysia for plans to be announced and projects launched that 
do not lead to any subsequent concrete actions and enforcement.
22  The Pan Malaysian Islamic Party, the Malaysian Youth Council and the Federation of 
Malaysian Consumers Associations were among those that objected to the self
regulation scheme proposed by the Home Ministry. They argued that the country is not 
ready for self censorship.
23  Section 19C reads: ‘The Minister may from time to time give the Board, the Committee 
of Appeal and the Assessment Committee directions of a general character not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as to the exercise of their powers and duties 
which appears to him may affect the government policy relating to public exhibition of 
 lms and the Board, the Committee of Appeal and the Assessment Committee shall 
give effect to all such directions’, whereas section 28(2)(c) reads:
     ‘Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), such regulations may provide 
for all or any of the following matters  (c) the procedure of the Board, Committee of 
Appeal and Assessment Committee in relation to the censoring and review of  lms’.
24  It should be noted that the Guidelines were drawn up in Malay and there is no of cial 
English version. Therefore, quotations from the Guidelines are the author’s translation. 
The Guidelines are not available to the public, but are kindly provided by the Home 
Ministry with an understanding that the provisions will not be reproduced or published 
elsewhere in full.
25  The Rukunegara is Malaysia’s national ideology, proclaimed on 31 August 1970. The 
 ve principles enunciated therein are: Belief in God; Loyalty to the King and Country; 
Upholding the Constitution; Sovereignty of the Law; and Good Behaviour and Morality.
26  The appendix to the Guidelines also states that censors must understand the provisions 
of the Sedition Act 1948 to avoid  lms from being manipulated to cause racial 
disharmony in Malaysia.
27  See Chapter 5 for the  lm practitioners’ comments on censorship guidelines.
28  Interview with Hussain Sha e, Chairman of the Board of Censors (Putrajaya, 6 January 
2009).
29  See also sections 12 and 13 of the Film Censorship Act 2002 for provisions on retention 
and return, and disposal of  lms that have been refused approval for exhibition.
30  Section 10(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
31  Section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
32  Section 11(2) provides that if any  lm is delivered to its owner for the purpose of 
making alteration, the owner must return the  lm to the Board within the time speci ed 
together with the excised parts of the  lm if the alteration is by way of excision.
33  Films classi ed 18SG, 18SX, 18PA and 18PL are legally restricted to persons of 18 
years of age and over.
34  If the  lm owner intends to make duplicate copies of a  lm that has been certi ed under 
section 14, the owner must submit a statutory declaration to the Board of Censors in accordance 
with section 16 stating the intention to do so, the number of duplicate copies to be made, and 
that the duplicate copies are to be made from the  lm approved by the Board. A censorship 
certi cate will be issued under section 17 to each of the duplicate copies of the  lm.

Notes 169
35  See sections 14 and 18 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
36  ‘Film publicity material’ is de ned under section 3 of the Film Censorship Act 2002 as 
to include ‘the original or duplicate of the whole or any part of a picture, photograph, 
poster,  gure, handbill, slide, newspaper advertisement and other form of advertisement 
printed or recorded on any material and intended to publicize a  lm’.
37  Section 19(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
38  Section 19(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
39  Section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
40  Section 21(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
41  Paragraph 9 of the Schedule to the Film Censorship Act 2002.
42  Section 23 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
43  Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions is explored in Chapter 6.
44  Prior to the enactment of the Film Censorship Ordinance, censorship of  lms was 
regulated under the Places of Public Entertainment Ordinance (Cap. 172) under which 
the Film Censorship Regulations 1953 were made. The principles of  lm censorship 
were stated in the Film Censorship Standards, published by the Hong Kong Government.
45  J. Chan, ‘Film Censorship Ordinance 1988’, Hong Kong Law Journal, 18, 1988, 457.
46  See F. Ching, ‘Hong Kong Plays Political Censor for China’, Asian Wall Street Journal 
(Hong Kong), 17 March 1987, p. 1.
47  See A. H. Y. Chen, ‘Some Re ections on the ‘Film Censorship Affair’’, Hong Kong 
Law Journal, 17, 1987, 352 and J. Chan, ‘Freedom of Expression: Censorship and 
Obscenity’, in R. Wacks (ed.) Civil Liberties in Hong Kong, Hong Kong: Oxford 
University Press, 1988, p. 208.
48  Pending the enactment of the Ordinance, a new set of Film Censorship Regulations 
which revokes and replaced the existing de cient Film Censorship Regulations 1953 
was gazetted.
49  Section 10(2)(c) requires censors to consider when determining the suitability of a  lm 
for exhibition, whether there is a likelihood that the exhibition of the  lm would 
seriously damage good relations with other territories. This provision justi ed what is 
referred to as ‘political censorship’ in Hong Kong and it is seen as applicable mainly to 
 lms which could offend or embarrass the People’s Republic of China. See J. Chan, 
‘Freedom of Expression: Censorship and Obscenity’, in R. Wacks (ed.) Civil Liberties 
in Hong Kong, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1988, p. 216. Section 10(2)(c) 
was repealed in 1994 by the Film Censorship (Amendment) Ordinance 1994.
50  For further discussion of this point, see J. Chan, ‘Film Censorship Ordinance 1988’, 
Hong Kong Law Journal, 18, 1988, 457. Section 10(3)(d) was later repealed in 1994 by 
the Film Censorship (Amendment) Ordinance 1994.
51  Sections 1 and 2 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
52  Section 3 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
53  Sections 4 and 5 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
54  Section 6 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
55  Sections 8 to 11 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
56  Sections 12 to 14 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
57  Section 12 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
58  Section 13 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
59  Sections 15A to 15J of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
60  Section 15K of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
61  Section 16 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
62  Sections 17 to 19 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
63  Sections 20 to 33 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
64  Section 20 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
    Films classi ed as Category III are approved for exhibition and distribution only to 
persons who have attained the age of 18 years. This provision makes the Category III 
classi cation legally enforceable and not merely advisory in nature.

170 Notes
65  Sections 21 and 22 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
66  Paragraph 2 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
67  See the discussion of the censorship processes in the Hong Kong system for the provisions.
68  Paragraph 7 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
69  Paragraph 10 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
70  Paragraph 25 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
    Such acknowledgement coupled with the fact that most contentious contents are not 
prohibited if they can be justi ed in the context of the  lm would encourage  lmmakers 
to depict the reality of everyday life (and be critical of existing social problems) as well 
as to strive for realism in their  lms.
71  See the discussion of the Hong Kong censorship guidelines in Chapter 4 for the list of 
prohibited  lm content.
72  The classes of  lm suitable for exemption include cultural, educational, promotional, 
sports, travel, musical and religious  lms.
73  Paragraph 48 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
    A  lm title may be rejected if it: (a) is likely to cause deep shock or disgust; (b) is 
likely to corrupt morals; (c) is likely to promote, incite or encourage crime, violence 
and drug use; (d) contains insulting or sexually suggestive wording or symbols; (e) 
contains coarse language, expressions with sexual connotations or sexual references; 
(f) contains triad expressions or signs; or (g) is likely to incite hatred or denigration on 
grounds of racial, religious, national or sexual differences.
74  Paragraphs 52 and 53 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
75  Paragraph 59 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
76  Paragraph 60 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
77  See the section on the Hong Kong system in Chapter 4 for a discussion of the exemption 
of  lms from censorship.
78  The statement and declaration are to be made in the Film Submission Form. The 
Authority may refuse to accept a submission if the  lm has been classi ed under the 
Control of Obscene and Indecent Articles Ordinance (COIAO) or if any submission 
requirement is not complied with.
79  Section 10(1) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
80  Censors are statutorily bound to consider the matters stated under section 10(2) and to 
take into account the matters stated under section 10(3). Failure to do so may be a 
ground to quash the resulting censorship decision by way of judicial review.
81  Section 10(6)(a) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
     What normally transpires is that the censor will view the submitted  lm with the assigned 
advisers. Thereafter, the censor will highlight the contentious contents and censorship 
elements that appeared in the  lm to the advisers before they  ll in a form which consists 
of three basic questions: ‘Is the  lm suitable for public exhibition?’; ‘If yes, under which 
category it should be classi ed in?’; and ‘Does the  lm needs to undergo any excision 
before it is released in that classi cation category?’ Further discussion with the advisers 
will be held, if necessary, before the censor proceeds to make his or her decision: Interview 
with Rose May Li, Principal Entertainment Standards Control Of cer (Film), Television 
and Entertainment Licensing Authority (Hong Kong, 24 March 2009). It is important to 
note that on 1 April 2012, the Of ce for Film, Newspaper and Article Administration of the 
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region was established to take over 
the functions of the Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority in relation to  lm 
censorship, control of obscene and indecent articles and newspaper registration.
82  Section 10(6)(a) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
83  Section 10(6)(b) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
     The most common entity consulted by censors is the Hong Kong police force where 
advice is sought in relation to  lms portraying triad activities: Interview with Rose May Li, 
Principal Entertainment Standards Control Of cer (Film), Television and Entertainment 
Licensing Authority (Hong Kong, 24 March 2009).

Notes 171
 84  See section 10(6) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 85  Section 13(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 86  Section 13(3) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 87  Section 13(4)(a) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 88  Section 15A of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 89  ‘Advertising material’ is de ned under section 2 of the Film Censorship Ordinance as 
‘a display,  gure,  lm, poster, picture or text used or intended to be used for the 
purpose of advertising  (a) a  lm which is exhibited or intended for exhibition; (b) a 
videotape or a laserdisc which is published or intended for publication’.
 90  Section 15K (5) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 91  Section 15K (6) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 92  Paragraph 54 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
 93  Paragraph 55 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors. For the list of contents 
not permitted in  lm advertising materials, see the same paragraph of the Film 
Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
 94  Section 10(6) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 95  See sections 16(3), 17(6), 18(7) and 19(8) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 96  Section 17(3) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 97  Section 18(2)(b) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 99  Section 18(8) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
100  Section 18(4) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
101  Section 19(2A) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
102  Sections 17(3)(c), 18(4)(c) and 19(5)(c) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
103  Sections 17(4), 18(5) and 19(6) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
104  See Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enforcement) Act 1995 
(Vic), Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) (Enactment) Act 1995 
(ACT), Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 
1995 (NSW), Classi cation of Publications, Films and Computer Games Act (NT), 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995 (SA), 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995 (Tas) 
and Censorship Act 1996 (WA).
      Every state and territory with the exception of South Australia has adopted the 
classi cation arrangement. The South Australian Classi cation (Publications, Films and 
Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995 established the South Australian Classi cation 
Council, which has the power to reclassify  lms and override decisions made by the 
Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board. See section 3 of the 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Enforcement Act 1995 (SA).
      In 2005, the South Australian Classi cation Council reclassi ed 9 Songs (Michael 
Winterbottom) from R18+ (given by the Classi cation Review Board) to X18+, 
thereby banning the  lm in the state.
105  This cooperative scheme is underpinned by an Intergovernmental Agreement on 
Censorship made between the Commonwealth and all states and territories.
106  For a detailed history of  lm censorship in Australia from the 1900s to the 1970s, see 
I. Bertrand, Film Censorship in Australia, Queensland: University of Queensland 
Press, 1978.
107  The Customs (Cinematograph Films) Regulations were repealed by section 98 of the 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
108  Daryl Williams, ‘From Censorship to Classi cation’ (Speech delivered at Murdoch 
University, Western Australia, 31 October 1997).
      The ‘mess’ can be illustrated by this example  each censorship decision was made 
under up to 13 separate pieces of legislation in the various jurisdictions and there were 
numerous differences between each of these pieces of legislation, one of which is the 
matters to be considered in making a decision. Therefore, a  lm could be banned in 
some states and not in the others.

172 Notes
109  Australian Law Reform Commission, Censorship Procedure, Report No.55, Sydney: 
Australian Law Reform Commission, 1991, 2.13.
110  Commonwealth, Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 22 September 
1994, p. 1381 (Michael Lavarch, Attorney General).
111  Sections 1 to 6A of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
112  Sections 7 and 8 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995 respectively.
113  Section 14 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
114  Sections 29 to 37 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
115  Sections 38 to 41 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
116  Sections 42 to 44B of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995.
117  Section 42 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
118  Section 43 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
119  Section 44 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
120  Sections 45 to 51 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
121  Sections 72 to 76 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
122  Sections 87A and 87B of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995.
123  Section 93 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995. 
See for example the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Regulations 2005 which primarily deal with fees for classi cation and review 
applications. In addition, the regulations also provide for the maximum number of 
members of the Classi cation Board and the computation of time within which the 
Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board are to make their decisions.
124  Sections 94 to 98 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
125  It is noteworthy that the ALRC does not make recommendations on exactly how the 
provisions of the proposed Classi cation of Media Content Act should be drafted.
126  Australian Law Reform Commission, Classi cation  Content Regulation and Convergent 
Media (ALRC Report 118), Sydney: Australian Law Reform Commission, 2012.
127  It is recommended that the new scheme based upon the Classi cation of Media 
Content Act should be enacted pursuant to the legislative power of the Parliament of 
Australia and not as part of any new cooperative scheme. It is also recommended that 
the Australian Government should be responsible for the enforcement of classi cation 
laws and a regime of offences and penalties.
128  It may be noted that the review is sparked by the greater scale of media convergence 
and the volume of media content available to, and consumed by, the public. The review 
emphasizes technological change, particularly regarding the internet. It is worth noting 
that in Australia, a  lm may be subject to up to four different regulatory requirements: 
as it is exhibited in cinemas ( lms are classi ed separately for 2D and 3D versions), 
sold or rented in DVD format, accessed online and broadcast on television.
129  The ALRC recommends that feature  lms for cinema release must be classi ed by the 
Classi cation Board while feature  lms not for cinema release (for example,  lms on 
DVD) may be classi ed by the Board or by authorized industry classi ers.
130  The ALRC recommends that the current prohibition of the two following contents be 
reviewed: the depiction of sexual fetishes in  lms and ‘detailed instruction in the use 
of proscribed drugs’. It is also recommended that the prohibition on content that 
‘promotes, incites or instructs in matters of crime’ be con ned to ‘serious crime’.

Notes 173
131  The ALRC recommends that the Classi cation Board, rather than the Classi cation 
Review Board, be responsible for reviewing classi cation decisions, that is, to make a 
new classi cation decision in response to an application for review.
132  Sections 12(2) and 12(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995.
133  Des Clark, ‘A Practical Response to Classi cation of Convergent Media in the 
Australian Context: The Combined Guidelines for Films and Computer Games’, 
(Speech delivered at the International Ratings Conference 2003: Classi cation in a 
Convergent World, Sydney, 23 September 2003). The OFLC was abolished on 1 July 
2007. Its functions were transferred to the new Classi cation Policy Branch and 
Classi cation Operations Branch of the Attorney General’s Department.
134  Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games.
135  Emphasis added.
136  See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the exemption of  lms from classi cation in the 
Australian system.
137  Besides submitting a  lm for classi cation under section 14, an application may be 
made under section 28A for a certi cate that the  lm is an exempt  lm.
138  One of the indications would be the controversy that the  lm had caused in other 
countries. A panel will normally consist of three classi ers but for controversial  lms, 
a larger panel of  ve or seven classi ers will be set up to examine the  lm: Interview 
with Greg Scott, Deputy Director of the Classi cation Board (telephone interview, 20 
July 2010).
139  Section 57(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
140  Section 8 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
      Section 21 provides that if a classi ed  lm is subsequently modi ed, the  lm 
becomes unclassi ed when the modi cation is made.
141  Section 9 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
142  The Code also contains a table which sets out each of the classi cation categories and 
a corresponding description of the types of content that will fall within those categories.
143  The insertion of the quali cation ‘as far as possible’ recognizes that there are situations 
when other community concerns or considerations take priority over the general 
freedom of adults to ‘read, hear and see what they want’. See Chapter 4 for the types 
of  lm content that are prohibited in Australia.
144  Films classi ed X18+ can only be exhibited and distributed in the Northern Territory 
and the Australian Capital Territory. Additionally, depiction of violence, sexual 
violence, sexualized violence or coercion is not allowed in X18+  lms. For high level 
sex scenes, the dividing criteria between the R18+ and X18+ classi cations is that, if 
it is a real depiction of sexual intercourse or other sexual activity, it should be classi ed 
X18+ whereas if the sex scene is simulated, it will be classi ed R18+. It is provided 
in the R18+ section of the Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer 
Games that: ‘Sexual activity may be realistically simulated. The general rule is 
“simulation, yes  the real thing, no”’.
     The case of Adultshop.Com Ltd v Members of the Classi cation Review Board and 
anor.[2008] 169 FCR 31 disclosed that the Classi cation Review Board considers that 
most reasonable adults would accept an exception to the general rule so as to permit an 
R18+ classi cation for explicit sexual activity where the  lm has artistic or other merits 
(see section 11 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995) 
and the actual sex is not prolonged or detailed, having regard to the context of the  lm. 
For example, The Piano Teacher (Michael Haneke, 2001) which contains scenes of actual 
sexual activity was classi ed R18+ instead of X18+ because of the artistic merits of the 
 lm: Interview with Greg Scott, Deputy Director of the Classi cation Board (telephone 
interview, 20 July 2010). Other examples include Romance (Catherine Breillat, 1999) 
which was classi ed R18+ by the Classi cation Review Board (the Classi cation Board 
initially classi ed it RC) although it contains actual depictions of fellatio and masturbation. 

174 Notes
The Classi cation Review Board made an exception to the general rule of ‘simulation, 
yes  the real thing, no’ due to the consideration of the  lm’s artistic merits. See B. Harris, 
‘Censorship: A Comparative Approach Offering a New Theoretical Basis for Classi cation 
in Australia’, (2005) 8 Canberra Law Review, 8, 2005 pp. 51 2.
     The BBFC also accepts that  lms with artistic merit would be classi ed 18 although 
they contain actual rather than simulated sex. Two examples that can be highlighted here 
are Michael Winterbottom’s 9 Songs and John Cameron Mitchell’s Shortbus. See G. 
Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, p. 856.
145  Section 20 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995. 
Consumer advice will describe the strongest elements in the  lm and indicates the 
intensity of those elements.
146  Section 25(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
147  Section 25(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
148  A classi cation marking has three components  the classi cation symbol, classi cation 
description, and consumer advice.
149  Australian Government  Classi cation (2009) How to apply for classi cation of 
public exhibition  lms, Online. Available: http://www.classi cation.gov.au/special.
html?n 278&p 83 (accessed 15 February 2009).
150  Sections 29 to 37 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995. See also section 5 for the de nition of ‘advertisement’.
151  Section 29(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
152  Section 29(6) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
153   Section 32(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
      The Board may grant a certi cate of exemption under section 33 if it is of the opinion 
that if the  lm is classi ed, it would not be classi ed RC, X18+ or R18+. See section 
33(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
154  Section 42(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995 provides that if a participating state or territory minister asks the Commonwealth 
Minister to apply for a review of a decision, the Commonwealth Minister must make 
the application. The Commonwealth Minister in this case is the Commonwealth 
Attorney General while the participating ministers are the Attorneys General for New 
South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia, Queensland 
and the Australian Capital Territory and the Minister for Justice and Attorney General 
for the Northern Territory.
      Two recent examples where decisions made by the Classi cation Board were 
reviewed by the Classi cation Review Board in response to applications made by this 
category of persons are the decisions on Serbian Film (Srdjan Spasojevic, 2010) and 
The Human Centipede II (Tom Six, 2011). The former was classi ed R18+ (Restricted) 
by the Classi cation Board but a three member panel of the Classi cation Review 
Board by unanimous decision determined that the  lm be classi ed RC (Refused 
Classi cation). According to the Review Board’s media release dated 19 September 
2011, the panel was of the opinion that the  lm ‘could not be accommodated within 
the R18+ classi cation as the level of depictions of sexual violence, themes of incest 
and depictions of child sexual abuse in the  lm has an impact which is very high and 
not justi ed by context’. The  lm is about a pornographic actor who accepts a job to 
appear in a snuff movie  nanced by a reclusive millionaire. It was reported that the 
 lm included scenes of sexual violence, child molestation and necrophilia. The latter 
 lm was also classi ed R18+ (Restricted) by the Classi cation Board but the 
Classi cation Review Board later determined that the  lm be classi ed RC. The 
Review Board in its reasons for the decision (published on the Classi cation website 
at www.classi cation.gov.au) noted that The Human Centipede II could not be 
accommodated within the R18+ classi cation as the level of depictions of violence in 
the  lm had an impact which was ‘very high’ and contained gratuitous, exploitative 
and offensive depictions of violence (including sexual violence). The Review Board 

Notes 175
was of the opinion that the contentious scenes were ‘lacking in artistic, moral or other 
values’ and they contravened ‘the standards of morality, decency and propriety 
generally accepted by reasonable adults’. In this  lm, the lead character kidnaps 12 
victims to create a ‘human centipede’ by surgically joining them mouth to anus. In 
the process, the main character tortures his victims with bashing, stabbing and 
shooting. The  lm’s violent content includes scenes of brutal cutting of throats, 
mutilation of  esh and rape.
155  Section 43(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
156  Section 43(3)(a) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
157  Section 43(3)(b) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
158  Section 43(4) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
159  Section 44 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
160  Australian Government  Classi cation (2009) Classi cation Review Board, Online. 
Available: http://www.classi cation.gov.au/special.html?n 251&p 62 (accessed 15 
February 2009).
161  Section 78 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
162  Section 79(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
163  Section 26(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
164  Section 25(1A) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
165  Section 25(1B) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
4 Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: the key issues
 1  Home Ministry, Malaysia (2009) Home Ministry Notice, Online. Available: http://
www.moha.gov.my (accessed 12 May 2009).
 2  Interview with Hussain Sha e, Chairman of the Board of Censors (Putrajaya, 6 January 
2009).
 3  Ibid.
 4  The four ex of cio members are the representative of the Inspector General of Police, 
the representative of the Secretary General of the Home Ministry, the representative of 
the Secretary General of the Ministry of Information and the representative of the 
Director General of Education.
 5  Interview with Hussain Sha e, Chairman of the Board of Censors (Putrajaya, 6 January 
2009).
 6  Emphasis added.
 7  Section 25(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 8  Interview with Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 
2008).
 9  The word ‘ lm’ is de ned in the Film Censorship Act 2002 as to include the ‘original 
or duplicate of the whole or any part of a cinematograph  lm, a videotape, diskette, 
laser disc, compact disc, hard disc, and other record, of a sequence of visual images, 
being a record capable of being used as a means of showing that sequence as a moving 
picture, whether or not accompanied by sound’.
     The Act is not applicable to any  lm published, circulated, exhibited or distributed 
on the internet. See section 2(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
10  The Board of Censors is empowered to impose conditions subject to which the certi cate 
of exemption is issued. See sections 7 and 8(4) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
11  The Film Censorship Act 2002 did not provide for classi cation categories. Section 15 
of the Act merely provides that ‘the Board may, before issuing a certi cate [of approval] 
under section 14, classify the  lm in such manner as may be prescribed’.
12  Paragraph 1(vii), section E of the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993.

176 Notes
13  The Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 are issued in Malay and there is no of cial 
English version. The provisions quoted in this book are therefore the author’s translation.
14  ‘Alteration’ is de ned under section 3 of the Film Censorship Act 2002 as to include 
‘excision, addition, deletion, erasure, reconstruction or removal of scenes, dialogues, or 
sound, in totality or in part, of a  lm, and also includes the insertion or amendment of 
subtitles in a  lm’.
15  Section 10(1)(b) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
16  See for example the Supreme Court’s decision in Minister of Labour, Malaysia v Chan 
Meng Yuen [1992] 2 MLJ 337. However, when an impugned administrative decision 
adversely affects a fundamental right such as the right to livelihood, then constitutional 
review will come into play where articles 5(1) and 8(1) of the Federal Constitution may 
be relied on as the authority to demand for procedural fairness which includes the 
provision of reasoned decision. See the cases of Hong Leong Equipment Sdn Bhd v 
Liew Fook Chuan [1996] 1 MLJ 481 and Sivarasa Rasiah v Badan Peguam Malaysia 
& Anor [2010] 2 MLJ 333.
17  Section 21(1) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
18  Section 21(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
19  Malaysia, Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 6 December 2001, p.106 
(Chor Chee Heung, Deputy Home Minister).
20  Article 5(1) reads: ‘No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty save in 
accordance with law’, while article 10(1)(a) reads: ‘Subject to clauses (2), (3) and (4), 
every citizen has the right to freedom of speech and expression’. The word ‘life’ in 
article 5(1) was interpreted by the courts so as to include the right to livelihood. See Tan 
Tek Seng v Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan [1996] 1 MLJ 261 and Lee Kwan 
Woh v Public Prosecutor [2009] 5 MLJ 301.
21  The Panel of Censors are therefore not  lled with retired government of cers.
22  Section 4(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
23  Section 10(6)(a) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
24  Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority, Government of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region, Film Censorship Requirements (2009) Available: 
http://www.tela.gov.hk/english/ about4 org e.htm (accessed 14 February 2009). Any 
Hong Kong citizen above the age of 18 and pro cient in both Chinese and English 
languages may apply to be appointed as an adviser.
25  In 2009, this group is made up of two lawyers, two academics, two members from the 
business and commerce sector, a district councillor, a director of a social welfare 
organization and a representative from the  lm industry: Interview with Rose May Li, 
Principal Entertainment Standards Control Of cer (Film), Television and Entertainment 
Licensing Authority (Hong Kong, 24 March 2009).
26  Section 16(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
27  Rose May Li (2011) ‘Members of the Panel of Censors’. E mail (3 May 2011).
28  Ibid.
29  ‘Film’ is de ned under section 2 of the Ordinance as ‘(a) a cinematograph  lm and 
includes any sound track associated with such  lm; (b) a videotape or laserdisc and 
includes any sound track associated with such videotape or laserdisc; (c) a still  lm and 
includes any sound track associated with such  lm; (d) any other record of visual 
moving images that is capable of being used for the subsequent screening of those 
images and includes any sound track associated with such record; (e) any combination 
of the  lms referred to in paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d); or an excerpt or part of a  lm 
referred to in paragraph (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e)’.
30  Section 7 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
31  Section 9(3) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
32  Section 29(1)(d) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
33  The provision reads: ‘(2) The censor shall as soon as practicable view the  lm and 
consider the following matters for the purpose of making his decision under subsection 

Notes 177
(4): (a) whether the  lm portrays, depicts or treats cruelty, torture, violence, crime, 
horror, disability, sexuality or indecent or offensive language or behaviour; and (b) 
whether the  lm denigrates or insults any particular class of the public by reference to 
the colour, race, religious belief or ethnic or national origins or the sex of the members 
of that class’.
34  Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority, Government of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region (2009) Vision, Mission and Values, Online. Available: 
http://www.tela.gov.hk/english/ about.htm (accessed 14 February 2009); Of ce for 
Film, Newspaper and Article Administration, Government of the Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region (2012) Vision, Mission and Values, Online. Available: http://
www.ofnaa.gov.hk/eng/aboutus/ aboutus1.htm (accessed 1 June 2012).
35  Public opinion surveys on  lm censorship standards in Hong Kong are conducted 
biennially. The most recent survey was conducted in 2011 and the reports are available 
upon request from the Of ce of Film, Newspaper and Article Administration, 
Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.
36  Rose May Li (2010) ‘Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors 1999’. E mail (22 
November 2010).
37  Paragraph 31 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
38  See paragraphs 2, 30, 31, 32 and 36 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
39  See paragraphs 14 to 19, 23, 27, 34 and 37 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
40  Emphasis added.
41  Paragraph 38(a) of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
42  Paragraph 24 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
43  Paragraph 31 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors. The term ‘hard core 
pornography’ is not de ned in the Guidelines. It is renowned as a dif cult term to de ne 
and indeed in the US Supreme Court case of Jacobellis v Ohio, Justice Stewart conceded 
that he could never succeed in intelligibly de ning the term ‘obscenity’ but went on to note 
that ‘I know it when I see it’: 378 US 184 (1964) 197. However, of more importance for 
this book is the evidence from interviews that suggests there is a clear understanding of the 
term by  lm practitioners as it is applied; see Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ comments.
44  Paragraph 38(d) of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
45  Paragraph 41 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
46  See the section on the Hong Kong System in Chapter 3 for a discussion of the censorship 
process.
47  See the section on alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category in 
Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong interviewees’ comments.
48  Section 8(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
49  Section 17 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
50  Section 18 of the Film Censorship Ordinance
51  Section 19 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
52  Section 49(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
     There are part time members as well in the Board, see section 49(2) of the 
Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
53  Australian Government  Classi cation (2011) Classi cation Board Members, Online. 
Available: http://www.classi cation.gov.au/www/cob/classi cation.nsf/Page/Classi cation
Whoweare/Classi cationBoard Classi cationBoardMembers (accessed 11 May 2011). See 
also section 47 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
54  Temporary members may be appointed by the Minister for the ef cient dispatch of the 
Board’s business. A temporary member is appointed for a maximum period of three 
months. See section 50 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995.
55  Section 48(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
56  Section 48(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995. Other than the requirement that the membership is ‘broadly representative of the 

178 Notes
Australian community’, the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995 places no other requirement upon appointment to the Board. Members are 
drawn from diverse backgrounds and locality and recruitment advertisements are 
placed in newspapers to invite the public to apply to be a member/classi er.
57  Section 48(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
58  Section 51(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
59  Section 51(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
60  Section 65(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
61  Section 65(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
62  Section 73 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
63  Section 74(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
64  As is the case with the Board, the law does not stipulate any other requirement for 
appointment to the Review Board.
65  Section 74(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
66  Section 73 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
67  Section 76(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
68  Section 76(3) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
69  Australian Government  Classi cation (2010) Classi cation Review Board, Online. 
Available: http://www.classi cation.gov.au/special.html?n 251&p 62 (accessed 15 
February 2010).
70  Section 77 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
71  Australian Government  Classi cation (2011) Classi cation Review Board Members, 
Online. 
Available: 
http://www.classi cation.gov.au/www/cob/classi cation.nsf/Page/
Classi cation Australia/whoweare/Classi cationBoardClassi cationReviewBoardMembers 
(accessed 11 May 2011).
72  Section 83(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
73  Section 83(2) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
74  Sections 67 and 85 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
75  Australian Law Reform Commission, Classi cation 
 Content Regulation and 
Convergent Media, Sydney: Australian Law Reform Commission, 2012, p. 149.
76  ‘Film’ is de ned under section 5 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 as to include ‘a cinematograph  lm, a slide, video tape and video disc 
and any other form of recording from which a visual image, including a computer 
generated image, can be produced (together with its soundtrack), but does not include: (a) 
a computer game; or (b) an advertisement for a publication, a  lm or a computer game’.
77  Section 5B(3) provides that a  lm is not an exempt  lm if it contains an advertisement 
that has been refused approval, or an advertisement for a  lm that has been classi ed M 
or a higher classi cation, or contains material that would be likely to cause the  lm to 
be classi ed M or a higher classi cation.
78  See section 5B(1) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995 for the full description of each type of exempt  lm.
79  Section 28C of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
80  See sections 48 and 74 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995.
81  Australian Government Attorney General’s Department (2010) Research, Online. 
Available: http://www.ag.gov.au/www/agd/agd.nsf/Page/Classi cationpolicy research 
(accessed 8 October 2010).
82  For example, the 2004 Community Assessment Panel rounds were conducted in 
Canberra, Alice Springs and Melbourne and the outcome showed ‘a high level of 
agreement between the Community Assessment Panels and the Classi cation Board’: 
Australian Government Attorney General’s Department (2010) Research, Online. 
Available: http://www.ag.gov.au/www/agd/agd.nsf/Page/Classi cationpolicy research 
(accessed 8 October 2010).

Notes 179
 83  For the Community Assessment Panel and other research and survey reports, see the 
Attorney General’s Department: Classi cation Policy Research website at http://
www.ag.gov.au/www/agd/agd.nsf/Page/Classi cationpolicy research.
 84  The Of ce of Film and Literature Classi cation received more than 370 submissions 
from the  lm industry and the public.
     In Adultshop.Com Ltd. v Members of the Classi cation Review Board and anor. 
[2008] 169 FCR 31 the Australian Federal Court held the view that the guidelines, 
‘promulgated by elected Government representatives after community consultation’, 
were ‘broadly representative of the current community standards’.
 85  See the Guidelines for the Classi cation of Films and Computer Games for the complete 
description of all the classi able elements in the various classi cation categories.
 86  The word ‘themes’ is de ned in the Guidelines as to mean ‘social issues such as 
crime, suicide, drug and alcohol dependency, death, serious illness, family breakdown 
and racism’.
 87  It may be noted that these contents are considered obscene by the standards of the 
contemporary Australian society and, hence, not suitable to be released.
 88  Interview with Greg Scott, Deputy Director of the Classi cation Board (Telephone 
interview, 20 July 2010).
 89  Ibid.
 90  See for example the High Court’s decision in Public Service Board of New South 
Wales v Osmond (1986) 159 CLR 656.
 91  Section 5 of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 laid down the 
grounds of judicial review.
 92  Section 13(2) of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977.
 93  This right is subject to the request being made in writing within the prescribed time 
frame. See section 13(5) of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977.
 94  See generally the website www.classi cation.gov.au. However, reasons for decisions 
made by the Classi cation Board are not published on the website.
 95  By virtue of section 42(2), this category also includes the state and territory ministers.
 96  Section 5 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 
de nes ‘publish’ as to include ‘sell, offer for sale, let on hire, exhibit, distribute and 
demonstrate’.
 97  Section 42A of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
     The Classi cation website de ned ‘person aggrieved’ as someone who can 
demonstrate an interest in the subject matter of the  lm in question that extends 
beyond that of an ordinary member of the public: Australian Government 
 
Classi cation (2009) Classi cation Review Board, Online. Available: http://www.
classi cation.gov.au/special.html?n 251&p 62 (accessed 15 February 2009).
      An example of application for review initiated under the category ‘person aggrieved 
by the decision’ is the application made by three non pro t groups who sought to have 
the  lm Lolita (Adrian Lyne, 1997) banned in Australia. However, the Review Board 
declined to deal with the application on several grounds, one of which is that these 
groups did not qualify as ‘aggrieved persons’. For an account of this application, see 
T. Gutman, ‘Lolita’s Lesson Learned’, Communications Update, 155, 1999, 18.
 98  Section 42 has caused worries amongst censorship watch groups and  lm activists 
because subsection (3) gave standing to apply for review only to persons or organizations 
whose activities relate to the contentious aspects of the  lm’s themes or subject matter 
but shuts out those whose purposes and activities relate to freedom of expression. See 
D. Marr, ‘Censored: Attorney General vs. “aggrieved persons”’, Art + Law, 9, 2001, 3.
 99  Sections 19 and 44 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) 
Act 1995.
100  Australian Government  Classi cation (2009) Classi cation Review Board, Online. 
Available: http://www.classi cation.gov.au/special.html?n 251&p 62 (accessed 15 
February 2009).

180 Notes
101  See Chapter 1 for a discussion of the legal literature about freedom of expression and 
censorship.
102  F. Schauer, ‘The Ontology of Censorship’, in R. C. Post (ed.) Censorship and 
Silencing, Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute for the History of Art and the 
Humanities, 1998, p. 162.
103  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 
p. 122.
104  In Australia,  lms have been censored on the basis of the views of reasonable adults 
in the community since the 1970s, while in Hong Kong,  lms have been censored 
based on the standards of the community brought to light by public opinion surveys 
since the late 1980s.
     See also Crowe v Graham (1968) 121 CLR 375 where the High Court emphasized 
offence to community standards as a determinant for censorship.
105  For an interesting discussion of the types of content censored under the British system, 
see G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 
2007, pp. 845 57.
106  See the sections on Malaysian  lm censorship guidelines in Chapters 4 and 7.
107  See sections 3 and 10 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
108  See the section on alteration to  lms and determination of classi cation category in 
Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong interviewees’ responses.
109  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 
p. 122.
5  Film censorship systems in Malaysia, Hong Kong and Australia: the practitioners’ 
opinions and experiences
 1  Interview with Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 
2009).
 2  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
 3  Interview with Lorna Tee,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
 4  Besides Susuk, Histeria (Hysteria, James Lee, 2009) a horror  lm produced by another 
established mainstream  lm production company was classi ed ‘U’ (suitable for all 
ages) with very minimal excision, a decision which surprised even the  lm’s director 
himself who expected more cuts to be required by the censors and the  lm to be 
classi ed in a restricted category. Interview with James Lee,  lm director and producer 
(Kuala Lumpur, 19 December 2008).
 5  Interview with Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 
December 2008).
 6  Interview with Yasmin Ahmad,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 6 January 2009).
 7  Muallaf (The Convert, 2008) was  nally released in Malaysia on 24 December 2009 after 
more than a year of entanglement with the censorship authority and alterations being made 
to it. Sadly, the director did not live to see her  lm released theatrically in her country.
 8  Interview with Ahmad Puad Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 
December 2008).
 9  Interview with Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 
December 2008).
10  Interview with Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 September 
2009).
11  Interview with Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008).
12  Interviews with Khoo Eng Yow,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008) and Tsai Ming liang (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009).
13  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008) and Ruhani 
Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008).

Notes 181
14  Interviews with Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008) and 
Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009).
15  Interview with Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 September 
2009).
    Aziz’s second  lm Fantasia was banned by the censors for four years and was only 
subsequently approved for exhibition after substantial alterations were made to the  lm.
16  Tsai’s opinion that the censorship standard is becoming stricter and censors more 
conservative is shared by Khoo Eng Yow and Leonard Tee.
17  Interviews with Saw Teong Hin,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 10 December 2008), 
Shuhaimi Baba,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009), Ahmad 
Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008), Ruhani Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 
16 December 2008), and U Wei Haji Saari (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
18  Interviews with Amir Muhammad (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008) and Khoo Eng 
Yow (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
19  This view is also shared by Ahmad Puad Onah and Shuhaimi Baba.
20  Interview with Shuhaimi Baba,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009).
21  Four out of the ten top grossing Malaysian  lms are in the horror genre and they were 
all produced after 2004. See National Film Development Corporation of Malaysia 
(2011) Industry: Top 20 Feature Films, Online. Available: http://www. nas.gov.my/
index.php?mod industry&sub top20 (accessed 20 April 2011).
22  Interview with Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and President of the Hong Kong 
Film Directors’ Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
23  Interviews with Benny Chan,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 23 March 2009); 
Winnie Tsang,  lm distributor (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009), Wellington Fung, Secretary 
General of the Hong Kong Film Development Council (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009); 
and Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
24  This response is echoed by Kenneth Bi who noted that ‘because the rating system is 
clear, we can make our choices as to what to keep and what to be taken out. If you want 
a Category II rating, you can cut a scene or a shot or a line out… so you can decide 
whether or not to cross that border [into Category III]’. Interview with Kenneth Bi,  lm 
director and producer (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009).
25  Terence Chang (2010) ‘Film Censorship in Hong Kong’. E mail (12 October 2010).
26  Interview with Wellington Fung, Secretary General of the Hong Kong Film Development 
Council (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009).
27  Interviews with Kenneth Bi (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009) and Benny Chan (Hong Kong, 
23 March 2009).
28  Interview with Nansun Shi,  lm producer (Hong Kong, 29 May 2009).
29  Interview with Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
30  Interview with Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and President of the Hong Kong 
Film Directors’ Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
31  Interview with Lorna Tee,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
32  Interview with Lo Chi Leung,  lm director (Hong Kong, 2 June 2009).
33  Interview with Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
34  Interview with Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and President of the Hong Kong 
Film Directors’ Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
35  Interviews with Benny Chan (Hong Kong, 23 March 2009), Gordon Chan (Hong Kong, 
25 March 2009), Wellington Fung (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009), Bill Kong (Hong Kong, 
26 March 2009), Lo Chi Leung (Hong Kong, 2 June 2009) and Winnie Tsang (Hong 
Kong, 1 June 2009).
36  Some of the interviewees do not deal with graphic violence and sex in their  lms for 
three main reasons: (1) such content is not necessary in their  lms; (2) personal taste or 
preference; and (3) commercial considerations.
37  Mabel Cheung’s 2001  lm Beijing Rocks was banned in China.

182 Notes
38  In China,  lms are either approved for exhibition and distribution (with or without 
excision) or banned. There are no classi cation categories and rating system for 
 lms there.
39  Only two of the Australian interviewees (Richard J. Frankland and Peter Campbell) 
expressed disappointment over certain aspects of the system.
40  Interview with Tony Ayres,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 9 October 2009).
41  Interview with Rolf de Heer,  lm director and producer (Telephone interview, 6 
October 2009).
42  Interview with Ray Lawrence,  lm director (Telephone interview, 20 August 2009).
43  Interview with James Hewison,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 19 August 2009).
44  Interview with Joel Pearlman,  lm distributor and exhibitor (Melbourne, 4 June 2010).
45  Interview with Peter Campbell,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 14 August 2009).
46  Ruhani Abdul Rahman’s answer suggests that positions in the Board of Censors were 
being ‘handed out’ easily to retired senior government of cers without much evaluation 
and consideration as to their suitability and competency to carry out censorship duties.
47  The word means ‘may peace be upon you’, a common Arabic greeting used amongst 
the Muslim Malay community.
48  Interview with Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 
December 2008).
49  The  lmmaker discussed in particular, the experiences he had with the censors regarding 
two  lms he directed  Senario (1999) a slapstick comedy and Seri Dewi Malam (2001) 
a love story of a comatose woman and her husband.
50  Members of the Board of Censors may be reappointed by the Minister after their term 
of service has expired.
51  See the section on the Malaysian system in Chapter 4 for a discussion of the appointment 
and removal of censors in Malaysia.
52  The  lm consists of interviews with the locals who presently live in the places where 
Chin Peng had lived, punctuated with musical numbers and biographical on screen 
texts explaining what Chin did in those places. The  lm does not contain any image of 
Chin Peng, nor is there any interview with the man himself. It also has no archive 
footage or any reconstruction of the battles with the communists.
53  The censors must have made their decision to approve the  lm based on some reasoning 
of their own but when the Minister banned the  lm, the basis supporting their decision 
suddenly disappeared.
54  See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the appointment of censors in Hong Kong.
55  Interview with Benny Chan,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 23 March 2009).
56  Interview with Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and President of the Hong Kong 
Film Directors’ Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
57  Interview with Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
58  Interview with Winnie Tsang,  lm distributor (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009).
59  Interviews with Gordon Chan (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009), Wellington Fung (Hong 
Kong, 26 May 2009), Nansun Shi (Hong Kong, 29 May 2009) and Winnie Tsang 
(Hong Kong, 1 June 2009).
60  See sections 65 and 83 of the Act.
61  Interview with Richard J. Frankland,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 7 October 
2009).
62  Interview with Peter Campbell,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 14 August 2009).
63  The pro les of members of the Classi cation Board and Classi cation Review Board are 
published at the Australian Government Classi cation website at www.classi cation.gov.au.
64  Interview with Ray Lawrence,  lm director (Telephone interview, 20 August 2009).
65  Interview with Greg Denning,  lm distributor (Telephone interview, 13 August 2009).
66  Interview with Jan Chapman,  lm producer (Telephone interview, 30 April 2010).
67  Interview with Saw Teong Hin,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 10 December 2008).
68  See section 9 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.

Notes 183
69  See section 29 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
70  Section 10(3)(b) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
71  Interview with Patrick Tam,  lm director (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
72  Ann Hui is one of the Hong Kong New Wave  lmmakers and is highly respected 
whereas Wong Jing is a commercially successful  lm director and producer, infamous 
for his exploitation  lms.
73  Interview with Greg Scott, Deputy Director of the Classi cation Board (Telephone 
interview, 20 July 2010).
74  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
75  G. C. Khoo, Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian Film and Literature, Vancouver: 
UBC Press, 2006, p. 108.
76  M. Mahathir, ‘Censure the Censor’, The Star (Kuala Lumpur) 5 February 2003, p.5.
77  Paragraph 2 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
78  Interview with Benny Chan,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 23 March 2009).
79  Interview with Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 
December 2008).
80  Interview with Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
81  Interview with Shuhaimi Baba,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 
2009).
82  Interview with Ahmad Puad Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 
December 2008).
83  Interview with Lorna Tee,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009).
84  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
85  Berkemban means a female wearing a sarong (cloth) around her midriff. U Wei Haji 
Saari’s  lm Perempuan, Isteri & … (Woman, Wife & Whore, 1993) had a scene where 
the lead actress wears only a piece of cloth around her midriff taking her bath and that 
scene was required to be excised from the  lm.
86  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
87  See the introduction of this chapter for the interviewees’ comments.
88  These interviewees include Kenneth Bi (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009), Benny Chan 
(Hong Kong, 23 March 2009), Gordon Chan (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009), Wellington 
Fung (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009), Bill Kong (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009), Lorna Tee 
(Hong Kong, 26 March 2009) and Winnie Tsang (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009).
89  For example, the word ‘fuck’ in English language  lms and its Cantonese equivalent 
‘tiu’ in Hong Kong  lms.
90  These interviewees include Tony Ayres (Melbourne, 9 October 2009), Rolf de Heer 
(Telephone interview, 6 October 2009), Ray Lawrence (Telephone interview, 20 
August 2009), Jan Chapman (Telephone interview, 30 April 2010), and Greg Denning 
(Telephone interview, 13 August 2009).
91  Section 10(1)(b) of the Film Censorship Act 2002. See Chapter 3 for a discussion of the 
censorship process in Malaysia.
92  Section 3 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
93  See sections 10(1) and 11 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
94  Shuhaimi Baba also noted that the censors required many scenes to be excised, forcing 
her to reshoot scenes as substitutes so that the  lm would make sense to the audience.
95  With a few exceptions, Malaysian  lms are not released commercially beyond the 
country’s borders.
96  The word ‘Jalang’ or ‘whore’ in the title had to be deleted and replaced with ‘…’.
97  The word ‘halal’ means in accordance with, or permitted under, the Syariah (Islamic 
Law).

184 Notes
 98  For example, the name ‘Putrajaya’, which is a planned city that serves as the Malaysian 
federal government’s administrative centre, was required to be deleted from the 
subtitles.
 99  T. D. Matthews provides numerous examples of censorship damaging the appeal of 
British  lms (and hence resulting in reduced audiences for them) in Chapter 15 of his 
book Censored: The Story of Film Censorship in Britain, London: Chatto & Windus 
Publishers, 1994.
100  Interview with Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 
2008).
101  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
102  See section 10(4)(c) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
103  For example, even Lust, Caution (Ang Lee, 2007) a  lm with high level and extended 
sex scenes was released uncut in Hong Kong.
104  One of the examples that came up during the  eldwork is Baise Moi (Rape Me (also 
known as Fuck Me in some European countries), Virginie Despentes, 2000), a  lm 
depicting two young women on a journey of murder and sex, where the censor 
required a few shots to be excised before the approval for exhibition under Category 
III classi cation could be granted. Due to the  lm director’s refusal to excise those 
shots, the  lm has not been commercially released in Hong Kong: Interview with 
Winnie Tsang,  lm distributor (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009).
105  Terence Chang (2010) ‘Film Censorship in Hong Kong’. E mail (12 October 2010).
106  See for example section 9A of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer 
Games) Act 1995 which prohibits, amongst other things,  lms that advocate the doing 
of a terrorist act.
107  For examples of these contents, see the section on the Australian  lm classi cation 
guidelines in Chapter 4.
108  To protect the anonymity and con dentiality of the interviewees, no further details 
can be produced here.
109  This information was obtained from the Malaysian  eldwork conducted from 
December 2008 to February 2009. Three interviewees and two other  lm practitioners 
(who preferred not to be interviewed on record) recounted instances where certain 
prominent producers were given access to ‘negotiate’ with  lm censors.
110  The classi cation category that attracts the largest audience in the UK is ‘15’  for 
audiences aged 15 and above only. See G. Robertson and A. Nicol, Media Law (5th 
edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007, p. 850.
111  Film practitioners are able to discuss with censors when the classi cation category 
they sought can not be provided. Interview with Rose May Li, Principal Entertainment 
Standards Control Of cer (Film), Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority 
(Hong Kong, 24 March 2009).
112  These interviewees include Tony Ayres (Melbourne, 9 October 2009), Peter Campbell 
(Melbourne, 14 August 2009), Rolf de Heer (Telephone interview, 6 October 2009), 
Ray Lawrence (Telephone interview, 20 August 2009) and two others who wish to 
remain anonymous.
113  Section 10(3) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
114  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008) and U Wei 
Haji Saari (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
115  Amir Muhammad commented that the reasons for the banning of his  lm Apa Khabar 
Orang Kampung (Village People Radio Show, 2007) were ‘very juvenile… and can 
be demolished easily’.
116  Interview with Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 
September 2009).
117  Interview with Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 
2009).

Notes 185
118  Interviews with Tsai Ming liang (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009) and Leonard Tee 
(Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
119  Malaysia has been hit by a smog like haze almost every year since the late 1990s. It is 
caused by smoke from forest  res in neighbouring Indonesia. The haze is a public 
health issue and has resulted in a state of emergency being declared.
120  Tsai Ming liang said: ‘They initially banned the  lm giving me reasons like there are 
too many migrant workers portrayed in the  lm, but in reality there are a lot of them 
in Malaysia… there is also the reason that there is a lot of haze… I did not purposely 
 lm it but in reality there is haze here in Malaysia. I mean, how can you dictate that 
 lmmakers can only  lm [portray] the glory of the Petronas Twin Towers and the 
impressive high rise buildings? No other countries stipulate this… this is unreasonable’ 
(Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009). 
121  See sections 10(4) and 13 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
122  Director Lo Chi Leung and producer Cheung Chi Kwong, for example, remarked that 
‘reasons for censorship decisions are always provided by the censors’.
123  For example, Jan Chapman noted that she never had any problem in obtaining reasons 
for the classi cation decisions made on the  lms she produced and remarked that the 
Boards were ‘transparent with the reasons given’.
124  Interviews with Peter Campbell (Melbourne, 14 August 2009), Greg Denning 
(Telephone interview, 13 August 2009) and Richard J. Frankland (Melbourne, 7 
October 2009).
125  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008), Khoo Eng 
Yow (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008), Leonard Tee (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 
2008), Shuhaimi Baba (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009) and U Wei Haji Saari (Kuala 
Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
126  Interviews with Amir Muhammad (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008), Ruhani 
Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008), Saw Teong Hin (Kuala Lumpur, 
10 December 2008) and Yasmin Ahmad (Kuala Lumpur, 6 January 2009).
127  Section 19 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
128  The names highlighted by Campbell during the interview include Reverend Fred Nile, 
the Australian Family Association, Family First and the Festival of Light.
129  Michael Atkinson, the South Australian Attorney General, has a long history in 
censorship issues and his tendency to intervene in this area is well known to the 
Australian  lm industry. See, for example, Samantha Maiden, ‘Sex and Santa spark 
movie complaints’ The Australian, 31 December 2005, p.3; Paul Kalina, ‘Short Cuts’, 
The Age (Melbourne), 19 October 2006, p.20; Nick Henderson, ‘Sorry, This Film is 
Banned’ The Advertiser (Adelaide), 20 August 2005, p.13 and ‘SA bans British  lm 
9 Songs’, The Mercury (Hobart), 20 August 2005, p.10.
130  Interview with Peter Campbell,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 14 August 2009).
131  Since 2003, there has been only one appeal made to the Board of Review and that is 
on the decision to classify Irreversible (Gaspar Noe, 2002) with Category III subject 
to minor excisions.
132  Gordon Chan noted that ‘if we appeal, we can go to them and explain why we appealed 
and what our views are… I mean you are killing somebody’s creative work and I think 
 lmmakers should have that right to defend themselves’.
133  The Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995 also does not 
provide an express right to make written representations to the Classi cation Review 
Board.
134  For example, Jan Chapman was of the opinion that it is important for  lm practitioners 
to be able to argue and explain ‘who they envisaged the  lm will be seen by and how 
that can best happen’.
135  Interviews with Peter Campbell (Melbourne, 14 August 2009), Greg Denning 
(Telephone interview, 13 August 2009), Richard J. Frankland (Melbourne, 7 October 
2009) and Joel Pearlman (Melbourne, 4 June 2010).

186 Notes
136  Interview with Greg Denning,  lm distributor (Telephone interview, 13 August 2009).
137  See the  nal section of Chapter 6 for the interviewees’ comments.
138  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008), Ruhani 
Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008), Saw Teong Hin (Kuala Lumpur, 
10 December 2008), Shuhaimi Baba (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009), Leonard Tee 
(Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008), Tsai Ming liang (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 
2009) and U Wei Haji Saari (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
139  Interviews with Ruhani Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008) and 
Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008).
140  Interviews with Khoo Eng Yow (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008) and Saw Teong 
Hin (Kuala Lumpur, 10 December 2008).
141  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008), Amir 
Muhammad (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008), Leonard Tee (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008), Tsai Ming liang (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009) and U Wei Haji 
Saari (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
142  Interviews with Peter Campbell (Melbourne, 14 August 2009) and an executive of a 
major  lm exhibition and distribution company who requested anonymity.
143  Interviews with Greg Denning (Telephone interview, 13 August 2009) and a  lm 
distributor who wished to remain anonymous.
6 Judicial review of  lm censorship decisions
 1  These three chapters made up the  rst part of the book.
 2  M. Groves, ‘Substantive Legitimate Expectations in Australian Administrative Law’, 
Melbourne University Law Review, 32, 2008, 470. Groves also emphasized that a point 
established by empirical research is that ‘matters remitted to decision makers after a 
successful application for judicial review often reach a different outcome when 
reconsidered in the light of the reasons for decision provided by the courts’. See also R. 
Creyke and J. McMillan, ‘Executive Perceptions of Administrative Law  An Empirical 
Study’, Australian Journal of Administrative Law, 9, 2009, 163.
 3  See J. Morgan, ‘Policy Reasoning in Tort Law: The Courts, the Law Commission and 
the Critics’, Law Quarterly Review, 125, 2009, 215; T. Poole, ‘Of Headscarves and 
Heresies: The Denbigh High School Case and Public Authority Decision making under 
the Human Rights Act’, Public Law, 2005, 685; M. Sunkin and K. Pick, ‘The Changing 
Impact of Judicial Review: The Independent Review Service of the Social Fund’, 
Public Law, 2001, 736; S. Halliday, ‘The In uence of Judicial Review on Bureaucratic 
Decision making’, Public Law, 2000, 110; and G. Richardson and M. Sunkin, ‘Judicial 
Review: Questions of Impact’, Public Law, 1996, 79.
 4  See the section on availability of judicial review in Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ responses.
 5  A. S. Anand, ‘Protection of Human Rights through Judicial Review’, in M. Andenas 
(ed.) Judicial Review in International Perspectives, Boston, US: Kluwer Law 
International, 2000, p. 381. See also P. Cane, ‘Understanding Judicial Review and Its 
Impact’, in M. Hertogh and S. Halliday (eds) Judicial Review and Bureaucratic Impact: 
International and Interdisciplinary Perspectives, New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004, p. 15.
 6  M. Supperstone, ‘The Ambit of Judicial Review’, in M. Supperstone and J. Goudie 
(eds), Judicial Review, London: Butterworths, 1992, p. 24.
 7  Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374, 408.
 8  Ibid.
 9  Ibid., 409.
10  Ibid.
11  M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997, p. 625 and Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of 
Judicial Review, London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1999, pp. 89 90.

Notes 187
12  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 95.
13  M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997, p. 697.
14  A ‘public element’ suggests a governmental or quasi governmental involvement 
extending to indirect governmental connections.
15  The GCHQ case (Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service) 
[1985] AC 374, 409.
16  [1987] QB 815, 847.
17  [1982] 1 WLR 1155.
18  [1982] 1 WLR 1155, 1174. See also Re Amin [On appeal from Regina v Entry Clearance 
Of cer, Bombay, Ex parte Amin] [1983] 2 AC 818, 829.
19  M. Supperstone, ‘The Ambit of Judicial Review’, in M. Supperstone and J. Goudie 
(eds), Judicial Review, London: Butterworths, 1992, pp. 24 6.
20  See, for example, the cases of Harpers Trading (M) Sdn Bhd v National Union of 
Commercial Workers [1991] 1 MLJ 417 and Hotel Equatorial (M) Sdn Bhd v National 
Union of Hotel, Bar and Restaurant Workers [1984] 1 MLJ 363.
21  See for example the case of Rohana bte Arif n v Universiti Sains Malaysia [1989] 1 
MLJ 487.
22  M. Supperstone, ‘Judicial Review after the Human Rights Act’, European Human 
Rights Law Review, 3, 1993, pp. 301, 328.
23  [1996] 1 MLJ 261.
24  Tan Tek Seng v Suruhanjaya Perkhidmatan Pendidikan [1996] 1 MLJ 261, 290.
25  See also the cases of Hong Leong Equipment Sdn Bhd v Liew Fook Chuan [1996] 1 
MLJ 481 and Sivarasa Rasiah v Badan Peguam Malaysia & Anor [2010] 2 MLJ 333.
26  [1997] 1 MLJ 145.
27  Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374.
28  Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374, 410  1.
29  These grounds of judicial review have been accepted in toto by the highest court in 
Malaysia as part of Malaysian law. See the cases of Rama Chandran R v The Industrial 
Court of Malaysia [1997] 1 MLJ 145, 188  90 and Kumpulan Perangsang Selangor 
Bhd v Zaid bin Hj Mohd Noh [1997] 1 MLJ 789, 798  799.
30  The rules of natural justice at common law refer to the audi alterem partem rule (right 
to fair hearing) and the nemo judex in causa sua rule (rule against bias).
31  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 447.
32  See the case of R v Secretary of State for the Environment, Ex parte Nottinghamshire 
County Council [1986] AC 240, 249.
33  For example, the principle that discretion should not be fettered may fall under 
‘illegality’ as well as ‘irrationality’ and ‘procedural impropriety’. See the discussion in 
Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 148.
34  It is necessary to point out that a brief survey of the subject matter is attempted here, 
with its scope limited to  lm censorship only. For detailed analyses and discussions, 
reference may be made to W. Wade and C. Forsyth, Administrative Law (10th edn), 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009; R. Douglas, Administrative Law (6th edn), 
Sydney: The Federation Press, 2009; P. Leyland and G. Anthony, Administrative Law 
(6th edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009; M. Aronson, B. Dyer and M. Groves, 
Judicial Review of Administrative Action (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2004; and 
M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997.
35  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 151.
36  Ibid.

188 Notes
37  Interview with Amir Muhammad, the producer and director of Malaysian Gods (Kuala 
Lumpur, 15 December 2008).
38  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 195.
39  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
40  Interview with James Lee,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 19 December 
2008).
41  Interview with Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
42  See section 26 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
43  C. C. Gan, Disciplinary Proceedings Against Public Of cers in Malaysia, Selangor, 
Malaysia: Lexis Nexis, 2007, p. 203.
44  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 210.
45  In the case of R v Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Ex parte Lonrho Plc [1989] 
1 WLR 525, 539, Lord Keith stated that where reasons for a decision were absent and 
‘if all other known facts and circumstances appear to point overwhelmingly in favour 
of a different decision, the decision maker… cannot complain if the court draws the 
inference that he had no rational reason for his decision’.
46  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 211.
47  Ibid.
48  Amir Muhammad (2006) Ban This: Kampung Komunis, Online. Available: http://www.
lastcommunist.blogspot.com (accessed 15 April 2009). See also Dennis Lim, ‘Your 
Film is Banned. There’s Not Enough Violence’, The New York Times, Online. Available: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/09/movies/09lim.html?r1 (accessed 17 July 2009).
    This is the  rst time that the author has heard of a  lm being banned because there is 
not enough violent content in it.
49  C. C. Gan, Disciplinary Proceedings Against Public Of cers in Malaysia, Selangor, 
Malaysia: Lexis Nexis, 2007, p. 208.
50  See Variety (2003) Malaysian cleric looks to smite ‘Almighty’: Minister for Religious 
Affairs calls for pic’s ban, Online. Available: http://www.variety.com/article/
VR1117890259.html?categoryid 1236&CS 1 (accessed 25 November 2009); BBC 
News (2003) Malaysia delays Carrey movie, Online. Available: http://news.bbc.co.uk/
go/pr/fr/ /2/hi/entertainment/3134589.stm (accessed 25 November 2009); BBC News 
(2003) Carrey comedy ‘offends’ Malaysians, Online. Available: http://news.bbc.co.uk/
go/pr/fr/ /2/hi/ entertainment/3102585.stm (accessed 25 November 2009); Guardian 
News and Media Limited (2003) Malaysian Minister urges ban on Bruce Almighty, 
Online. Available: http://www.guardian.co.uk/ lm/2003/jul/29/news (accessed 25 
November 2009).
51  [1948] 1 KB 223.
52  [1948] I KB 223, 229.
53  [1986] AC 240.
54  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 488.
55  Ibid.
56  Ibid, p. 459.
57  Reference may be made to the case of Ketua Pengarah Kastam v Ho Kwan Seng [1977] 
2 MLJ 152 for a classic restatement of the principles of natural justice.
58  Lord Diplock in the case of O’Reilly v Mackman [1983] 2 AC 237, 275 stated that the 
rules of natural justice ‘means no more than the duty to act fairly’.
59  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 275.
60  Ibid, p. 282.

Notes 189
61  Ibid, p. 286.
62  For example, the procedure of appeal against a censorship decision provided under the 
Hong Kong law where the parties affected by the decision under appeal are entitled to 
make written and oral representations to the Board of Review.
63  See for example, sections 17(2)(c), 18(3)(c) and 19(4)(c) of the Hong Kong Film 
Censorship Ordinance.
64  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 330.
65  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ comments on appealing against censorship decisions.
66  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 347.
67  Ibid pp. 34 52.
68  Section 10(4) of the Hong Kong Film Censorship Ordinance provides that censors must 
provide reasons for all the types of censorship decision they make under the provision.
69  See C. C. Gan, ‘Administrative Law and Judicialized Governance in Malaysia’, in T. 
Ginsburg and A. H. Y. Chen (eds) Administrative Law and Governance in Asia: 
Comparative Perspectives, London: Routledge, 2009, p. 257.
70  Council of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374.
71  See P. Walker, ‘Irrationality and Proportionality’, in M. Supperstone and J. Goudie (eds) 
Judicial Review, London: Butterworths, 1992, pp. 119 37 and W. Wade and C. Forsyth, 
Administrative Law (9th edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004, pp. 366 9.
72  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, p. 503. See also the arguments against proportionality by Lord Lowry 
in the case of R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex parte Brind [1991] 1 
AC 696, 766  7.
73  [1952] 1 All ER 122.
74  [1976] 3 All ER 452.
     For a discussion of the application of the doctrine of proportionality in England since 
the introduction of the Human Rights Act 1998, see P. Leyland and G. Anthony, 
Administrative Law (6th edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, pp. 294 309. 
See also the case of Huang v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] 2 AC 
167 for the four stage process of the review.
75  [1996] 1 MLJ 261.
76  In this case, articles 5 and 8 of the Federal Constitution.
77  See the case of Badan Peguam Malaysia v Kerajaan Malaysia [2008] 2 MLJ 285 
where the Federal Court accepted the omnipresence of article 8 when interpreting other 
provisions in the Federal Constitution.
78  [2006] 6 MLJ 213.
79  Ibid., 219  20. See also the case of Lee Kwan Woh v Public Prosecutor [2009] 5 MLJ 
301 where the Federal Court reaf rmed the principle.
80  See the case of Om Kumar v Union of India (2001) 2 SCC 386 for the Indian Supreme 
Court’s elucidation of the principle of proportionality.
81  In addition to the time limitation prescribed by legislation, the court may also refuse to 
exercise its jurisdiction where there is undue delay (laches) in the application and 
where the relief sought is futile.
82  In Malaysia, the courts have in the course of time created an area of unreviewable 
discretionary powers and non justiciable issues through judicial pronouncements. They 
include the prerogative of mercy, the doctrine of pleasure in public service matters, the 
constitutional position of Malay rulers in matters of succession, the power of the 
Attorney General to institute, conduct or discontinue any proceedings for an offence 
other than proceedings before a Syariah court, a native court or a court martial and 
preventive detentions.
83  M. Aronson, B. Dyer and M. Groves, Judicial Review of Administrative Action (3rd 
edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2004, p. 144.

190 Notes
 84  Section 23(2) reads: ‘The decision of the Appeal Committee shall be  nal and shall 
not be questioned in any court of law’.
 85  Section 48 reads: ‘No decision of the Minister, the Board or the Appeal Committee 
under this Act or any regulations made under this Act shall be subject to appeal or 
review by any court on any ground’.
 86  [1969] 2 AC 147.
 87  Ibid., 171.
 88  See also the case of R v Hull University Visitor, Ex parte Page [1993] AC 682.
 89  [1980] 2 MLJ 165.
 90  C. C. Gan, ‘Privative Clauses: Post Fire Bricks Development and Trend’, Journal of 
Malaysian and Comparative Law, 18, 1991, p. 109.
 91  M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997, p. 785.
 92  Ibid., p. 791.
 93  [1995] 2 MLJ 336.
 94  Ibid., 342.
 95  [1997] 1 MLJ 789.
 96  [1995] 3 MLJ 378.
 97  Woolf, J. Jowell and A. P. Le Sueur, Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999, pp. 29 31. See also M. J. Beloff, ‘Who Whom? Issues in Locus 
Standi in Public Law’, in M. Andenas (ed.), Judicial Review in International 
Perspective, Boston, US: Kluwer Law International, 2000, pp. 275 7.
 98  See for example the cases of Lim Cho Hock v Government of the State of Perak [1980] 
2 MLJ 148, Mohamed bin Ismail v Tan Sri Haji Othman Saat [1982] 2 MLJ 133 and 
George John v Goh Eng Wah Bros Filem Sdn Bhd [1988] 1 MLJ 319 where the courts 
accepted ‘suf cient interest’ as the basis of locus standi and moved away from the 
early English concept of ‘aggrieved person’. In contrast, see United Engineers (M) 
Bhd v Lim Kit Siang [1988] 2 MLJ 12 where the Supreme Court applied a strict locus 
standi rule by insisting that the test applicable is whether the applicant was an 
‘aggrieved person’ or not.
 99  [1988] 1 MLJ 319.
100  The approval was granted under the now repealed Film (Censorship) Act 1952.
101  George John v Goh Eng Wah Bros Filem Sdn Bhd [1988] 1 MLJ 319, 326.
102  [2006] 3 MLJ 164.
103  Ibid., 171 2.
104  Article 5 guarantees the right to life (which has been judicially interpreted so as to 
encompass the right to livelihood) while article 10 guarantees freedom of speech.
105  W. A. Ahmad and A. A. Badri, Judicial Review Handbook, Kuala Lumpur: Lexis 
Nexis, 2003, p. 22.
106  Haji Laugan Tarki bin Mohd Noor v Mahkamah Anak Negeri Penampang [1988] 2 
MLJ 85.
107  Katherine Lim KH Sr v Ketua Pengarah Perkhidmatan Perubatan Malaysia [1997] 2 
MLJ 538.
108  [2006] 3 MLJ 164.
109  Majlis Perbandaran Pulau Pinang v Syarikat Berkerjasama sama Serbaguna Sungai 
Gelugor dengan Tanggungan [1999] 3 MLJ 1.
110  Robin Tan Pang Heng v Ketua Pengarah Kesatuan Sekerja Malaysia [2002] 1 MLJ 
466.
111  Majlis Perbandaran Pulau Pinang v Syarikat Berkerjasama sama Serbaguna Sungai 
Gelugor dengan Tanggungan [1999] 3 MLJ 1.
112  Government of Malaysia v Jagdis Singh [1987] 2 MLJ 185.
113  C. C. Gan, ‘Administrative Law and Judicialized Governance in Malaysia’, in T. 
Ginsburg and A. H. Y. Chen (eds) Administrative Law and Governance in Asia: 
Comparative Perspectives, London: Routledge, 2009, p. 261.

Notes 191
114  Section 25 and the Schedule to the Act.
115  Orders 15 and 53 of the Rules.
116  Chapters VI, VIII, IX and X of the Act.
117  M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997, p. 665.
118  Ibid. p. 653.
119  An order in the nature of mandamus (mandatory order) may also be granted by the 
court under section 44 of the Speci c Relief Act 1950 to enforce the performance of a 
public duty imposed by law against any person holding a public of ce.
120  M. P. Jain, Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997, p. 725.
121  The provision reads: ‘Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (1), the High 
Court shall have the additional powers set out in the Schedule. Provided that all such 
powers shall be exercised in accordance with any written law or rules of court relating 
to the same.’
122  Paragraph 1 of the Schedule to the Courts of Judicature Act 1964. Freedom of 
expression and the right to life are guaranteed under Part II of the Constitution.
123  [1997] 1 MLJ 145.
124  See also Minister of Finance, Government of Sabah v Petrojasa Sdn Bhd [2008] 4 
MLJ 641, 652 where the Federal Court held that the additional powers ‘can only be 
more than, not limited to, what has already been provided by other laws’.
125  Paragraph 1, in its material part, is in pari materia with article 226 of the Indian 
Constitution. For the full potential of the invocation of this provision, see M. P. Jain, 
Indian Constitutional Law (5th edn), New Delhi: Wadhwa and Co., 2003 and M. P. Jain 
and S. N. Jain, Principles of Administrative Law (4th edn), Bombay, India: NM Tripathi 
Private Ltd., 1986. The Indian courts have relied on article 226 (as well as article 32) as 
the source of their judicial powers in granting relief to judicial review applicants.
126  See the case of Ramachandran R v The Industrial Court of Malaysia [1997] 1 MLJ 
145, Rule 76 of the Rules of the Court of Appeal 1994 and Rules 106 and 137 of the 
Rules of the Federal Court 1995.
127  See the case of Kerajaan Negeri Selangor v Sagong Tasi [2005] 4 CLJ 169.
128  [1996] 1 MLJ 481.
129  Ibid., 543.
130  Although Adultshop.Com Ltd v Members of the Classi cation Review Board [2008] 169 
FCR 31 is an application for judicial review challenging the decision of the Classi cation 
Review Board in classifying a  lm entitled Viva Erotica with the X18+ category, this 
case (and other similar applications) is not directly relevant to the book because the  lm 
in question is not a feature  lm for commercial public release but contains only sexually 
explicit materials. For a description of the  lm’s content, see Adultshop.Com Ltd v 
Members of the Classi cation Review Board [2008] 169 FCR 31, 36.
131  (1987) 17 FCR 324.
132  [2011] FCA 1014.
      Judicial review of administrative decisions can be made at the High Court and the 
Federal Court of Australia. It is worth noting that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal 
only has jurisdiction to review a decision if the relevant legislation provides so. See 
generally the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 and section 25 of 
the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975.
133  The applicant submitted that it had a very substantial interest in the outcome of the 
matter as reclassi cation of the  lm to the ‘M’ category (meaning that it could be 
viewed by persons aged 15 years and above) was expected to result in additional box 
of ce receipts of two to three million dollars.
134  The  lm has a complex, controversial and long history of censorship in Australia. It 
was initially banned in 1975, then approved for screening in 1993 and then banned 
again in 1998 before the 2010 Classi cation Review Board’s decision to classify it 

192 Notes
R18+ for DVD release. Set in an Italian villa in Salo, Northern Italy in 1944, the  lm 
follows four fascist men (representing the four pillars of the Italian establishment: the 
Church, Politics, Nobility and Judiciary) who detain 18 young people and subject 
them to inhumane treatment and torture before killing some of them. The  lm is 
loosely based on Marquis de Sade’s novel, 120 Days of Sodom or the School of 
Licentiousness and directed by Pier Paolo Pasolini, one of the great names in the 
history of Italian Cinema.
135  The controversial  lm contains scenes of rape, sodomy, characters leashed and made 
to bark like dogs before being forced to compete for food, a character forced to eat 
pastry containing nails with blood running out from the character’s mouth as she 
screams, a character forced to eat excrement and scenes of execution.
136  Classi cation Review Board, Decision and Reasons for Decision: Salo o le 120 
Giornate di Sodoma (Salo), Surrey Hills: Australian Government, 2010.
     The  lm was classi ed R18+ based on the fact that its DVD release contained 
additional material (of about 176 minutes). Therefore, the screening of the  lm in 
cinema without the additional material (that facilitates ‘wider consideration of the 
context of the  lm which results in the impact of the  lm no more than high’) would 
constitute a breach of the classi cation law.
137  Interview with Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008).
138  Interview with U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
139  Interview with Khoo Eng Yow,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008).
140  Interview with Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
141  Interview with Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 
September 2009).
142  Aziz M. Osman’s Fantasia was banned in 1992 by the Board of Film Censors and was 
only granted approval for exhibition four years later after substantial alterations were 
made to the  lm and the title changed to Fantasi. Aziz’s XX Ray 2 also faced 
censorship problems in 1995 where several scenes had to be excised before the  lm 
was approved for exhibition.
143  For example, Gordon Chan noted that it is very unlikely that he would have resort to 
judicial review because the  lm censorship system is transparent and works very well. 
Chan remarked that he does not even need to appeal (against a censorship decision) to 
the Board of Review: Interview with Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and 
President of the Hong Kong Film Director’s Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
144  Interview with Mabel Cheung,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 28 May 2009).
145  Interview with Patrick Tam,  lm director (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009).
146  Interview with Kenneth Bi,  lm director (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009).
147  Interview with Wellington Fung, Secretary General of the Hong Kong Film 
Development Council (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009).
148  Interview with Rolf de Heer,  lm director and producer (Telephone interview, 6 
October 2009).
      Joel Pearlman also noted that it is unlikely that he would need to apply for judicial 
review because he had never received a decision that he thought was ‘unjusti ed’ in 
his career: Interview with Joel Pearlman,  lm distributor and exhibitor (Melbourne, 4 
June 2010).
149  Interview with Ray Lawrence,  lm director (Telephone interview, 20 August 2009).
150  Interview with Tony Ayres,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 9 October 2009).
151  Interview with Greg Denning,  lm distributor (Telephone interview, 13 August 2009).
152  Interview with Peter Campbell,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 14 August 2009).

Notes 193
7  Conclusion: proposals for the reform of the Malaysian  lm censorship system and 
further research
 1  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ comments.
 2  See the section on the Malaysian system in Chapter 4 for a discussion of the composition 
of the Board and the Committee.
 3  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 
December 2008); Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 
December 2008); Shuhaimi Baba,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 
2009); and Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009).
 4  Interviews with Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 
September 2009); Khoo Eng Yow,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008); Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 
2008); and Yasmin Ahmad,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 6 January 2009).
 5  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 
December 2008); Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 
February 2009); and U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
 6  Positions in the Hong Kong Panel of Censors and Panel of Advisers and the Australian 
Classi cation Board are open to the public and recruitment advertisements are placed 
to invite them to apply to be a member. For further discussion of the recruitment and 
appointment processes see Chapter 4.
 7  Section 4(2) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 8  In Australia, the names and biographies of classi ers are published on the Classi cation 
website.
 9  Ray Lawrence also opined that ‘censorship boards should consist of intelligent people 
who are able to see the difference between something that has artistic, social and 
cultural merits rather than just slop’(Telephone interview, 20 August 2009).
10  A view echoed by fellow director Khoo Eng Yow (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
11  Leonard Tee (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008) noted that ‘we don’t know who 
makes the decision’ while Shuhaimi Baba (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009) remarked 
that ‘I don’t know who sits on the Board’.
12  See the section on legal literature in Chapter 1 for further discussion of this point.
13  Interview with Rose May Li, Principal Entertainment Standards Control Of cer (Film), 
Television and Entertainment Licensing Authority (Hong Kong, 24 March 2009).
     For example, these members include Ann Hui and Peter Yung, two acclaimed 
veteran  lmmakers of the Hong Kong New Wave Cinema movement.
14  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 122.
15  See Chapter 5 for some of the instances indicating the lack of independence of censors.
16  See Chapter 4 for a discussion about the appointment, tenure and termination of 
appointment of censors.
17  Paragraph 12 of the Schedule to the Film Censorship Act 2002.
18  Sections 4 and 22 and paragraphs 4 and 6 of the Schedule to the Film Censorship Act 
2002.
20  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong interviewees’ comments on the independence of  lm 
censors and Chapter 4 for the circumstances under which the appointment of Australian 
classi ers may be terminated.
21  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 122.
22  For an actual incident of the exercise of this power, see the section on the Malaysian 
decision making entities in Chapter 4.
23  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinion of this power.
24  Minister of Home Affairs v Persatuan Aliran Kesedaran Malaysia [1990] 1 MLJ 351.
     In this case, the respondent had applied for a permit under the Printing Presses and 
Publications Act 1984 to publish a magazine. The respondent’s application was rejected 

194 Notes
by the appellant, the Minister of Home Affairs. The respondent then applied for an 
order of certiorari to quash the Minister’s decision and for an order of mandamus 
directing the Minister to determine its application according to law. The High Court 
granted the orders sought and the appellant appealed to the Supreme Court. In allowing 
the appeal, the Supreme Court noted that section 12(2) of the 1984 Act gives the 
Minister ‘absolute discretion’ to refuse an application for a permit and held that the 
High Court may not intervene to question the Minister’s discretion and set aside the 
decision made ‘unless it can be clearly established that the Minister had in any way 
exercised his discretion wrongfully, unfairly, dishonestly or in bad faith’.
25  Minister of Home Affairs v Persatuan Aliran Kesedaran Malaysia [1990] 1 MLJ 351, 355.
26  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ reactions and comments on these provisions.
27  See Chapter 4 for the classes of  lm that are eligible to be exempted from censorship in 
Hong Kong and for the list of 13 types of  lm designated as exempt  lms in Australia.
28  See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the consideration of the artistic merit of  lm in the 
Hong Kong and Australian systems.
29  Some notable examples include Schindler’s List (Steven Spielberg, 1993), Happy 
Together (Wong Kar Wai, 1997), Jogho (Champion, U Wei Haji Saari, 1997), Saving 
Private Ryan (Steven Spielberg, 1999), Lan Yu (Stanley Kwan, 2001), Brokeback 
Mountain (Ang Lee, 2005), I Don’t Want to Sleep Alone (Tsai Ming liang, 2006) and 
Lust, Caution (Ang Lee, 2007).
30  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinion of the importance of censors taking into 
account the artistic merit of the  lms they examine.
31  See the section on legal literature in Chapter 1 for a discussion of the obscenity tests 
applied in England and the United States.
32  For the provisions in the Hong Kong and Australian laws stipulating artistic merit as a matter 
to be taken into account by censors, see the sections on those jurisdictions in Chapter 4.
33  See the section on the Australian system in Chapter 4 for a discussion of the 
Classi cation Board and the Classi cation Review Board.
34  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinions of the standards to be applied.
35  See paragraph 2 of the Film Censorship Guidelines for Censors.
36  See section 11 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 
1995.
37  See R v Hicklin (1868) LR 3 QB 360, 371.
38  See section 1 of the Obscene Publications Act.
39  See the section on legal literature in Chapter 1 for a discussion of the obscenity tests in 
the Anglo American jurisprudence.
40  The 2010 Guidelines were drawn up in Malay and there is no of cial English language 
version. Therefore, quotations in the text are the author’s translation. Like the Film 
Censorship Guidelines 1993, the 2010 Guidelines are also not published in the Gazette 
and copies are not made available to the public.
41  See the part of Chapter 3 on the Malaysian system for a description of the censorship 
principles.
42  The four censorship elements provided in the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 are 
‘Ideology and Politics’, ‘Religion’, ‘Socio culture’ and ‘Order and Decorum’.
43  Paragraph 2.2.1 of the Film Censorship Guidelines (2010).
44  ‘Religion’ is the most detailed censorship element in the 2010 Guidelines, containing 
55 matters for censors’ consideration, 53 of which are in regard to the Islamic faith.
45  Paragraph 1, Part IV of the Film Censorship Guidelines (2010).
46  Films classi ed U are suitable for viewing by all levels of society.
47  Films classi ed PG13 are not recommended for viewing by persons under 13 years of 
age without guidance from a parent or guardian.
48  Films classi ed 18 are restricted to persons aged 18 and above only. They contain 
elements of violence, horror or sex that are not excessive and may also contain religious 
or political elements.

Notes 195
49  Prior to the introduction of the 2010 Guidelines, there were  ve classi cation categories: U, 
18SG, 18SX, 18PA and 18PL. See Chapter 3 for a summary description of these categories.
50  See Chapter 4 for discussions of the Hong Kong and Australian censorship guidelines.
51  For example, most of the provisions that appear under the censorship element of ‘Religion’ 
are verbatim reproductions of those found in the Film Censorship Guidelines 1993.
52  For example, some of the provisions that appear under the ‘Socio culture’ section in the 
Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 now appear under the ‘Public safety and public 
order’ section in the 2010 Guidelines.
53  Paragraphs 2.1.1, 2.2.1, 2.3.1 and 2.4.1 of the Film Censorship Guidelines (2010).
54  See Chapter 4 for a discussion of the guidelines and Chapter 5 for interviewees’ 
comments on the guidelines.
55  See Chapter 5 for more comments by the interviewees.
56  See Paris Adult Theatre v Slaton 413 US 49 (1973) 83.
57  See the relative sections in Chapter 4 for discussion of the censorship guidelines applied 
in Hong Kong and Australia. See also Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinions of the 
guidelines.
58  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees’ comments.
59  See Chapter 5 for the Malaysian interviewees’ comments.
60  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 
p. 124.
61  See Chapter 5 for the Malaysian interviewees’ comments on this point.
62  See Chapter 4 for discussions of this consideration in the Hong Kong and Australian 
guidelines.
63  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees’ comments.
64  See the section on the legal literature in Chapter 1 for a discussion of this free speech 
justi cation.
65  D. Rolph, M. Vitins and J. Bannister, Media Law: Cases, Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010, p. 28 and L. McNamara, ‘Free Speech’ in 
D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 
2007, p. 6.
66  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 7.
67  See Chapter 3 for a discussion of the classi cation categories.
68  See section 3 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
69  The author also spoke to two  lm practitioners who preferred not to be interviewed on 
record. They were of the opinion that the ‘clumsy’ and ‘irresponsible’ censorship 
decisions have ‘damaged good  lms’ and made  lms lose their appeal, thus reducing 
the turnout of audiences at cinemas.
70  Article 10 of the Federal Constitution.
71  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008); Amir 
Muhammad (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008); Khoo Eng Yow (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008); Ruhani Abdul Rahman (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008); Saw 
Teong Hin (Kuala Lumpur, 10 December 2008); Tsai Ming liang (Kuala Lumpur, 1 
February 2009); and U Wei Haji Saari (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008).
72  See the section on the legal literature in Chapter 1 for a discussion of the free speech 
principle and its justi cations.
73  See Chapter 4 for the lists of prohibited content and portrayal under the Hong Kong and 
Australian systems.
74  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, p. 7.
75  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong interviewees’ comments and experiences.
76  In Australia, there is no similar provision allowing its  lm practitioners to discuss the 
classi cation category to be given to their  lm with classi ers.
77  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinion of this procedure.
78  Interview with Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008).

196 Notes
 79  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ comments on the reasons provided to them as well 
as examples of reasons furnished by the Board.
      A number of interviewees labelled the reasons given as ‘shallow’, ‘bizarre’ and 
‘odd’, suggesting that the censors are an incompetent lot therefore underlining again 
the importance of appointing competent and suitable individuals to sit in the decision
making entities.
 80  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees’ feedback.
 81  In Malaysia, there is no general statutory provision akin to section 13 of the Australian 
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 which provides that any person 
who is entitled to apply for judicial review may request the decision maker for a 
statement of reasons for decision.
 82  Interviews with Ahmad Puad Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 
December 2008) and U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 
December 2008).
 83  Section 21(2) of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 84  Examples include Zoolander (Ben Stiller, 2001), Bruce Almighty (Tom Shadyac, 
2003), Daredevil (Mark Steven Johnson, 2003) and The Last Communist (Amir 
Muhammad, 2006).
 85  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ comments.
 86  E. Barendt, Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005, 
p. 122.
 87  See Chapter 5 for an example of appeal made by lobby groups and campaigners in Australia.
 88  Section 21 of the Film Censorship Act 2002.
 89  See sections 17, 18 and 19 of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
 90  See Chapter 5 for a description of the Australian experience where  lm practitioners 
were not allowed to reference past classi cation decisions.
 91  An interesting example would be that of the experiences of producer director 
Shuhaimi Baba. When she appealed against the censorship decision on her second 
 lm, Ringgit Kasyorga (Dollar to Heaven, 1995), she did not get the opportunity to 
make oral representations before the Appeal Committee but when she appealed 
against the censorship decision on her sixth  lm Pontianak Harum Sundal Malam 
(Pontianak: A Scent of Tuberose, 2004), she was given ample opportunity to do so. It 
is perhaps the case that by the time Pontianak was made, Shuhaimi Baba had become 
an established and commercially successful  lmmaker in Malaysia.
 92  For example, Tsai Ming liang did not get to make oral representations before the 
Committee when he appealed against the Board’s decision on his  lm I Don’t Want to 
Sleep Alone (2006).
 93  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ responses.
 94  See Chapter 5 for the Hong Kong and Australian interviewees’ opinions of this issue.
 95  See Chapter 4 for a discussion of these provisions and Chapter 6 for a discussion of 
the effect of ouster clauses in Malaysia.
 96  The Malaysian interviewees questioned the justi cation of having these ouster clauses. 
For example, Amir Muhammad noted: ‘the decisions of the Appeal Committee cannot be 
challenged under judicial review which, you know, why make these people so infallible? 
Why can’t a judge look at the decision?’ (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008).
 97  See article 10 of the Federal Constitution.
 98  Interviews with Khoo Eng Yow,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 18 
December 2008) and Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008).
 99  See Chapter 5 for the interviewees’ opinions of the availability of judicial review.
100  See the  nal section of Chapter 6 for the Malaysian interviewees’ responses.
101  See Chapter 3 for a discussion of the six censorship elements provided in the Film 
Censorship Guidelines for Censors. Inconsistencies of application are found only with 
regards to ‘Language’, as in the use of coarse language in  lms, and not with the rest 
of the censorship elements.

Notes 197
102  It is interesting to note that the Public Opinion Survey on Film Classi cation System 
2011 reported that ‘for contents on offensive language, the respondents [of the 2011 
survey] tended to be more tolerant of expletives in English  lms but applied stricter 
standards in Cantonese  lms in particular towards language carrying strong sexual 
connotations’. However, no explanation was offered in the report to shed light on why 
such a tendency exists amongst the respondents.
103  Section 10(1) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
104  Section 10(6) of the Film Censorship Ordinance.
105  Paragraph 8 of the Schedule to the Film Censorship Act 2002.
106  Section 58(5) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
107  Section 58(6) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
108  Section 58(7) of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
109  Interviews with Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 
2009) and Winnie Tsang,  lm distributor (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009).
110  See the section concerning the Australian system in Chapter 3 for a discussion of the 
classi cation categories.
111  Section 38 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
112  Section 39 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
113  Section 40 of the Classi cation (Publications, Films and Computer Games) Act 1995.
114  One of the more well known examples is Pier Paolo Pasolini’s Salo o le 120 giornate 
di Sodoma (Salo, the 120 Days of Sodom, 1975) which has undergone no less than 
three reclassi cations. Another example would be Caligula (Tinto Brass, 1979) which 
was initially classi ed for release in 1981 but later refused classi cation after the 
Classi cation Board called the  lm back for reclassi cation.
115  Ray Lawrence, for example, remarked that he has no issue with reclassi cation of 
 lms ‘as long as they classify down but not up’, referring to the order of the 
classi cation categories.
116  Interview with Tony Ayres,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 9 October 2009).
117  Interview with Rolf de Heer,  lm director and producer (Telephone interview, 6 
October 2009).
118  This view is shared by another interviewee who requested anonymity. The interviewee 
noted that ‘once a  lm has gone through the process and classi ed, that should be the 
end of it’.

Bibliography
Ahmad, M., ‘Colonial Policies, the Marketplace and the Malaysian Film Industry’, in L. 
Feilberg (ed.) Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences’ Sharing, 
Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, 16
Ahmad, W. A. and Badri, A. A., Judicial Review Handbook, Kuala Lumpur: Lexis Nexis, 
2003
Anand, A. S., ‘Protection of Human Rights through Judicial Review’, in M. Andenas (ed.) 
Judicial Review in International Perspectives, Boston, US: Kluwer Law International, 
2000, 381
Andaya, B. W. and Andaya, L., A History of Malaysia (2nd edn), London: Macmillan, 2001
Aronson, M., Dyer, B. and Groves, M., Judicial Review of Administrative Action (3rd edn), 
Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2004
Ashworth, A., Principles of Criminal Law (6th edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009
Asian Development Bank, Key Indicators for Asia and the Paci c 2010 (41st edn), Manila: 
Asian Development Bank, 2010
Australian Film Commission, The Economics of Films and Television in Australia, Sydney: 
Australian Film Commission, 1993
Australian Law Reform Commission, Censorship Procedure, Report No.55, Sydney: 
Australian Law Reform Commission, 1991
Australian Law Reform Commission, Classi cation  Content Regulation and Convergent 
Media, Sydney: Australian Law Reform Commission, 2012
Baker, C. E., Human Liberty and Freedom of Speech, New York: Oxford University Press, 
1989
Balaraman, N., ‘The Legislative System to Support Cinema: Instruments and Policies’, in 
L. Feilberg (ed.) Film Industries in Asia and Europe: A Platform for Experiences 
Sharing, Singapore: Asia Europe Foundation, 2005, 12
Barendt, E., Freedom of Speech (2nd edn), New York: Oxford University Press, 2005
Beloff, M. J., ‘Who Whom? Issues in Locus Standi in Public Law’, in M. Andenas (ed.) 
Judicial Review in International Perspective, Boston, US: Kluwer Law International, 
2000, 275
Bertrand, I., Film Censorship in Australia, St. Lucia, Queensland, Australia: University of 
Queensland Press, 1978
Bertrand, I., ‘Finance’, in B. McFarlane, G. Mayer and I. Bertrand (eds) The Oxford 
Companion to Australian Film, Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 1999, 156
Bollinger, L. C. and Stone, G. R., Eternally Vigilant: Free Speech in the Modern Era, 
Chicago, US: University of Chicago Press, 2002

Bibliography 199
Bordwell, D., Planet Hong Kong: Popular Cinema and the Art of Entertainment, 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2000
Bronitt, S. and McSherry, B., Principles of Criminal Law (2nd edn), Sydney: Lawbook 
Co., 2005
Butler, D. and Rodrick, S, Australian Media Law (3rd edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2007
Campbell, T., ‘Rationales for Freedom of Communications’, in T. Campbell and W. 
Sadurski (eds) Freedom of Communication, Aldershot, UK: Dartmouth, 1994, 17
Cane, P., ‘Understanding Judicial Review and Its Impact’, in M. Hertogh and S. Halliday 
(eds) Judicial Review and Bureaucratic Impact: International and Interdisciplinary 
Perspectives, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004, 15
Chan, J., ‘Film Censorship Ordinance 1988’, Hong Kong Law Journal, 18, 1988, 457
Chan, J., ‘Freedom of Expression: Censorship and Obscenity’, in R. Wacks (ed.) Civil 
Liberties in Hong Kong, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1988, 208
Chaudhuri, S., Contemporary World Cinema: Europe, the Middle East, East Asia and 
South Asia, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2005
Chen, A. H. Y., ‘Some Re ections on the “Film Censorship Affair”’, Hong Kong Law 
Journal, 17, 1987, 352
Chen, A. H. Y., ‘The Concept of “One Country, Two Systems” and Its Application to Hong 
Kong’, in S. Hsu (ed.) Understanding China’s Legal System, New York: New York 
University Press, 2003, 353
Ching, F., ‘Hong Kong Plays Political Censor for China’, Asian Wall Street Journal (Hong 
Kong), 17 March 1987, 1.
Coldham, S., ‘Reports of the Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship’, Modern Law 
Review, 43, 1980, 306
Collins, D., Hollywood Down Under: Australians at the Movies  1896 to the Present Day, 
North Ryde, Australia: Angus & Robertson, 1987
Collins, F. and Davis, T., Australian Cinema after Mabo, Melbourne: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004
Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship, Report of the Committee on Obscenity and 
Film Censorship (Cmnd 7772), London: HMSO, 1979
Commonwealth, Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 22 September 1994, p. 
1381 (Michael Lavarch, Attorney General)
Courtauld, C. and Holdsworth, M., The Hong Kong Story, Hong Kong: Oxford University 
Press, 1997
Creyke, R. and McMillan, J., ‘Executive Perceptions of Administrative Law  An Empirical 
Study’, Australian Journal of Administrative Law, 9, 2009, 163
Curtin, M., Playing to the World’s Biggest Audience: The Globalization of Chinese Films 
and TV, Berkeley, US: University of California Press, 2007
Dannen, F. and Long, B., Hong Kong Babylon: An Insider’s Guide to the Hollywood of the 
East, London: Faber and Faber, 1997
Denoon, D., Mein Smith, P. and Wyndham, M., A History of Australia, New Zealand and 
the Paci c, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers, 2000
Dermody, S. and Jacka, E., The Screening of Australia: Anatomy of a Film Industry, 
Sydney: Currency Press, 1987
Douglas, R., Administrative Law (6th edn), Sydney: The Federation Press, 2009
Dworkin, A., ‘Against the Male Flood: Censorship, Pornography and Equality’, Harvard 
Women’s Law Journal, 8, 1985, 1
Dworkin, R. M., ‘Is There a Right to Pornography?’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 1, 
1981, 177

200 Bibliography
Easton, S. M., The Problem of Pornography: Regulation and the Right to Free Speech, 
London: Routledge, 1994
Endicott, T. A. O., ‘The Impossibility of the Rule of Law’, Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 
19, 1999, 1
Faruqi, S. S. and Ramanathan, S., Mass Media Laws and Regulations in Malaysia, 
Singapore: Asian Media Information and Communication Centre, 1998
Fish, S., ‘There’s No Such Thing as Free Speech, and It’s a Good Thing Too’, in H. A. 
Veeser (ed.) The Stanley Fish Reader, Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers, 1999, 145
Gan, C. C., ‘Administrative Law and Judicialized Governance in Malaysia’, in T. Ginsburg 
and A. H.Y. Chen (eds) Administrative Law and Governance in Asia: Comparative 
Perspectives, London: Routledge, 2009, 257
Gan, C. C., Disciplinary Proceedings against Public Of cers in Malaysia, Selangor, 
Malaysia: Lexis Nexis, 2007
Gan, C. C., ‘Privative Clauses: Post Fire Bricks Development and Trend’, Journal of 
Malaysian and Comparative Law, 18, 1991, 109
Gifford, D. J., Understanding the Australian Legal System, Sydney: Cavendish, 1997
Gonski, D., Review of Commonwealth Assistance to the Film Industry, Canberra: 
Department of Communications and the Arts Australia, 1997
Groves, M., ‘Substantive Legitimate Expectations in Australian Administrative Law’, 
Melbourne University Law Review, 32, 2008, 470
Gutman, T., ‘Lolita’s Lesson Learned’, Communications Update, 155, 1999, 18
Halliday, S., ‘The In uence of Judicial Review on Bureaucratic Decision making’, Public 
Law, 2000, 110
Hamzah, W. A., Malaysian Legal System, Selangor, Malaysia: Oxford Fajar, 2003
Harding, A., Law, Government and the Constitution in Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia: 
Lexis Nexis, 1996
Harris, B., ‘Censorship: A Comparative Approach Offering a New Theoretical Basis for 
Classi cation in Australia’, Canberra Law Review, 8, 2005, 25
Hawkins, G. J., ‘The Problem of Pornography’, Sydney Law Review, 5(2), 1966, 221
Hinchy, R., The Australian Legal System: History, Institutions and Method, Sydney: 
Pearson, 2008
Hodsdon, B., Straight Roads and Crossed Lines: The Quest for Film Culture in Australia?, 
Shenton Park, Australia: Bernt Porridge Group, 2001
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Communications, Information 
Technology and the Arts, Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, From Reel to 
Unreal: Future Opportunities for Australia’s Film, Animation, Special Effects and 
Electronic Games Industries, Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, 2004
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment, Recreation and the Arts, 
Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, Report of the Moving Pictures Inquiry, 
Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service, 1992
Hunnings, N. M., Film Censors and the Law, London: Allen & Unwin, 1967
Information Services Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong 
Kong Yearbook 2009, Hong Kong: Information Service Department of the Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region, 2010
Jain, M. P., Administrative Law of Malaysia and Singapore (3rd edn), Kuala Lumpur: 
Butterworths, 1997
Jain, M. P., Indian Constitutional Law (5th edn), New Delhi: Wadhwa and Co., 2003
Jain, M. P. and Jain, S. N., Principles of Administrative Law (4th edn), Bombay, India: N. 
M. Tripathi Private Ltd., 1986

Bibliography 201
Jones, R., ‘The Australian Film Distribution and Exhibition Industry and Competition Law 
and Policy’, in M. Alderson (ed.) Current Issues in Film Law, Sydney: Prospect Media 
Ltd., 2007
Kenyon, A. T., ‘What Conversation? Free Speech and Defamation Law’, Modern Law 
Review, 73(5), 2010, 697
Khan, H. A., The Malay Cinema, Selangor, Malaysia: National University of Malaysia 
Press, 1997
Khoo, G. C., Reclaiming Adat: Contemporary Malaysian Film and Literature, Vancouver, 
Canada: UBC Press, 2006
Law, K. and Bren, F., Hong Kong Cinema: A Cross Cultural View, Lanham, US: Scarecrow 
Press, 2004
Leyland, P. and Anthony, G., Administrative Law (6th edn), Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2009
Luhr, W., World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987
McDonald, N. ‘Australia’ in W. Luhr (ed.) World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987
Macintyre, S., A Concise History of Australia, Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 2000
MacKinnon, C., ‘Pornography, Civil Rights and Speech’, Harvard Civil Rights  Civil 
Liberties Law Review, 20, 1985, 1
MacMillan, P. R., Censorship and Public Morality, Aldershot, UK: Gower Publications, 1983
McNamara, L., ‘Free Speech’, in D. Butler and S. Rodrick, Australian Media Law (3rd 
edn), Sydney: Lawbook Co., 2007
Malaysia, Parliamentary Debates, House of Representatives, 6 December 2001, p. 106 
(Chor Chee Heung, Deputy Minister of Home Affairs)
Marr, D., ‘Censored: Attorney General vs. “aggrieved person”’, Art + Law, 9, 2001, 1
Matthews, T. D., Censored: The Story of Film Censorship in Britain, London: Chatto & 
Windus, 1994
Meiklejohn, A., Political Freedom: The Constitutional Powers of the People, New York: 
Harper, 1960
Meyerson, M. I., ‘The Neglected History of the Prior Restraint Doctrine: Rediscovering the 
Link between the First Amendment and Separation of Powers’, Indiana Law Review, 34, 
2001, 295
Morgan, J., ‘Policy Reasoning in Tort Law: The Courts, the Law Commission and the 
Critics’, Law Quarterly Review, 125, 2009, 215
Murray, S., Australian Cinema, Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1994
Muthalib, H. and Wong, T. C., ‘Malaysia: Gentle Winds of Change’, in A. Vasudev, L. 
Padgaonkar and R. Doraisamy (eds) Being and Becoming: The Cinemas of Asia, New 
Delhi: Macmillan, 2002, 301
O’Regan, T., Australian National Cinema, London: Routledge, 1996
Poole, T., ‘Of Headscarves and Heresies: The Denbigh High School Case and Public 
Authority Decision making under the Human Rights Act’, Public Law, 2005, 685
Post, R., ‘Reconciling Theory and Doctrine in First Amendment Jurisprudence’, California 
Law Review, 88, 2000, 2353
Rattigan, N., Images of Australia: 100 Films of the New Australian Cinema, Dallas, US: 
Southern Methodist University Press, 1991
Rayner, J., Contemporary Australian Cinema, Manchester: Manchester University Press, 
2000
Reid, M. A., More Long Shots: Australian Cinema Successes in the 90s, Sydney: Australian 
Film Commission, 1999
Richardson, G. and Sunkin, M., ‘Judicial Review: Questions of Impact’, Public Law, 1996, 79

202 Bibliography
Robertson, G. and Nicol, A., Media Law (5th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2007
Rolph, D., Vitins, M. and Bannister, J., Media Law: Materials and Commentary, 
Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2010
Schauer, F., Free Speech: A Philosophical Inquiry, New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982
Schauer, F., ‘Free Speech in a World of Private Power’, in T. Campbell and W. Sadurski 
(eds) Freedom of Communication, Aldershot, UK: Dartmouth, 1994, 6
Schauer, F., The Law of Obscenity, Washington: Bureau of National Affairs, 1976
Schauer, F., ‘The Ontology of Censorship’, in R. C. Post (ed.) Censorship and Silencing, Los 
Angeles, US: Getty Research Institute for History of Art and the Humanities, 1998, 147
Scott, M. ‘100 Years of Hong Kong Cinema’ Hong Kong International Film Festival 
Edition, Hong Kong: Screen International, 20 March 2009
Screen Australia, Information for Filmmakers, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008
Screen Australia, Production Guidelines, Sydney: Screen Australia, 2008
Sheckels, T. F., Celluloid Heroes Down Under: Australian Film, 1970 2000, Westport, 
US: Praeger, 2002
Shuaib, F. S., Powers and Jurisdiction of Syariah Courts in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur: 
Lexis Nexis, 2003
Shum, C., General Principles of Hong Kong Law, Hong Kong: Longman, 1992
Sunkin, M. and Pick, K., ‘The Changing Impact of Judicial Review: The Independent 
Review Service of the Social Fund’, Public Law, 2001, 736
Supperstone, M., ‘Judicial Review after the Human Rights Act’, European Human Rights 
Law Review, 3, 1999, 301
Supperstone, M., ‘The Ambit of Judicial Review’, in M. Supperstone and J. Goudie (eds) 
Judicial Review, London: Butterworths, 1992, 24
Strossen, N., ‘A Feminist Critique of “The” Feminist Critique of Pornography’, Virginia 
Law Review, 79, 1993, 1103
Tackaberry, P. and Hewitt, J., ‘Towards a New De nition of Obscenity in Canada: Did 
Butler really do it?’, Entertainment Law Review, 4(5), 1993, 152
Teo, S., Hong Kong Cinema: The Extra Dimension, London: BFI Publishing, 1997
Tsang, S., A Modern History of Hong Kong, New York: I. B. Tauris, 2004
Turnbull, C. M., A History of Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, Sydney: Allen & Unwin, 1989
van der Haide, B., ‘Malaysian Movies: The Shaw Brothers Meet the Pandava Brothers in 
the Land Below the Wind’, in B. Bennett, J. Doyle and S. Nandan (eds) Crossing 
Cultures: Essays on Literature and Culture of the Asia Paci c, London: Skoob Books, 
1996, 101
van der Haide, W., Malaysian Cinema, Asian Film: Border Crossings and National 
Cultures, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2002
Vines, P., Law and Justice in Australia (2nd edn), Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2009
Wade, W. and Forsyth, C., Administrative Law (9th edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004
Wade, W. and Forsyth, C., Administrative Law (10th edn), Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2009
Walker, P., ‘Irrationality and Proportionality’, in M. Supperstone and J. Goudie (eds) 
Judicial Review, London: Butterworths, 1992
Watkins, D., ‘Freedom of Artistic Expression and the Human Rights Act 1998’, Art, 
Antiquity and Law, 2005, 147
Wesley Smith, P., An Introduction to the Hong Kong Legal System (3rd edn), Hong Kong: 
Oxford University Press, 1998

Bibliography 203
White, H., Anatomy of Censorship: Why the Censors Have it Wrong, Lanham, US: 
University Press of America, 1997
Whiting, A., ‘Desecularising Malaysian Law?’, in P. Nicholson and S. Biddulph (eds) 
Examining Practice, Interrogating Theory: Comparative Legal Studies in Asia, Leiden, 
The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 2008, 224
Whitmore, H., ‘Obscenity in Literature: Crime or Free Speech’, Sydney Law Review, 4(2), 
1963, 179
Woolf, H., Jowell, J. and Le Sueur, A. P., Principles of Judicial Review, London: Sweet & 
Maxwell, 1999
Wu, M. A., The Malaysian Legal System (3rd edn), Selangor, Malaysia: Longman, 2005
Yau, E., ‘China’, in W. Luhr (ed.) World Cinema Since 1945, New York: Ungar, 1987, 116
List of interviewees
Ahmad Puah Onah,  lm producer and distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 17 December 2008)
Amir Muhammad,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 15 December 2008)
Tony Ayres,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 9 October 2009)
Aziz M. Osman,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 4 September 2009)
Kenneth Bi,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009)
Peter Campbell,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 14 August 2009)
Benny Chan,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 23 March 2009)
Gordon Chan,  lm director, producer and President of the Hong Kong Film Directors’ 
Guild (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009)
Terence Chang,  lm producer (Hong Kong, 12 October 2010)
Jan Chapman,  lm producer (Telephone interview, 30 April 2010)
Mabel Cheung,  lm director and producer (Hong Kong, 28 May 2009)
Cheung Chi Kwong,  lm producer (Hong Kong, 2 June 2009)
Rolf de Heer,  lm director and producer (Telephone interview, 6 October 2009)
Greg Denning,  lm distributor (Telephone interview, 13 August 2009)
Richard J. Frankland,  lm director and producer (Melbourne, 7 October 2009)
Wellington Fung, Secretary General of the Hong Kong Film Development Council and 
 lm producer (Hong Kong, 26 May 2009)
James Hewison,  lm distributor (Melbourne, 19 August 2009)
Hussain Sha e, Chairman of the Board of Censors (Putrajaya, 6 January 2009)
Khoo Eng Yow,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008)
Bill Kong,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009)
Ray Lawrence,  lm director (Telephone interview, 20 August 2009)
James Lee,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 19 December 2008)
Rose May Li, Principal Entertainment Standards Control Of cer (Film), Television and 
Entertainment Licensing Authority (Hong Kong, 24 March 2009)
Lo Chi Leung,  lm director (Hong Kong, 2 June 2009)
Joel Pearlman,  lm distributor and exhibitor (Melbourne, 4 June 2010)
Ruhani Abdul Rahman,  lm producer (Kuala Lumpur, 16 December 2008)
Saw Teong Hin,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 10 December 2008)
Greg Scott, Deputy Director of the Classi cation Board (Telephone interview, 20 July 2010)
Nansun Shi,  lm producer (Hong Kong, 29 May 2009)
Shuhaimi Baba,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 5 January 2009)
Patrick Tam,  lm director (Hong Kong, 25 March 2009)

204 Bibliography
Leonard Tee,  lm distributor (Kuala Lumpur, 18 December 2008)
Lorna Tee,  lm producer and distributor (Hong Kong, 26 March 2009)
Tsai Ming liang,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 1 February 2009)
Winnie Tsang,  lm distributor (Hong Kong, 1 June 2009)
U Wei Haji Saari,  lm director and producer (Kuala Lumpur, 11 December 2008)
Yasmin Ahmad,  lm director (Kuala Lumpur, 6 January 2009)

Index
Australia
background and model of government 
27
legal system 27 28
social and economic settings 28
Australian  lm classi cation system
alteration to  lm 52, 71, 75 76, 98, 
100, 143
appeal against classi cation decisions 
49, 54 55, 72, 76 77, 103, 104, 
106, 146 147, 151
artistic merit of a  lm 11, 52, 69, 89, 
135
classi able elements 51, 69 70, 95, 
127, 140 141
Classi cation Board 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 
54, 55, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 86, 
87, 91, 98, 104, 149, 151, 152
classi cation categories 49, 50, 51, 
52 53, 70, 71, 76, 95, 98, 100, 
126, 127, 140 141, 151 152
classi cation certi cate 53, 55, 150
Classi cation  Content Regulation and 
Convergent Media report 49 51
classi cation panels 52, 149
classi cation process 52 55, 68, 
146 147
Classi cation Review Board 49, 50, 51, 
54, 55, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72, 73, 86, 
91, 98, 103, 104, 106, 126, 127, 
129, 132, 151
Community Assessment Panel 69, 91, 
136
consumer advice 52, 53, 55, 98, 127
current community standards 69, 
90 91, 136 137
decision making entities 67 68, 73, 
86 87
exemption from classi cation 68, 73, 
87
 lm advertising materials 49, 53, 54, 
106, 150 151
Guidelines for the Classi cation of 
Films and Computer Games 51, 
53, 69 71, 75, 89, 94 95, 127, 
139 141
National Classi cation Code 51, 52, 53, 
91, 127
National Classi cation Scheme 48, 49, 
50
principles of classi cation 52
reasons for decisions 71, 76, 102
reclassi cation of  lm 49, 106, 
151 152
South Australian Classi cation Council 
50
Australian  lm industry
Australian Film Commission 29, 32
Australian Screen Production Incentive 
33 34
background and development 28 30
current setting and operations 30 31
Film Finance Corporation Australia 30, 
32
governmental involvement 32 34
New Australian Cinema 29
Screen Australia 32, 35
Barendt, E. 7, 8, 10, 11, 73, 132, 133, 140, 
141, 143, 145
British Board of Film Classi cation 
(BBFC) 1, 36

206 Index
Censorship
exemption from 4
industry based system 1, 36
features and characteristics 11
Hays Code / Production Code 1
self censorship 80, 81, 82
state based system 1, 36
Committee on Obscenity and Film 
Censorship (Williams Committee) 9
Freedom of expression 6, 7, 36, 62, 80, 81, 
82, 83, 93, 95, 105, 147
see also Free speech
Free speech 6, 77, 152
Aeropagitica: A Speech for the Liberty 
of Unlicensed Printing 6
John Milton 6
John Stuart Mill 6
principle 6, 133, 143
rationales 6 7, 75 76, 141, 142
restriction 7
suppression 7
Hong Kong  lm censorship system
alteration to  lm 46, 66, 75 76, 97 98, 
143
appeal against censorship decisions 
46 48, 66 67, 76, 103, 104, 
146 147
artistic merit of a  lm 11, 44, 46, 63, 
88 89, 135
Board of Review 42, 46, 47, 48, 62, 66, 
67, 85, 103, 104, 118, 132
censorship certi cate 42, 43, 46
censorship elements 43, 64 65, 94, 
106, 140 141, 148 149
censorship process 44 48, 146 147
classi cation categories 43, 44, 45, 46, 
64, 65, 66, 76, 81, 93 94, 97 98, 
99 100, 140 141, 143 144
current community standards 42, 46, 
63 64, 90, 136 137
decision making entities 62 63, 73, 
85 86, 149 150
exemption from censorship 43, 44, 63, 
73, 87
 lm advertising materials 42, 43, 46, 151
Film Censorship Authority 42, 44, 47, 
48, 62, 63, 66, 87, 104, 149
Film Censorship Guidelines for 
Censors 42 43, 44, 64 66, 
93 94, 106, 139 141, 143
Panel of Advisers 42, 44, 62, 64, 85, 
90, 136
Panel of Censors 42, 62, 85, 106
public opinion survey 42, 64, 90, 136
reasons for decisions 45, 46, 66, 76, 
102
Television and Entertainment Licensing 
Authority 62, 63
three tier classi cation scheme 41, 43, 
81, 82
Hong Kong  lm industry
background and development 22 25
Closer Economic Partnership 
Agreement 24
current setting and operations 25
Film Development Fund 26, 35
Film Guarantee Fund 26
Film Services Of ce 25 26, 35
Golden Age 24, 34
governmental involvement 25 27
Hong Kong Film Development Council 
26, 35
Hong Kong New Wave 23, 25
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
background and model of government 
21
legal system 21 22
social and economic settings 22
Indecency 8, 9, 75
Judicial review
abuse of power 111, 122, 123
availability of 57, 61 62, 67, 72, 77, 
104 105, 118 122, 147 148 
basis of 110
constitutional review 11, 118
cost 127
de nition of 109 110
error of jurisdiction 112, 120 121
error of law 77, 111, 120 121, 123, 
126, 127
exhaustion of alternative remedies 119, 
122
failure to observe statutory 
requirements 113, 116

Index 207
 lter mechanisms
see availability of 
fundamental liberties 111, 122
grounds of 113 118
illegality 113 115, 125
irrationality 113, 115 116, 125
procedural impropriety 113, 
116 117, 125
proportionality 111 112, 113, 
117 118, 125
improper purpose 114
irrelevant considerations 114 115
judicial activism 111 112
judicial review of administrative action 
109 113
justiciability 119
limitation period 119
locus standi 119, 121 122
mala  des 116
moulding of relief 124 125
non exercise of discretion 115
ouster clause (privative clause) 61 62, 
67, 72, 77, 119 120, 147
principles of 111
reasons for decision 4, 115, 116 117
remedies
additional powers of the High Court 
123, 124 125
certiorari 110, 121, 123
compensation 112, 123, 125
consequential orders 112
declaration 123
mandamus 110, 123
prohibition 110
rule of law 109
rules of natural justice 111, 113, 116, 
122, 123, 144
scope of 110 111
standing
see locus standi
stare decisis 120
susceptibility to 110
ultra vires doctrine 110, 122
Malaysia
background and model of government 
14
legal system 15
social and economic settings 15 16
Malaysian  lm censorship system
alteration to  lm 37, 40, 41, 60, 75 76, 
92, 95 97, 116, 132, 141 143 
appeal against censorship decisions 37, 
41, 61, 76, 102, 103 104, 
145 147 
Appeal Committee 73, 41, 57, 58, 61, 
62, 72, 79, 84, 85, 97, 101, 103, 
105, 112, 122, 125, 131, 132, 
133, 142, 144, 145, 146
artistic merit of a  lm 11, 58, 73 74, 
88, 131, 135
Board of Censors 37, 39, 40, 41, 57, 58, 
61, 62, 72, 79, 83, 84, 85, 90, 92, 
95, 101, 105, 131, 133, 142, 144, 
145
censorship certi cate 37, 40  
censorship elements 38, 59 60, 74, 93, 
140 141 
censorship panel 39, 40, 100, 103, 112, 
114, 115, 117, 122, 125, 149
censorship process 39 41, 88, 146 147 
classi cation categories 40, 41, 59, 60, 
75 76, 93, 98 99, 140 141, 
141 143, 143 144  
current community standards 58, 74, 
84, 89 90, 135 137 
decision making entities 57 58, 72 73, 
83 84, 105, 131 134 
exemption from censorship 57, 58, 73, 
87, 134 
Film Censorship Guidelines 1993 
37 39, 58 60, 65, 74 75, 91 93, 
130, 139 141 
Film Censorship Guidelines 2010 
37 38, 59, 75, 106, 137 139 
Film Control Division of the Home 
Ministry 57, 125, 145
 lm publicity materials 37, 41, 57, 61, 
92, 151
reasons for decisions 40, 41, 61, 76, 
100 101, 144 145 
Malaysian  lm industry
background and development 16 17
Compulsory Screening Scheme 20
current setting and operations 17 19
Entertainment Duty Incentive Scheme 20
Feature Film Loan Scheme 20
Golden Era 16, 34

208 Index
governmental involvement 19 21
Malaysian New Wave 17
National Film Development 
Corporation of Malaysia 
(FINAS) 17, 19 20, 35
National Film Policy 20, 39
Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA) 1, 36
Obscenity 6, 8
de nition 8, 9, 140
test 10 11, 74, 75, 135, 137
see also Pornography 
Oligopolistic control and structure 13, 16, 
18, 29, 34
Pornography 7, 8 
Public morals 7, 46
Public order 7
Schauer, F. 8, 11, 73, 132
The Law of Obscenity 8 

