
Differences Between U.S. GAAP and IFRS
(Exhibit 17.1, p. 670)
Chapter
Reporting Topic
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
8
Revenue recognition
Must have delivered a product or service in 
return for net assets capable of sufficiently 
reliable measurement. Over 200 documents 
provide industry-specific and transaction-
specific guidance.
One general standard and a few documents with 
industry-specific guidance. For long-term contracts, 
use percentage-of-completion method if amounts 
are estimable. Otherwise, use cost-recovery method. 
Completed contract method not permitted.
9
Inventories and cost of 
goods sold: lower of cost 
or market
Measurement of market value uses a 
combination of replacement cost and net 
realizable values.
Measurement of market value uses net realizable value.
9
Inventories: cost flow
Specific identification, FIFO, weighted-
average, and LIFO cost-flow assumptions 
permitted.
Specific identification, FIFO, and weighted-average 
cost-flow assumptions permitted. LIFO not permitted.
10
Property, plant, and 
equipment: revaluations 
above acquisition cost
Not permitted.
Permitted under certain conditions.
10
Research and development 
cost
Recognize as an expense in the period 
incurred, except for certain software 
development costs.
Recognize research costs as an expense in the period 
incurred. Capitalize certain development costs and 
amortize them over the expected period of benefit.
10
Property, plant, and 
equipment: impairment 
loss
If carrying value exceeds undiscounted cash 
flows value, recognize an impairment loss 
equal to the excess of carrying value over 
fair value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount is 
larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the value 
in use. Can subsequently reverse the impairment loss 
but not above acquisition cost.
10
Intangible assets with 
finite lives: impairment 
loss
If undiscounted cash flows exceed carrying 
value, recognize an impairment loss equal 
to the excess of carrying value over fair 
value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount 
is the larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the 
value in use. Can subsequently reverse the impairment 
loss but not above acquisition cost.
10
Intangible assets, 
other than goodwill, 
with indefinite lives: 
impairment loss
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess 
of carrying value over fair value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount 
is the larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the 
value in use. Test these assets annually for impairment 
losses and recoveries of impairment losses.
10
Goodwill: impairment loss
Step 1: Compare the carrying value to the 
fair value of a reporting unit. If the carrying 
value exceeds the fair value, proceed to 
Step 2.
Step 2: Allocate the fair value of the 
reporting unit to assets and liabilities 
based on their fair values and any excess to 
goodwill. Recognize an impairment loss on 
the goodwill if the carrying value exceeds 
the allocated fair value.
Step 3: Test goodwill annually for 
impairment loss or whenever a goodwill 
impairment loss is probable. Firms may also 
apply a qualitative impairment test.
Step 1: Compare the carrying value to the recoverable 
amount for a cash-generating unit.
Step 2: Recognize an impairment loss for any excess 
of carrying value over recoverable amount of the cash-
generating unit. First write down goodwill and then 
allocate any remaining loss to other assets based on 
their relative recoverable amounts.
Step 3: Test goodwill annually for impairment losses.
12
Contingent obligations 
(U.S. GAAP) and 
provisions (IFRS)
Recognize as liabilities if payment is 
probable (probability usually exceeds 80%). 
Measure at the most likely amount or at 
the low end of range if no one estimate is 
better than any other.
Recognize as liabilities if payment is more likely than 
not (probability exceeds 50%). Measure at the best 
estimate of the amount to settle the obligation.
11
Leases
A lease is a capital lease if it satisfies 
one of four conditions; otherwise, it is an 
operating lease.
Judgment required based on several indicators to 
identify the entity that enjoys the benefits and bears 
the risks of leasing.
15
Convertible bonds
Unless the conversion option can be settled 
in cash, allocate issue price entirely to 
bonds and none to conversion option.
Allocate issue price between the bonds and the 
conversion option.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Summary of Financial Statement Ratios
(Exhibit 7.11, p. 244)
Ratio
Numerator
Denominator
Profitability Ratios
Return on Equity (ROE)  . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Average Shareholders’ Equity 
During the Period
Return on Assets (ROA)  . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Average Total Assets During the Period
Return on Assets, adjusted 
for financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income + Interest Expense 
(net of tax effects)
Average Total Assets During the Period
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Sales
Various Expense Ratios  . . . . . . . . . . .
Various Expenses
Sales
Asset Ratio Turnover  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Total Assets During the Period
Accounts Receivable Turnover 
Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Accounts Receivable During 
the Period
Inventory Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . . .
Cost of Goods Sold
Average Inventory During the Period
Fixed-Asset Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Fixed Assets During the Period
Financial Leverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . .
Average Total Assets During the Period
Average Shareholders’ Equity During 
the Period
Short-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Current Assets
Current Liabilities
Quick or Acid Test Ratio . . . . . . . . . . .
Highly Liquid Assets 
(cash, marketable securities, 
and accounts receivable)a
Current Liabilities
Cash Flow from Operations to Current 
Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cash Flow from Operations
Average Current Liabilities During 
the Period
Accounts Payable Turnover Ratio . . . . .
Purchasesb
Average Accounts Payable During 
the Period
Days Accounts Receivable 
Outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio
Days Inventories Held  . . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Inventory Turnover Ratio
Days Accounts Payable 
Outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Accounts Payable Turnover Ratio
Long-Term Liquidity Ratios
Liabilities to Assets Ratio. . . . . . . . . .
Liabilities
Assets
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-Term Debt
Assets
Debt–Equity Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-Term Debt
Shareholders’ Equity
Cash Flow from Operations to Total 
Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cash Flow from Operations
Average Total Liabilities During 
the Period
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . .
Income Before Interest and 
Income Taxes
Interest Expense
aThe calculation could exclude receivables for some firms and include inventories for others.
bPurchases = Cost of Goods Sold + Ending Inventories – Beginning Inventories.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Roman L. Weil
University of Chicago
University of California, San Diego
Katherine Schipper
Duke University
Jennifer Francis
Duke University
AN INTRODUCTION TO CONCEPTS, METHODS, AND USES
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING
14e
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
       This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions,
some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed 
content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right 
to remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For
valuable information on pricing, previous editions, changes to current editions, and alternate 
formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for 
materials in your areas of interest.

Financial Accounting: An Introduction 
to Concepts, Methods, and Uses, 14e
Roman L. Weil, Katherine Schipper, 
Jennifer Francis
Senior Vice President, LRS/Acquisitions & 
Solutions Planning: Jack W. Calhoun
Editorial Director, Business & Economics: 
Erin Joyner
Editor-in-Chief: Rob Dewey
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Matthew Filimonov
Senior Developmental Editor: Craig Avery
Editorial Assistant: Ann Loch
Marketing Manager: Heather Mooney
Senior Content Project Manager: Tim Bailey
Media Editor: Jessica Robbe
Manufacturing Planner: Doug Wilke
Senior Marketing Communications Manager: 
Libby Shipp
Production Service: Lachina Publishing 
Services, Inc.
Senior Art Director: Stacy Jenkins Shirley
Cover and Internal Designer: Joe Devine, 
Red Hangar Design
Cover Images: ©Shutterstock
Rights Acquisition Director: Audrey Pettengill
© 2014, 2010 South-Western, Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein 
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means 
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, 
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, web distribution, information networks, 
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under 
 Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
ExamView® is a registered trademark of eInstruction Corp. Windows is a 
 registered trademark of the Microsoft Corporation used herein under license. 
The ﬁ nancial statements are included for illustrative and education purposes 
only.  Nothing herein should be construed as ﬁ nancial advice.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012942884
ISBN-13: 978-1-111-82345-0
ISBN-10: 1-111-82345-6
South-Western
5191 Natorp Boulevard
Mason, OH 45040
USA
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson  Education, Ltd.
For your course and learning solutions, visit  www.cengage.com 
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred 
online store www.cengagebrain.com
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7  16 15 14 13 12
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, 
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions 
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

For Our Students
Whatever be the detail with which you cram your students, the chance of their meeting in after-
life exactly that detail is infinitesimal; and if they do meet it, they will probably have forgot-
ten what you taught them about it. The really useful training yields a comprehension of a few 
general principles with a thorough grounding in the way they apply to a variety of concrete 
details. In subsequent practice the students will have forgotten your particular details; but 
they will remember by an unconscious common sense how to apply principles to immediate 
circumstances.
Alfred North Whitehead
The Aims of Education and Other Essays
WARNING: Study of this book is known to cause thinking, occasionally deep thinking. 
Typical side effects include mild temporary anxiety followed by profound long-term 
understanding and satisfaction.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

P r e f a c e
O
 ver the years, we have come to refer to our book’s title by the acronym FACMU—
Financial Accounting: An Introduction to Concepts, Methods, and Uses. We take con-
cepts, methods, and uses to be the central elements in learning and teaching about 
financial accounting.
The 14th Edition of FACMU has the same objectives as the previous editions:
■ 
To help students develop a sufficient understanding of the basic concepts underlying finan-
cial reports so that they can apply the concepts to new and different situations.
■ 
To train students in accounting terminology and methods so that they can interpret, ana-
lyze, and evaluate financial statements and notes currently published in corporate annual 
reports.
Most introductory financial accounting textbooks state these, or similar, objectives. Textbooks 
differ in their relative emphases on concepts, methods, and uses.
1. Concepts This book emphasizes the rationale for, and implications of, accounting con-
cepts. To learn accounting, students must develop the ability to conceptualize the transac-
tions that accounting summarizes and the process of summarization. Without such concepts, 
students will have difficulty focusing on the relevant issues in new and different situations.
 
 
Accordingly, each chapter identifies important accounting concepts and includes 
numerical examples illustrating their application. The end-of-chapter material includes 
numerous short exercises and longer problems to check students’ ability to apply the con-
cepts to different situations.
2. Methods We place enough emphasis on accounting procedures to enable students to 
interpret, analyze, and evaluate published financial statements. The text does not empha-
size procedures to such an extent that students bog down in detail. All writers of account-
ing textbooks must decide just how much accounting procedure to include. We believe 
students learn most effectively by working exercises and problems. Too much emphasis on 
accounting procedures, however, lulls students into the security of thinking they under-
stand accounting concepts when they do not. We have for many years used the mixture of 
concepts and procedures in this book and have found it effective in the classroom.
 
 
Understanding the accounting implications of an event requires that students con-
struct the journal entry for that event. Throughout this book we use journal entries in 
describing the nature of accounting events. Moreover, most chapters contain exercises and 
problems that require the analysis of transactions with debits and credits. Do not conclude 
by a glance at this text, however, that it is primarily procedural. We want students to learn 
concepts; the procedures enhance the learning of concepts.
3. Uses This book attempts to bridge the gap between the preparation of financial reports 
and their use in various decision situations. The chapters consider the effects of alterna-
tive accounting principles on the measurement of earnings and financial position and the 
appropriate interpretations of them. Numerous problems based on financial statement 
data of actual companies appear at the end of most chapters.
OVERVIEW OF THE 14TH EDITION
WHAT’S NEW IN FACMU 14E
Most important, but easily visible, we have simplified the book. The text pulls back a bit from 
discussion of advanced accounting topics and simplifies the treatments remaining.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vi
The major visible changes occur at the beginning and end of the book:
■ 
NEW: We have split the former Chapter 2, which treated record-keeping procedures, into 
two chapters, now Chapters 2 and 3. Chapter 2 treats balance sheet basics, and Chapter 3 
treats income statement basics.
■ 
NEW: Chapter 17 now treats issues of organizing and presenting elements of income in 
a single place. We discuss the following in sequence, with emphasis on why these matter: 
recurring versus nonrecurring income, operating versus peripheral income, earnings versus 
other comprehensive income, and errors and accounting changes.
Other important features of the 14th Edition are as follows. These features affect multiple chap-
ters of the text.
■ 
Integration of International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) We continue to inte-
grate IFRS into the text. We start from the premise that U.S. GAAP and IFRS use the 
same concepts but sometimes require or permit different methods. At the FACMU level, 
for MBA students and upperclass undergraduates, the methods are often identical or simi-
lar; where they are not, we describe and illustrate the differences. You can easily see the 
scope of the U.S. GAAP/IFRS details in this book by examining the chart inside the front 
cover. That chart shows the chapters and topics where the discussion includes both IFRS 
and U.S. GAAP.
■ 
Fair values and components of other comprehensive income As U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
incorporate more required or permitted fair value measurements, we have broadened our 
coverage. The fair value option in U.S. GAAP affects accounting for some debt securities 
and some investments. We discuss these in Chapters 11, 13, 14, 15, and 17, both concepts 
and methods. Insofar as changes in fair values affect other comprehensive income, we’ve 
expanded that discussion as well.
■ 
Actual financial statements We have continued the use of actual financial statement excerpts 
in the chapters and in end-of-chapter assignment materials. We often change the names and 
dates in the financial statements. You will see that Chapter 1, for example, shows the financial 
statements for Great Deal and Thames, which are based on the financial statements of Best 
Buy and Thales, respectively.
The following features affect individual chapters.
■ 
Treatment of record-keeping cycle in early chapters Given the success the Duke Univer-
sity authors have had with the record-keeping material they give to their MBA students 
before the financial accounting class begins, we have reorganized the balance sheet and 
income statement record-keeping material into a pair of chapters that precede most of the 
conceptual discussions. Chapter 2 introduces assets, liabilities, shareholders’ equity, jour-
nal entries, and T-accounts. Chapter 3 introduces the recording of operating transactions, 
elementary adjusting entries, closing entries, and preparation of financial statements.
 
 
Chapters 2 and 3 accomplish this without overwhelming the student with advanced 
accounting and economic concepts. The problem material for Chapter 3 includes the 
“working backward” problems that have distinguished this text from many of its com-
petitors. The basic record-keeping cycle gives students transactions and then asks them to 
produce recording entries and adjusting entries, prepare the income statement, supply the 
closing entries, and finally provide the ending balance sheet and statement of cash flows. In 
the working backward problems, we give students some of the later items and ask them to 
derive earlier items. We say one doesn’t understand accounting until one can work through 
the record-keeping cycle backward as well as forward. The typical accounting problem 
gives facts and asks the students to derive the financial statements. The working backward 
problems start with some subset of the financial statements and ask the students to derive 
the underlying transactions.
■ 
Focus on balance sheet and income statement measurements, formats, and conventions Chap-
ter 4 (balance sheet) introduces the asset and liability recognition criteria and measure-
ment bases, including fair value measurement. Chapter 5 (income statement) continues by 
describing basic revenue and expense recognition criteria and measurement and timing 
issues. Chapter 8 contains a more detailed discussion of revenue recognition. All three 
chapters highlight classification and display differences that exist across firms, as well as 
between firms that follow U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Preface
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

vii
Preface
■ 
Emphasis on the direct method of computing cash flow from operations Both the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and the International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB) have expressed a preference for the direct method of computing cash flow from 
operations. Students are likely to increasingly encounter the direct method during their 
professional careers. Thus, we continue our emphasis on the direct method in the 14th 
Edition. Our students encounter difficulty with the indirect method of computing cash 
flow from operations when they first study the statement of cash flows. We have found 
that introducing the direct method early, as we do in Chapter 1, helps students to under-
stand the adjustments required to convert net income to cash flow from operations under 
the indirect method. Chapter 6 therefore emphasizes the direct method, without deleting 
material on the indirect method commonly found in practice. Chapter 16 revisits the state-
ment of cash flows, integrating material on more advanced topics into discussions of both 
the direct and indirect methods for presenting cash flow from operations. For example, we 
include transactions for, and income tax effects of, stock option compensation expense, 
impairment loss, and, employees’ exercise of their stock options.
■ 
Organization of topics involving revenue recognition and working capital Chapter 8 treats 
revenue recognition, receivables, and advances from customers. Chapter 9 treats other cur-
rent assets and current liabilities, including inventories, payables, and restructuring liabili-
ties. The decision to bring all the working capital account issues together results from our 
view that the accounting for current liabilities has more in common with the accounting for 
current assets than with the accounting for noncurrent assets. Consider, for example, the 
parallels between the allowance method applied to uncollectibles and to warranty costs.
■ 
IFRS differences from U.S. GAAP for noncurrent assets Chapter 10 contrasts the U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS treatments of noncurrent assets. At the elementary level of this book, the 
major differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS in the accounting for noncurrent assets 
occur in the accounting for development costs and impairments.
■ 
Organization of noncurrent liability topics Chapter 11 treats mortgages, bonds, install-
ment notes, and lease liabilities. Leases are so common in business that we treat them as a 
basic, not an advanced, topic in liabilities. As this book goes to press, the standard setters 
have proposed to change the accounting for leases. We have introduced the topics in such a 
way that the students learn both the existing and proposed accounting treatments. Chapter 
12 treats income taxes, off–balance sheet financing, and defined benefit pension arrange-
ments, each in separate sections allowing the instructor to select one or two of these topics, 
without doing all three. For example, you can skip the pension material and assign the 
material on income taxes. We don’t expect students to master all this material during their 
first term in accounting, but many will not take more accounting and find later in their 
careers that they need to understand the basics of accounting for these more advanced top-
ics. We have included this material, in the FACMU style of concepts, methods, and uses, so 
that this book can serve as a reference on these topics for our alumni.
■ 
Separation of investments in marketable securities and derivatives from treatment of the equity 
method and consolidated statements Chapter 13 simplifies our coverage of accounting for 
derivatives, while Chapter 14 continues to present material on joint ventures and variable 
interest entities (U.S. GAAP) and special purpose entities (IFRS). We have expanded this 
material into two chapters so that we can provide more coverage on derivatives without 
having a single enormous chapter. As in Chapter 12, we have provided some advanced 
materials to support instructor choice as to which advanced topics to cover and to ensure 
that our alumni will have this material at the ready when they encounter these issues on the 
job or in more advanced courses in the MBA curriculum.
■ 
Summary of the FASB’s and IASB’s joint projects on the conceptual framework Chapter 17 
discusses the conceptual frameworks of both the FASB and IASB and the changes under 
consideration in their joint conceptual framework project.
■ 
Reporting on transactions of a company, other than with owners that affect owners’ equity. 
New in this edition, Chapter 17 brings together into a unified discussion the reporting and 
disclosure of income statement information, including the nature and reporting of transac-
tions, accounting errors and adjustments, earnings per share, and segment reporting.
■ 
More complex topics appear on the Web site We have placed complex material on deferred 
taxes, foreign currency translation, and general price level adjusted accounting on the text’s 
Web site.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

viii
Preface
ORGANIZATION
This book comprises four major parts:
■ 
Part 1: “Overview of Financial Statements,” consisting of Chapters 1 through 3.
■ 
Part 2: “Accounting Concepts and Methods,” Chapters 4 through 7.
■ 
Part 3: “Measuring and Reporting Assets and Equities,” Chapters 8 through 15.
■ 
Part 4: “Synthesis,” Chapters 16 and 17.
In our view, the four parts are tiers, or steps, in the learning process. Part 1 presents a general 
overview of the principal financial statements and basic transactions recording and financial 
statement preparation. Part 2 discusses the basic accounting model accountants use to gen-
erate the principal financial statements. Part 3 considers the specific accounting principles or 
methods used in preparing the financial statements. Part 4 summarizes and integrates the mate-
rial from the first three parts. This organization reflects our view that learning takes place most 
effectively when students begin with a broad picture, then break up that broad picture into smaller 
pieces until achieving the desired depth, and finally synthesizing so that the relation between the 
parts and the whole retains its perspective.
Chapter 1 presents a brief description of the principal activities of a business firm (goal 
setting and strategy formulation, investing, financing, and operating) and shows how the prin-
cipal financial statements—the balance sheet, the income statement, and the statement of cash 
flows—report the results of these activities. We use the business activities and the financial 
statements of Best Buy and Thales, renamed Great Deal and Thames, to illustrate the impor-
tant concepts. Chapter 1 also provides an overview of the financial reporting environment. 
Many students feel deluged with the multitude of new terms and concepts after reading Chap-
ter 1. Later, many students admit that the broad overview helped piece material together as 
they later explored individual topics at greater length and in greater depth. Chapters 2 (balance 
sheet) and 3 (income statement) focus on record-keeping vocabulary and processes. Chapter 
3, unlike treatments in other texts, integrates the accounting entries for transactions during a 
period with the related adjusting entries at the end of the period. When textbooks discuss these 
two types of entries in separate chapters, students often lose sight of the fact that measuring net 
income and reporting financial position requires both kinds of entries.
Chapters 4 and 5 present the basic accounting model that generates the financial state-
ments. They discuss the elements of financial statements: assets, liabilities, equity, revenue, and 
expenses. The conceptual frameworks of the FASB and the IASB provide the basis for these 
discussions, which include fair value measurements for assets and liabilities.
Chapter 6 discusses cash flows. We continue to put coverage of the statement of cash flows 
early in the text. This placement serves two purposes. First, it elevates the statement to its right-
ful place among the principal financial statements. Students can thereby integrate the concepts 
of profitability and cash flow more effectively and begin to understand that one does not neces-
sarily accompany the other. Covering this statement at the end of the course can lead students 
to think the cash flow statement less important. Placing this chapter early in the book forces 
the student to cement understanding of the basic accounting model from Chapters 2, 3, 4, and 
5. Preparing the statement of cash flows requires the student to work backward from the bal-
ance sheet and income statement to reconstruct the transactions that took place. We present 
the direct method of computing cash flow from operations, without detracting from the impor-
tance of understanding the indirect method. The FASB, for more than a decade, and the IASB 
have expressed a preference for the direct method. Few U.S. companies currently use it, but we 
think this will change during the careers of students.
Chapters 2 through 6 use the Balance Sheet Equation or changes in the Balance Sheet 
Equation to motivate understanding of the topics discussed. Each of these chapters includes 
one or more simple problems that students can work using the balance sheet approach to pre-
pare the principal financial statements. Although these chapters emphasize debit/credit proce-
dures, instructors can use the Balance Sheet Equation approach to communicate the basics of 
statement preparation.
Chapters 3 through 6 each contain a section on analyzing and interpreting the financial 
statement introduced in the chapter. This presages the integrated analysis of profitability and 
risk in Chapter 7.
Chapter 7 describes and illustrates tools for analyzing the financial statements. The discus-
sion structures the various financial statement ratios in a multi-level format that, students have 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

ix
Preface
found, reduces the students’ need to memorize formulas. Instructors who incorporate annual 
reports of actual companies throughout their course, as we do with Great Deal and Thames, 
will find that analysis of the financial statements of such companies provides an effective syn-
thesis at this point. An appendix to Chapter 7 illustrates procedures for preparing pro forma 
financial statements. This topic helps cement understanding of the relation among the principal 
financial statements.
Chapters 8 through 15 discuss the guidance in U.S. GAAP and IFRS for generating the 
financial statements. Each chapter not only describes and illustrates the application of the 
guidance but also considers how accounting principles affect the financial statements. This 
approach reflects the view that students should be able to interpret and analyze published 
financial statements and to understand the effect of alternative accounting methods on such 
assessments.
Chapter 16 deepens the exploration of the statement of cash flows by presenting a compre-
hensive illustration using the transactions in Chapters 8 to 14. Chapter 17 reviews the account-
ing principles discussed in Chapters 8 to 15 and discusses reporting issues that standard-setting 
bodies are currently addressing, particularly those where U.S. GAAP and IFRS diverge.
An appendix to the book describes compound interest and present value computations for 
students not previously exposed to this topic.
The end of the book includes a comprehensive glossary of accounting terms. It serves as 
a reference tool for accounting and other business terms and provides additional descriptions 
of a few topics, such as accounting changes and inventory profit, considered only briefly in the 
text. The companion website for the book includes expanded discussion of certain topics in the 
text, including income taxes, foreign currency translation, and general price-level account. Go 
to http://login.cengage.com. 
RELATED MATERIALS ACCOMPANYING THE TEXTBOOK
The following supplementary materials augment the textbook:
NEW online homework For the 14th Edition we have added CengageNOW.
CengageNOW is a powerful course management and online homework tool that provides 
robust instructor control and customization to optimize the student learning experience and 
meet desired outcomes.
CengageNOW has the following advantages:
■ 
“Smart Entry” ensures students do not guess their way through an assignment by unthink-
ingly clicking on an option in a drop-down menu. Instead, in selected assignments, students 
must use free response to type in the account title, meaning that students must understand 
the accounting to get the answer right. It will also help you prepare for tests and quizzes.
■ 
Designed as teaching problems, Blueprint problems bring concepts full circle, focusing on 
a single topic and emulating the experience of a teacher working through an accounting 
problem with a student in their office.
■ 
Blueprint Connections are shorter, scenario-based activities, built as an extension of the 
Blueprint Problem. These items focus on making sure that students understand the inter-
relationship of the concepts introduced in various Blueprint Problems.
■ 
A variety of study tools helps students review concepts. Students can check out the multi-
media resources such as games, Spotlight videos, animated review problems, and more.
■ 
The publisher designed the Personalized Study Plan in CengageNOW to improve students’ 
performance. They can master key concepts and prepare for exams with the Personalized 
Study Plan—a diagnostic tool plus study plan—that contains an Integrated eBook to make 
learning more engaging. 1. Students can take the Pre-Test to find out what they know prior 
to the class lecture. 2. Next, the Personalized Study Plan automatically generates a plan, 
pointing each student to the right section of the text that will help him or her focus on the 
areas of greatest need. 3. Finally, each time the student takes the Post-Test, the Personal-
ized Study Plan revises the plan to help the student continue to focus on remaining areas 
of need.
For more information, go to www.CengageBrain.com.
Where True Learning Takes Place
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

x
Preface
Instructor’s Resource CD (ISBN 978-1-133-62940-5) The Instructor’s Resource 
CD includes the following supplements:
■ 
Solutions Manual The Solutions Manual, written by the authors, provides full solutions 
for all end-of-chapter assignment items, including questions, exercises, and problems. We 
give computations, allowing the instructor to show how to reach a particular answer. The 
Solutions Manual also appears as a printed item.
■ 
Solutions Transparency Masters Transparency masters, available to adopting instructors, 
accompany all numerical end-of-chapter exercises and problems.
■ 
Test Bank The test bank includes multiple-choice items, matching questions, short essay 
questions, and problems.
■ 
ExamView computerized testing software All items in the Test Bank are available in 
ExamView computerized testing software format. This supplement allows instructors to 
add or edit questions, instructions, and answers by previewing them onscreen. They can 
also create and administer quizzes online—whether over the internet, a local area network 
(LAN), or wide area network (WAN).
■ 
Lecture presentations in PowerPoint These sample lectures aid in class preparation by 
those using this text. The PowerPoint slides are also available by download to instructors 
on the book’s Web site.
Printed Solutions Manual (ISBN 978-1-133-37249-3) The Solutions Manual, 
written by the authors, provides full solutions for all end-of-chapter assignment items, includ-
ing questions, exercises, and problems. We give computations, allowing the instructor to show 
how to reach a particular answer.
Bundle for Text Plus Solutions Manual (ISBN: 978-1-285-47797-8)
Spreadsheet template software To reduce tedium in solving problems and increase 
student awareness of basic software applications, at least three problems per chapter have a 
corresponding template where basic problem data appear on a Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet. 
Additional spreadsheet templates are a pedagogical tool in learning selected topics such as for 
the statement of cash flows. The templates, both student and instructor versions, are available 
by download on the book’s Web site.
Student Solutions Manual (ISBN 978-1-133-59102-3) The Student Solutions 
Manual, written by the authors, provides full solutions for the odd end-of-chapter assignment 
items, including questions, exercises, and problems. We give computations, allowing the student 
to see how to reach a particular answer.
Bundle for Text Plus Student Solutions Manual (ISBN: 978-1-285-48198-2) 
Web resources Many helpful Web resources, including free Study Guide components, 
topical discussions, advanced topics, regulatory updates, editorial and marketing contacts, and 
more are available for students to access. These items help reinforce and shed light on text top-
ics. We invite you to discover this wealth of student and instructor resources by logging into the 
text Web site. www.CengageBrain.com, or, for instructors, http://login.cengage.com.
We encourage instructors to contact their South-Western Cengage Learning sales representative 
for information and samples of these items.
Instructors may also contact the publisher directly with questions, comments, or concerns:
Matt Filimonov, Senior Acquisitions Editor – matt.filimonov@cengage.com
Craig Avery, Senior Developmental Editor – craig.avery@cengage.com
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following individuals provided invaluable and insightful comments during the development 
of the 14th Edition:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xi
Preface
Laura Beal University of Nebraska at Omaha
Peggy De Prophetis University of Pennsylvania
Judith S. Flaxman Temple University
Joe Hatch Lewis University
Alison Iavarone Fordham University
Shirin Jahanian Philadelphia Community College
Adam Myers Texas A&M University
John R. Page Tulane University
Wilson Seda New York University
Greg Sommers Southern Methodist University
James Taibleson New York University
Xiao-Jun Zhang University of California, Berkeley
Stephen A. Zeff Rice University
The above-mentioned Steve Zeff has given us so many helpful comments and materials over the 
years that we have lost count, including half a dozen definitions about international accounting 
standard setting for the glossary. Most of these appear in the glossary at International Account-
ing. He deserves and gets our special thanks.
Thomas Horton and Daughters, Inc., permits us to reproduce material from Accounting: 
The Language of Business. Problems 42, 43, and 44 in Chapter 2 derive from ones prepared by 
George H. Sorter. These problems involve working backward from one financial statement to 
another, and we have found them useful in cementing understanding.
We thank Katherine Xenophon-Rybowiak for helping us to prepare the manuscript for this 
edition and Lachina Publishing Services for preparing the index.
We thank the following at Cengage Learning: Matt Filimonov and Craig Avery for provid-
ing general guidance for the direction and scope of the revision and coordinating the revision 
process, and Tim Bailey for coordinating the production.
We are grateful to Jim Emig and Catherine Lumbattis for their careful reading of and help-
ful suggestions for chapters in the text and solutions manual.
We thank the employees of Lachina Publishing Services, Inc., for their copyediting and 
compositing expertise and for their excellent work on page makeup. Bonnie Briggle gets special 
thanks for coordinating the efforts.
Thanks to Michael Behnke for inspiring the WARNING on the dedication page.
We don’t forget Sidney Davidson. What can we say? He taught us and guided us and wrote 
with us. We’re all the intellectual descendants of William Paton. Thank you.
Finally, Clyde Stickney, who led FACMU efforts for over 35 years, since its inception in 
1974. Even in this edition, where his name does not appear as author, he did yeoman work on 
the entire book. Clyde’s special skills involve making sure that we who are inclined to give a 
“full-core dump,” as the computer scientists called it, omit details that MBA students do not 
need to know, but making sure that we cover thoroughly the things they do. And after 35 years 
of reading endless manuscript and publisher proof, he has developed a skilled eye at spotting 
errors. We shall miss him.
RLW
KS
JF
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B r i e f  C o n t e n t s
Preface    
v
Part 1 
Overview of Financial Statements 
1
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities and Overview of Financial Statements 
and the Reporting Process 
3
Part 2 
Accounting Concepts and Methods 
41
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: 
Balance Sheet 
43
Chapter 3 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: 
Income Statement 
71
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing 
111
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities 
141
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows 
167
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis 
219
Part 3 
Measuring and Reporting Assets and Equities 
Using U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
275
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers 
277
Chapter 9 
Working Capital 
327
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets 
375
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases 
415
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, 
and Income Taxes 
465
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives 
505
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock 
547
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions 
583
Part 4 
Synthesis 
611
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look 
613
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions 
657
Appendix 
707
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables 
729
Glossary 
735
Index 
833
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C o n t e n t s
Preface  v
Part 1 
Overview of Financial Statements  1
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities and Overview of Financial Statements 
and the Reporting Process  3
Overview of Business Activities  4 | Principal Financial Statements  6 | Problem 1.1 for 
Self-Study  19 | Financial Reporting Process  20 | Basic Accounting Conventions and 
Concepts  24 | Accounting Methods for Measuring Performance  24 | Problem 1.2 for 
Self-Study  27 | Summary  27 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  27 | Key Terms and 
Concepts  29 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  30
Part 2 
Accounting Concepts and Methods  41
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: 
Balance Sheet  43
Accounts  43 | The Balance Sheet  44 | Problem 2.1 for Self-Study  50 | Problem 2.2 
for Self-Study  53 | Problem 2.3 for Self-Study  56 | Problem 2.4 for Self-Study  56 | 
Summary  57 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  58 | Key Terms and Concepts  63 | 
Questions, Exercises, and Problems  63
Chapter 3 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: 
Income Statement  71
The Income Statement  71 | Relation Between the Balance Sheet and the Income 
Statement  73 | Accounting Process for Revenues, Expenses, and Dividends  74 | 
Problem 3.1 for Self-Study  78 | Problem 3.2 for Self-Study  82 | Problem 3.3 for 
Self-Study  83 | Financial Statement Preparation  83 | Summary  87 | Solutions to 
Self-Study Problems  88 | Key Terms and Concepts  90 | Questions, Exercises, and 
Problems  91
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing  111
Underlying Concepts  111 | Asset Recognition and Measurement  114 | Three Conventions 
Underlying Asset Measurement  119 | Problem 4.1 for Self-Study  120 | Liability Recognition 
and Measurement  121 | Problem 4.2 for Self-Study  123 | Shareholders’ Equity Measurement 
and Disclosure  124 | Summary  126 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  126 | Key Terms 
and Concepts  127 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  127
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities  141
Underlying Concepts and Terminology  141 | Income Statement Display  142 | Revenue 
Recognition and Measurement  146 | Expense Recognition and Measurement  149 | 
Problem 5.1 for Self-Study   151 | Comprehensive Income  151 | Summary  152 | Solution 
to Self-Study Problem  152 | Key Terms and Concepts  154 | Questions, Exercises, and 
Problems  154
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvi
Contents
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows  167
Need for a Statement of Cash Flows  167 | Overview of the Statement of Cash Flows  168 | 
Problem 6.1 for Self-Study  172 | Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows  174 | Problem 6.2 
for Self-Study  180 | Problem 6.3 for Self-Study  185 | Problem 6.4 for Self-Study  189 | 
Using Information from the Statement of Cash Flows  190 | Interpretative Issues Involving the 
Statement of Cash Flows  191 | Problem 6.5 for Self-Study  192 | Summary  193 | Solutions 
to Self-Study Problems  193 | Key Terms and Concepts  200 | Questions, Exercises, and 
Problems  200
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis  219
Objectives of Financial Statement Analysis  220 | Analysis of Profitability  222 | Problem 
7.1 for Self-Study  225 | Problem 7.2 for Self-Study  231 | Analysis of Risk  232 | 
Problem 7.3 for Self-Study  236 | Problem 7.4 for Self-Study  238 | Limitations of Ratio 
Analysis  238 | Common-Size Financial Statements  239 | Summary  243 | Problem 7.5 
for Self-Study  245 | Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements  245 | Solutions to 
Self-Study Problems  254 | Key Terms and Concepts  257 | Questions, Exercises, and 
Problems  257
Part 3 
Measuring and Reporting Assets and Equities Using 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS  275
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers  277
Review and Application of Income Recognition Principles  277 | Application of Income 
Recognition Principles  278 | Problem 8.1 for Self-Study  281 | Income Recognition at 
the Time of Sale  281 | Problem 8.2 for Self-Study  292 | Income Recognition After the 
Sale  294 | Problem 8.3 for Self-Study  296 | Problem 8.4 for Self-Study  299 |  Income 
Recognition Before Delivery  299 | Problem 8.5 for Self-Study  303 | Summary  303 | 
Appendix 8.1: Comparison of Revenue Recognition Criteria Between U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS  304 | Appendix 8.2: Summary of Joint FASB-IASB Revenue Recognition 
Project  305 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  306 | Key Terms and Concepts  310 | 
Questions, Exercises, and Problems  311
Chapter 9 
Working Capital  327
Underlying Concepts and Terminology  327 | Principal Current Asset Accounts  328 | 
Problem 9.1 for Self-Study  335 | Problem 9.2 for Self-Study  341 | Problem 9.3 for 
Self-Study  343 | Principal Current Liability Accounts  344 | Problem 9.4 for Self-
Study  348 | Problem 9.5 for Self-Study  350 | Summary  351 | Appendix 9.1: A Closer 
Look at LIFO’s Effects on Financial Statements  351 | Problem 9.6 for Self-Study  355 | 
Solutions to Self-Study Problems  355 | Key Terms and Concepts  361 | Questions, Exercises, 
and Problems  361
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets  375
Treatment of Expenditures as Assets Versus as Expenses  376 | Measurement of Acquisition 
Cost  379 | Problem 10.1 for Self-Study  381 | Treatment of Acquisition Cost over the Life 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xvii
Contents
of a Long-Lived Asset  382 | Problem 10.2 for Self-Study  386 | Impact of New Information 
About Long-Lived Assets  388 | Problem 10.3 for Self-Study  389 | Problem 10.4 for 
Self-Study  390 | Disposal of Assets  391 | Changes in the Fair Values of Long-Lived 
Assets  392 | Financial Statement Presentation of Long-Lived Assets  394 | Summary  395 | 
Appendix 10.1: Long-Lived Asset Impairment Procedures in U.S. GAAP and IFRS  396 | 
Problem 10.5 for Self-Study  398 | Problem 10.6 for Self-Study  402 | Solutions to Self-Study 
Problems  402 | Key Terms and Concepts  404 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  405
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases  415
Overview of Long-Term Debt Markets  417 | Accounting for Notes  419 | Problem 11.1 
for Self-Study  421 | Accounting for Bonds  421 | Problem 11.2 for Self-Study  424 | 
Problem 11.3 for Self-Study  426 | Problem 11.4 for Self-Study  431 | Fair Value 
Option  433 | Accounting for Leases  434 | Problem 11.5 for Self-Study  441 | Problem 
11.6 for Self-Study  444 | Summary  445 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  446 | 
Key Terms and Concepts  454 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  454
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income 
Taxes  465
Off-Balance-Sheet Financing  465 | Problem 12.1 for Self-Study  468 | Retirement 
Benefits  469 | Problem 12.2 for Self-Study  477 | Income Taxes  479 | Problem 12.3 
for Self-Study  483 | Problem 12.4 for Self-Study  486 | Solutions to Self-Study 
Problems  487 | Key Terms and Concepts  490 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  491
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives  505
Issues in Asset Measurement and Income Recognition  506 | Accounting and Reporting 
of Marketable Securities  508 | Problem 13.1 for Self-Study  512 | Problem 13.2 for 
Self-Study  515 | Derivative Instruments  517 | Problem 13.3 for Self-Study  531 | 
The Fair Value Option Applied to Marketable Securities and Derivatives  532 | 
Summary  533 | Appendix 13.1: Summary of IFRS 9, Financial Instruments  533 | 
Solutions to Self-Study Problems  534 | Key Terms and Concepts  538 | Questions, 
Exercises, and Problems  538
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock  547
Overview of the Accounting for and Reporting of Investments in Common Stock  547 | 
Minority, Active Investments  549 | Problem 14.1 for Self-Study  553 | Majority, Active 
Investments  554 | Problem 14.2 for Self-Study  556 | Problem 14.3 for Self-Study  563 | 
Variable Interest Entities  565 | Summary  566 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  568 | 
Key Terms and Concepts  570 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  571
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions  583
Capital Contributions  584 | Problem 15.1 for Self-Study  587 | Corporate Distributions  587 | 
Problem 15.2 for Self-Study  590 | Problem 15.3 for Self-Study  592 | Problem 15.4 for 
Self-Study  597 | Summary  598 | Solutions to Self-Study Problems  598 | Key Terms and 
Concepts  600 | Questions, Exercises, and Problems  600
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

xviii
Contents
Part 4 
Synthesis  611
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look  613
Review of Concepts Underlying the Statement of Cash Flows  613 | Review of T-Account 
Procedure for Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows  614 | Comprehensive Illustration 
of the Statement of Cash Flows  615 | Problem 16.1 for Self-Study  630 | Illustration of 
the Direct Method for Cash Flow from Operations  631 | Interpreting the Statement of 
Cash Flows  632 | The Effects of Transactions Involving Derivatives and the Fair Value 
Option on the Statement of Cash Flows  633 | The Effects of Transactions Involving 
Investments on the Statement of Cash Flows  634 | Summary  635 | Solution to Self-Study 
Problem  635 | Problems  636
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions  657
Conceptual Framework  657 | Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts  663 | 
Problem 17.1 for Self-Study  669 | More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income  674 | 
Problem 17.2 for Self-Study  684 | Earnings per Share  684 | Solutions to Self-Study 
Problems  689 | Key Terms and Concepts  694 | Exercises and Problems  694
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications  709
 
 
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables  729
Glossary 
735
Index 
833
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FACMU14
P a r t
1
Overview of 
Financial Statements
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I
n making resource allocation decisions, investors and creditors depend on reliable and relevant 
information about financial position, profitability, and risk. Financial reports are a key source 
of this information. The process of preparing those reports is financial accounting, or, more 
broadly, financial reporting. Understanding the basics of the financial reporting process is funda-
mental to understanding how to use financial reports for resource allocation decisions, such as 
making investments.
You are about to embark on the study of financial accounting. You will learn the concepts 
underlying the accounting principles firms use to measure the results of their business activities, 
the accounting principles themselves, some of the judgments and estimates managers must make 
to apply accounting principles, and tools for analyzing financial statements. You will learn about 
two similar—but not identical—financial accounting systems: U.S. GAAP1 and International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Accounting systems specify the financial accounting prin-
ciples that firms must use, and the kinds of estimates and judgments that managers must make 
in applying those principles. We introduce these two systems in this chapter, illustrate them with 
a firm that uses U.S. GAAP (Great Deal, Inc., hereafter Great Deal) and a firm that uses IFRS 
(Thames Limited, hereafter Thames), and continue to present both systems throughout the book.2
Our goal is to help you understand the concepts, methods, and uses of financial accounting to 
enable you to use financial accounting information effectively. As a financial statement user, you 
will encounter financial reports with a variety of formats and presentations. We show a few of 
those variations, understanding that you will encounter many more.
As the chapter title suggests, this chapter introduces the concepts, methods, and uses that later 
chapters discuss in detail. We begin with a description of Great Deal’s and Thames’s business 
activities. We next see how firms measure the results of their business activities and report those 
 1 GAAP refers to generally accepted accounting principles. U.S. GAAP is the authoritative guidance for financial 
accounting in the United States. We discuss U.S. GAAP and IFRS in more detail throughout the book.
 2 Financial information presented for Great Deal and Thames Limited is derived from the financial reports of two 
actual firms that report using U.S. GAAP and IFRS, respectively. That information has been modified for inclusion 
in this book.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Introduction to Business 
Activities and Overview 
of Financial Statements 
and the Reporting Process
C h a p t e r
1
1. Understand four key activities of 
business entities: (a) establish goals 
and strategies, (b) obtain financing, 
(c) make investments, and (d) conduct 
operations.
2. Understand the purpose and content 
of the financial statements: (a) balance 
sheet, (b) income statement, (c) state-
ment of cash flows, and (d) statement 
of shareholders’ equity.
3. Understand the roles of participants in 
the financial reporting process, includ-
ing managers and governing boards, 
accounting standard setters and 
regulators, independent external audi-
tors, and financial statement users.
4. Gain an awareness of financial report-
ing as part of a global system for 
providing information for resource 
allocation decisions, including two 
financial reporting systems (U.S. GAAP 
and International Financial Reporting 
Standards).
5. Understand the difference between 
the cash basis and the accrual basis of 
accounting, and why the latter provides 
a better measure of performance.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
results in their financial statements. Finally, we describe several components of the financial 
reporting process and introduce U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS ACTIVITIES
The managers of a business3 prepare financial reports to present information about that busi-
ness’s activities to external users. External users include owners of the business, lenders, regula-
tors, and employees. Understanding those financial reports requires an understanding of the 
activities of the business:
1. Establishing goals and strategies.
2. Obtaining financing.
3. Making investments.
4. Conducting operations.
We illustrate these four business activities using two firms, Great Deal and Thames.
Example 1 Great Deal, based in the United States, operates more than 3,500 retail stores in 
the United States and around the world. The United States is its largest market. It prepares 
financial statements using U.S. GAAP. Its retail stores sell consumer electronics, home office 
products, entertainment software, appliances, and related services.
Example 2 Thames, based in France, is an electronics company that provides information 
systems and related services to the aerospace, defense, and security sectors. Thames prepares its 
financial statements using IFRS. It operates around the world. Europe is its largest market.
Although Great Deal and Thames differ in terms of business model, size, and geographical 
scope, their managers must carry out similar kinds of business activities. Differences in the two 
firms’ business models affect the content of each of the activities.
ESTABLISH CORPORATE GOALS AND STRATEGIES
Goals are the end results toward which the firm directs its energies, and strategies are the means 
for achieving those results. Examples of corporate goals include maximizing the return to the 
firm’s owners, providing a good working environment for employees, and improving the envi-
ronmental performance of the firm’s products and manufacturing processes. Management, 
under the oversight of the firm’s governing board (or boards),4 sets the firm’s strategies—for 
example, determining the firm’s lines of business and its geographic locations and the strate-
gies for each business unit. Factors that would affect a firm’s goals and strategies include the 
following:
1. Goals and strategies of competitors.
2. Barriers to entry of the industry, such as patents or large investments in buildings.
3. Nature of the demand for the firm’s products and services. For example, demand might 
be increasing, such as for certain pharmaceutical products, or demand might be relatively 
stable, such as for groceries.
4. Existence and nature of government regulation.
Firms provide extensive information about their corporate goals and strategies. For exam-
ple, a recent Great Deal financial report indicates that store development, including entering 
new markets, opening new stores in existing markets, and remodeling/expanding existing stores, 
plays a role in Great Deal’s growth. The report provides quantitative information about store 
openings and store closings in the past year as well as plans for the coming year. Similarly, 
 3 We use the terms managers and management to refer to employees who make operating, investing, and financing 
decisions and apply accounting standards to prepare financial statements. We also use the term firms to refer to 
these same decision makers.
 4 By law, some countries require firms to have two governing boards; other countries require one.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

5
Overview of Business Activities
Thames’s recent financial report announced a plan to address the difficult business outlook in 
its main markets by undertaking cost-cutting efforts.
Establishing corporate goals and strategies does not directly affect the firm’s cash flows. 
The other three business activities—carrying out operations, making investments, and obtain-
ing financing—either generate cash or use cash. The statement of cash flows, introduced later 
in the chapter, describes these cash flows in more detail.
OBTAIN FINANCING
To carry out their plans, firms require financing, that is, funds from owners and creditors. 
Owners provide funds to a firm and in return receive ownership interests. For a corpora-
tion, the ownership interests are shares of common stock and the owners are shareholders or 
 stockholders.5 In some cases the common shares trade in active markets such as the New York 
Stock Exchange and the London Stock Exchange. Firms whose shares trade in active markets 
are publicly traded and subject to special regulations. When the firm raises funds from own-
ers, it has no obligation to repay these funds. Sometimes, a firm’s governing board may decide 
to distribute dividends to that firm’s shareholders. Dividends are a distribution of assets, often 
cash, to owners.
Creditors provide funds that the firm must repay in specific amounts at specific dates. Long-
term creditors require repayment from the borrower over a period of time that exceeds one 
year. Short-term creditors require payment over the next year. One common form of long-term 
financing is bonds. A bond agreement specifies the amount borrowed and the terms of repay-
ment, including the timing and amounts of cash the borrower agrees to pay to the creditors. 
Another common form of long-term borrowing is bank loans. Banks usually lend for periods 
between several months and several years. Finally, suppliers of raw materials or merchandise 
that do not require payment immediately also provide funds—the firm gets raw materials or 
merchandise now but does not pay cash until later.
Each firm makes financing decisions about the proportion of funds to obtain from owners, 
long-term creditors, and short-term creditors. Corporate finance courses cover the techniques 
that firms use to make financing decisions.
MAKE INVESTMENTS
A firm makes investments to obtain the productive capacity to carry out its business activities. 
Investing activities involve acquiring the following:
1. Land, buildings, and equipment. These investments provide the capacity to manufacture and 
sell products and to create and sell services. They are usually long term, in the sense that 
they provide productive capacity for a number of years.
2. Patents, licenses, and other contractual rights. These investments provide rights to use ideas 
and processes. They are intangible, in the sense that they do not have a physical existence.
3. Common shares or bonds of other firms. These investments make a firm an owner or creditor 
of another firm. Short-term investments in equity shares typically involve partial owner-
ship, while long-term investments in equity interests involve partial or complete ownership 
of another business.
4. Inventories. Firms maintain an inventory of products to sell to customers. For example, 
Great Deal maintains inventories of consumer electronics, home office products, entertain-
ment software and appliances.
5. Accounts receivable from customers. In many businesses, customers do not pay for goods 
and services immediately. Accounts receivable describes the amounts owed to a firm by its 
customers for short periods, such as 30 days. In extending credit to customers, the firm 
does not collect cash right away. If the firm did not extend the credit, however, it might not 
make the sale in the first place.
6. Cash. Most firms maintain cash balances (like a corporate checking account) to pay their 
current bills.
 5 If the business is organized as a partnership, the owners are partners. If the business is organized as a propri-
etorship, the owner is the proprietor. This book considers corporations, in which the owners are shareholders or 
stockholders.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Managerial accounting courses and corporate finance courses cover the techniques that 
firms use to make investment decisions.
CARRY OUT OPERATIONS
Management operates the productive capacity of the firm to generate earnings. 
 Operating  activities include the following:
1. Purchasing. The purchasing department of a retailer, such as Great Deal, acquires items 
to sell to customers. The purchasing department of a firm with manufacturing operations, 
such as Thames, acquires raw materials needed for production.
2. Production. The production department in a manufacturing firm combines raw materials, 
labor services, and other manufacturing inputs to produce goods for sale. A service firm 
combines labor inputs and other inputs to provide services to customers.
3. Marketing. The marketing department oversees selling and distributing products and ser-
vices to customers.
4. Administration. Administrative activities include data processing, human resource manage-
ment, legal services, and other support services.
5. Research and development. A firm undertakes research and development with the objective 
of discovering new knowledge that it can use to create new products, new processes, or new 
services.
Managerial accounting, marketing, and operations management courses cover the tech-
niques that firms use to make operating decisions.
PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Firms communicate the results of their business activities in the annual report to shareholders.6 
The annual report may contain letters from the firm’s management describing the firm’s goals, 
strategies, and accomplishments, as well as descriptions and pictures of the firm’s products, 
facilities, and employees. If the firm’s shares trade publicly, it will also file an annual report 
with a regulator, typically a government agency.7 The applicable laws and regulations of the 
country where the shares trade specify the form and content of the annual report. In the United 
States, regulatory requirements applicable to publicly traded firms require the inclusion of a 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A), in which management discusses operating 
results, liquidity (sources and uses of cash), capital resources, and reasons for changes in profit-
ability and risk during the past year.
We focus on the four principal financial statements and the supplementary information that 
firms report, including the following:
1. Balance sheet or statement of financial position at a specified time.
2. Income statement or statement of profit and loss for a specified time period.
3. Statement of cash flows.
4. Statement of shareholders’ equity or statement of changes in shareholders’ equity.
5. Notes to the financial statements, including various supporting schedules.
 6 Many firms provide these annual reports on their Web sites, often in the investor relations section. Some securi-
ties regulators’ Web sites also provide required filings, including annual reports.
 7 The regulator may also require interim reports, for example, on a quarterly basis. In the United States, firms 
whose shares trade publicly file quarterly reports that contain a subset of the information in the annual report. 
Those quarterly reports appear on the regulator’s Web site (www.sec.gov). The U.S. regulator is the Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

7
Principal Financial Statements
The following sections of this chapter briefly discuss each of these five items. In describ-
ing these items, we refer to the financial statements of Great Deal and Thames. Great Deal’s 
financial statements appear in Exhibits 1.1–1.4, and Thames’s financial statements appear in 
Exhibits 1.5–1.8. We begin with several observations about conventions and concepts that apply 
to financial statements in general.
FINANCIAL REPORTING CONVENTIONS
In this section we describe some conventions used in financial statement preparation. These 
conventions govern the length of time covered by the financial statements (the account-
ing period), the number of reporting periods included in the financial reports, the monetary 
amounts, and the terminology and level of detail in the financial statements.
Length of Reporting (Accounting) Period Financial statement presentations can 
span intervals of any length. The most common accounting period for external reporting is one 
year, called the fiscal year. While many firms use the calendar year as their fiscal year (that is, 
the fiscal year ends on December 31), some firms select other fiscal year-ends. When the fiscal 
year ends in June–December of calendar year T, convention describes the financial reports as 
pertaining to fiscal year T. For example, Thames’s financial report for the year ended December 
31, 2013, reports Thames’s performance for fiscal 2013. When the fiscal year ends in January–
May of year T, convention describes the financial reports as pertaining to fiscal year T − 1. 
For example, Great Deal’s financial report for the year ended February 27, 2013, reports Great 
Deal’s performance for fiscal 2012.8
Number of Reporting Periods To assist in making comparisons over time, both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require firms to include results for multiple reporting periods in each report. 
Firms must include two balance sheets describing the beginning and ending balances of the 
accounts for the current fiscal year and the prior fiscal year. Refer to Exhibit 1.1, which shows 
that Great Deal’s fiscal 2012 annual report includes a balance sheet as of February 27, 2013 
(the end of fiscal 2012), and a balance sheet as of February 28, 2012 (the end of fiscal 2011). 
For the income statement, statement of cash flows, and statement of shareholders’ equity, SEC 
rules require statements for the current year and the two prior years; IFRS requires statements 
for the current year and the prior year.
Monetary Amounts The financial statements report a numerical amount, the monetary 
amount, for each listed item. The financial statements indicate the measuring units, both the 
numerical expression such as in thousands or in millions, and the currency, such as dollars ($) 
or euros (€). A firm typically reports in the currency of the country where it is headquartered 
or where it conducts most of its business. For example, a firm with headquarters and most of 
its business activities in England would report its results in pounds sterling (£).
Terminology and Level of Detail U.S. GAAP and IFRS contain broad guidance 
on what the financial statements must contain, but neither completely specifies the level of 
detail or the names of accounts. IFRS contains relatively more guidance. For example, IFRS 
describes the line items that the balance sheet must display and described items that the firm 
must separately disclose.9 U.S. GAAP contains no analog to this IFRS guidance.10 You should 
therefore expect to encounter variation in the ways financial statements display information and 
variation in the level of detail provided. In addition, the rules do not always require firms to use 
specific names for accounts and line items on the financial statements. While practice tends to 
converge on certain names, such as cash, accounts receivable, and inventories, you should expect 
to encounter variation in account titles as well as variation in format and display.
With these conventions in mind, we turn to a discussion of the financial statements.
 8 Not all firms follow this convention, so use caution in comparing results across firms.
 9 International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of 
Financial Statements,” revised 2003.
10 As of late 2011, a long-running project underway to improve and converge the U.S. GAAP and IFRS guidance 
for financial statement presentation was incomplete. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Great Deal, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 1.1
February 27, 
2013
February 28, 
2012
Assets
Current Assets
 
Cash and cash equivalents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,826 
$   498 
 
Short-term investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 90 
 11 
 
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,020 
 1,868 
 
Merchandise inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5,486 
 4,753 
 
Other current assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   1,144
   1,062
 
 
Total current assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 10,566 
 8,192 
Property and Equipment
 
Land and buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 757 
 755 
 
Leasehold improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,154 
 2,013 
 
Fixtures and equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,447 
 4,060 
 
Property under capital lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      95
     112
 7,453 
 6,940 
 
Less: Accumulated depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (3,383)
   (2,766)
 
 
Net property and equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,070 
 4,174 
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,452 
 2,203 
Tradenames  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 159 
 173 
Customer relationships. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 279 
 322 
Equity and other investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 324 
 395 
Other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     452
     367
Total assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$18,302
$15,826
 
 
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current Liabilities
 
Accounts payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,276 
$ 4,997 
 
Unredeemed gift card liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 463 
 479 
 
Accrued compensation and related expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 544 
 459 
 
Accrued liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,681 
 1,382 
 
Accrued income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 316 
 281 
 
Short-term debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 663 
 783 
 
Current portion of long-term debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      35
      54
 
 
Total current liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 8,978 
 8,435 
Long-term liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,256 
 1,109 
Long-term debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   1,104
   1,126
 
Total liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,338 
 10,670 
Commitments and contingencies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
Shareholders’ Equity
 
Preferred stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
 
Common stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 42 
 41 
 
Additional paid-in capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 441 
 205 
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5,797 
 4,714 
 
Accumulated other comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      40 
    (317)
 
 
Total Great Deal shareholders’ equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,320 
 4,643 
 
Noncontrolling interests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     644
     513
 
 
Total shareholders’ equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   6,964 
    5,156 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$18,302
$15,826
BALANCE SHEET
The balance sheet, also called the statement of financial position, provides information, at 
a point in time, on the firm’s productive resources and the financing used to pay for those 
resources. Exhibit 1.1 presents Great Deal’s balance sheet as of February 27, 2013, and Feb-
ruary 28, 2012. Exhibit 1.5 presents Thames’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2013, and 
December 31, 2012. These balance sheets present information at the end of each firm’s fiscal 
year. Great Deal’s annual report states that its fiscal year ends on February 27 or February 28 
of each year; Thames states that its fiscal year ends on December 31. The financial position of 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

9
Principal Financial Statements
Great Deal, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Earnings
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 1.2
the firm at other times during the year can differ substantially from that depicted on the end-of-
year balance sheet.
Concepts of Assets, Liabilities, and Shareholders’ Equity The balance sheet 
lists the firm’s assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ equity and provides totals and subto-
tals. Each line item on the balance sheet has a title that indicates the nature of the item and 
a numerical amount, in units of currency. For example, the first item on Great Deal’s balance 
sheet is Cash and Cash Equivalents of $1,826 million. The heading of the balance sheet indi-
cates the measuring unit is millions of U.S. dollars. The first item on Thames’s balance sheet is 
Goodwill, net, measured in millions of euros (€); the amount is €2,986.9 million.
Assets are economic resources with the potential to provide future economic benefits to a 
firm. The firm’s investments in items to provide productive capacity are examples of assets. For 
example, both Great Deal and Thames list property and equipment (Thames calls these “tan-
gible assets, net”) among the assets on their balance sheets.11
Liabilities are creditors’ claims. Creditors have provided funds, or goods and services, and 
the firm has an obligation to pay creditors for those goods and services. We describe two exam-
ples of liabilities that result from a firm’s having previously received benefits (inventories, labor 
services):
■ 
Both Great Deal and Thames have made purchases but have not yet paid the entire amount 
owed. Great Deal includes the amount owed to its suppliers in the liability account labeled 
“Accounts payable.” Thames includes the amount in the account “Accounts, notes and 
other current payables.”
11 The order in which the assets appear differs between Great Deal’s and Thames’s balance sheets. We discuss this 
ordering later in this chapter.
February 27, 
2013
February 28, 
2012
February 27, 
2011
Revenue
 $49,694 
 $45,015 
 $40,023 
Cost of goods sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  37,534 
 34,017 
  30,477 
Gross profit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,160 
10,998 
9,546 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses  . . . . . . . 
9,873 
8,984 
7,385 
Restructuring charges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
52 
78 
0 
Goodwill and trade name impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       0 
      66 
       0 
Operating income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,235 
1,870 
2,161 
Other income (expense)
 
Investment income and other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
54 
35 
129 
 
Investment impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0 
(111)
0 
 
Interest expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     (94)
     (94)
     (62)
Earnings before income tax expense and equity in 
income (loss) of affiliates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,195 
1,700 
2,228 
Income tax expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
802 
674 
815 
Equity in income (loss) of affiliates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       1
       7
      (3)
Net earnings including noncontrolling interests . . . . . . 
1,394 
1,033 
1,410 
Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests . . 
     (77)
     (30)
      (3)
Net earnings attributable to Great Deal, Inc.  . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,317 
$ 1,003 
$ 1,407 
Earnings per share attributable to Great Deal, Inc.
 
Basic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3.16 
 $2.43 
 $3.20 
 
Diluted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3.10 
 $2.39 
 $3.12 
Weighted-average common shares outstanding 
(in millions)
 
Basic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
416.8 
412.5 
439.2 
 
Diluted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
427.5 
422.9 
452.9 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Great Deal, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 1.3
February 27, 
2013
February 28, 
2012
February 27, 
2011
Operating Activities
Net earnings including noncontrolling interests . . . . . . . . .
 $ 1,394 
 $ 1,033 
 $ 1,410 
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to total cash 
provided by operating activities:
 
Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
838 
730 
580 
 
Amortization of definite lived intangible assets . . . . . . .
88 
63 
1 
 
Asset impairments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 
177 
0 
 
Restructuring charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52 
78 
0 
 
Stock-based compensation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118 
110 
105 
 
Deferred income taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(30)
(43)
74 
 
Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation . .
(7)
(6)
(24)
 
Other, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      (4)
      12 
      (7)
2,453 
2,154 
2,139 
Changes in operating assets, net of acquired assets 
and liabilities:
 
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(63)
(419)
12 
 
Merchandise inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(609)
258 
(562)
 
Other assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(98)
(175)
42 
 
Accounts payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141 
139 
221 
 
Other liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279 
(75)
74 
 
Income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     103 
      (5)
      99 
Total cash provided by operating activities . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,206 
  1,877 
  2,025 
Investing Activities
 
Additions to PPE, net of non-cash expenditures  . . . . . .
(615)
(1,303)
(797)
 
Purchases of investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(16)
(81)
(8,501)
 
Sales of investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56 
246 
10,935 
 
Acquisitions of businesses, net of cash acquired  . . . . .
(7)
(2,170)
(89)
 
Change in restricted cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18 
(97)
(85)
 
Settlement of net investment hedges . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40 
0 
0 
 
Other, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (16)
     (22)
       1 
 
Total cash (used in) provided by investing activities. . . .
    (540)
  (3,427)
  1,464 
Financing Activities
 
Repurchase of common stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0 
0 
(3,461)
 
Issuance of common stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138 
83 
146 
 
Dividends paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(234)
(223)
(204)
 
Repayments of debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5,342)
(4,712)
(4,353)
 
Proceeds from issuance of debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,132 
5,606 
4,486 
 
Acquisition of noncontrolling interests. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(34)
(146)
0 
 
Excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation . .
7 
6 
24 
 
Other, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (15)
     (23)
     (16)
 
Total cash (used in) provided by financing activities. . . .
    (348)
    591
  (3,378)
Effect of exchange rate changes in cash. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10 
19 
122 
Increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents . . . . .
  1,328 
    (940)
    233 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year. . . . . .
    498 
  1,438 
  1,205 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year  . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,826 
$   498 
$ 1,438 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
 
Income taxes paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
732 
766 
644 
 
Interest paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78 
83 
49 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

11
Principal Financial Statements
Great Deal, Inc.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(amounts in millions of US$ except share amounts)
EXHIBIT 1.4
Common 
Shares
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income
Subtotal
Non-
controlling 
Interests
Total
Balance at February 28,  2010. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
481
 $48 
 $430 
 $5,507 
 $216 
$6,201 
 $ 35 
 $6,236 
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
 1,407 
—
 1,407 
 3 
 1,410 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments  . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
 311 
 311 
 2 
 313 
 
Unrealized losses on available for sale 
investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
 (25)
   (25)
   (25)
Total comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,693
   5
 1,698
Cumulative effect of adopting a new accounting . . . . . 
standard related to uncertain tax positions . . . . . 
—
—
—
 (13)
—
 (13)
—
 (13)
Stock options exercised  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
—
 93 
—
—
 93 
—
 93 
Tax benefit from stock options, restricted stock, and 
employee stock purchase plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
 17 
—
—
 17 
—
 17 
Issuance of common stock under employee stock 
purchase plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
—
 53 
—
—
 53 
—
 53 
Stock-based compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
 105 
—
—
 105 
—
 105 
Common stock dividends, $0.46 per share  . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
 (204)
—
 (204)
—
 (204)
Repurchase of common stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(75)
  (7)
(690)
 (2,764)
   —
(3,461)
  —
(3,461)
Balance at February 27,  2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
411 
 41 
 8 
 3,933 
 502 
 4,484 
 40 
 4,524 
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
 1,003 
—
 1,003 
 30 
 1,033 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments  . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
 (830)
 (830)
 (175)
 (1,005)
 
Unrealized losses on available for sale 
investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
 (19)
 (19)
—
 (19)
 
Reclassification adjustment for impairment loss 
on available for sale security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
  30
    30
   —
    30
Total comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   184 
  (145)
    39
Acquisition of business. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—
—
 666 
 666 
Acquisition of noncontrolling interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—
—
 (48)
 (48)
Stock options exercised  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2 
—
 34 
—
—
 34 
—
 34 
Tax benefit from stock options, restricted stock, 
and employee stock purchase plan . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
 4 
—
—
 4 
—
 4 
Issuance of common stock under employee stock 
purchase plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
  —
 49
—
—
 49 
—
 49 
Stock-based compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
 110 
—
—
 110 
—
 110 
Common stock dividends, $0.54 per share  . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
   —
  (222)
   —
  (222)
  —
  (222)
Balance at February 28,  2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
414 
 41 
 205 
 4,714 
 (317)
 4,643 
 513 
 5,156 
Net earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
—
 1,317 
—
 1,317 
 77 
 1,394 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
 
Foreign currency translation adjustments  . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
—
—
 329 
 329 
 76 
 405 
 
Unrealized gains on available for sale investments  . .
 —
  —
—
—
 28 
    28 
  —
    28 
Total comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,674 
 153 
 1,827 
Purchase accounting adjustments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
—
—
—
—
 (22)
 (22)
Stock options exercised  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4 
 1 
 95 
—
—
 96 
—
 96 
Tax loss from stock options, restricted stock, and 
employee stock purchase plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
 (19)
—
—
 (19)
—
 (19)
Issuance of common stock under employee stock 
purchase plan  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1 
  —
 42 
—
—
 42 
—
 42 
Stock-based compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
 118 
—
—
 118 
—
 118 
Common stock dividends, $0.56 per share  . . . . . . . . . 
 —
  —
    —
   (234)
   —
  (234)
   —
  (234)
Balance at February 27,  2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
419
$42
$441
$5,797
$ 40
$6,320
$644
$6,964
■ 
Employees have provided labor services for which Great Deal and Thames have not made 
full payment. Great Deal includes the amounts owed to employees in the liability account 
“Accrued compensation and related expenses.” Thames includes them in “Accounts, notes 
and other current payables.”
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Shareholders’ equity shows the amount of funds owners have provided either by buying 
shares or by reinvesting (retaining) the net assets generated by earnings. Owners have a claim 
on the firm’s assets because they have provided funds to the firm. The owners’ claim is a resid-
ual interest in the firm’s assets. That is, owners have a claim on assets that are in excess of the 
assets required to meet creditors’ claims. Shareholders’ equity lists both the amount invested by 
shareholders for their ownership interests and the amount of retained earnings. Thames com-
bines contributed capital and retained earnings in the account “Capital, paid-in surplus and 
other reserves”; Thames’s total shareholders equity is €3,743.6 million. Great Deal also uses 
the term shareholders’ equity. As of February 27, 2013, there were 419 million shares issued 
Thames Limited
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(amounts in millions of euros [€] except share amounts)
EXHIBIT 1.5
December 31, 
2013
December 31, 
2012
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€ 2,986.9 
€ 2,793.2
Other intangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
925.3
1,129.3
Tangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,338.3
  1,262.9
Total noncurrent operating assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,250.5
5,185.4
Share in net assets of equity affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
711.0
692.4
Available for sale investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
101.9
175.4
Loans and other financial assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    171.9
    258.8
Total noncurrent financial assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,235.3
6,312.0
Fair value of derivatives: interest rate risk management. . . . . . . . . . . . 
24.8
13.1
Pension and other employee benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
66.0
44.0
Deferred tax assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    678.0
    433.5
 
Noncurrent assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  7,004.1
  6,802.6
Inventories and work in progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,210.8
2,227.4
Construction contracts: assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,243.2
2,400.6
Advances to suppliers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
342.4
548.2
Accounts, notes and other current receivables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,934.8
4,064.1
Fair value of derivatives: currency risk management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    172.6
    292.4
Total current operating assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,903.8
9,532.7
Current tax receivables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40.4
13.1
Current accounts with affiliated companies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
94.8
65.1
Marketable securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.4
22.4
Cash and equivalents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,960.1
  1,499.8
Total current financial assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2,099.7
  1,600.4
 
Current assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,003.5
 11,133.1
 
Total assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€18,007.6
€17,935.7
Capital, paid-in surplus and other reserves  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€ 4,168.3 
€ 4,498.9 
Cumulative translation adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (283.2)
 (399.8)
Treasury shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (141.5)
    (150.2)
Shareholders' equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,743.6 
 3,948.9 
Noncontrolling interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     10.2
      2.9
 
Total shareholders' equity and noncontrolling interests . . . . . . 
 3,753.8 
 3,951.8 
Financial debt: long term  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,651.6 
 761.3 
Pension and other employee benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 856.7 
 847.5 
Deferred tax liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    258.6
    268.6
 
Noncurrent liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,766.9 
 1,877.4 
Advances received from customers on contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,849.4 
 3,687.4 
Refundable grants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 172.8 
 169.5 
Construction contracts: liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 882.7 
 578.4 
Reserves for contingencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,129.8 
 961.5 
Accounts, notes and other current payables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,736.0 
 5,045.9 
Fair value of derivatives: currency risk management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    100.7
    279.5
Total current operating liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 10,871.4 
 10,722.2 
Current tax payables. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 92.2 
 88.9 
Financial debt: short term. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 326.4 
 1,136.3 
Current accounts with affiliated companies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    196.9
    159.1
Total current financial liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    523.3
  1,295.4
 
Total current liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,486.9
 12,106.5
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€18,007.6
€17,935.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

13
Principal Financial Statements
to shareholders, who had provided total funds to Great Deal of $483 million (= $42 + $441). 
Great Deal’s retained earnings is $5,797 million, discussed next.
Retained earnings represent the net assets (= total assets − total liabilities) a firm derives 
from its earnings that exceed the dividends it has distributed to shareholders. Management 
operates the firm’s assets with the intent of generating earnings. That is, the firm expects to 
receive more assets than it consumes in operations. The increase in assets, after claims of credi-
tors, is called Retained Earnings, and it belongs to the firm’s owners. As of February 27, 2013, 
Great Deal’s retained earnings is $5,797 million, meaning that cumulative earnings exceed 
cumulative dividends by $5,797 million. As of December 31, 2013, Thames has an accumulated 
deficit, as shown in Exhibit 1.8, the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders Equity 
and Minority Interests.12 An accumulated deficit means that cumulative earnings less dividends 
are negative. The amount of Thames’s accumulated deficit at December 31, 2013 is €197.3 
million.
An amount of assets equal to retained earnings does not appear on any single line on the 
balance sheet. Instead, firms use the assets generated by the retention of earnings to acquire 
various assets including inventories, buildings, equipment, and other assets. Almost all success-
ful firms use a large percentage of the assets they generate by earnings to replace assets and to 
grow, rather than to pay dividends.
12 Authoritative guidance uses the term noncontrolling interest, not minority interest. However, firms sometimes 
continue to use the latter term in their financial reports.
Thames Limited
Consolidated Profit and Loss Account
(amounts in millions of euros [€])
EXHIBIT 1.6
A. Consolidated Profit and Loss Statements
2013
2012
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 12,881.5 
€12,664.8 
Cost of sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (10,633.4)
 (9,964.5)
Research and development expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (550.5)
 (440.2)
Marketing and selling expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (901.9)
 (806.7)
General and administrative expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (543.4)
 (558.7)
Restructuring costs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (116.1)
 (32.5)
Amortization of intangible assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (84.4)
   (109.8)
Income from operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 51.8 
 752.4 
Impairment of noncurrent operating assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (260.1)
 (69.1)
Gain (loss) on disposal of assets and other . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (1.0)
 35.2 
Income of operating activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (209.3)
 718.5 
Financial interest on gross debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      (91.6)
    (101.4)
Financial income from cash and equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      26.0 
     49.6 
Cost of net financial debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (65.6)
 (51.8)
Other financial income (expense). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (44.9)
 (49.8)
Other components of pension charge  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (105.1)
 (11.1)
Income tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 175.3 
 (103.0)
Share in net income (loss) of equity affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      48.0
      57.6
Net income (loss)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€   (201.6)
€   560.4
Of which:
 
 
Net income, Group Share. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (201.8)
   559.9 
Noncontrolling interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.2 
0.5 
Basic earnings per share  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€    (1.03)
€    2.87 
Diluted earnings per share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€    (1.03)
€    2.85 
B. Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
2013
2012
Net income (loss)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€   (201.8)
€   559.9 
Translation of the financial statements of foreign subsidiaries  . . . . . . .
119.1 
(263.3)
Foreign investments' hedge, net of tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2.5)
2.9 
Cash flow hedge, net of tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51.4 
(29.7)
Financial assets available for sale, net of tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        1.5
      (0.5)
Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     169.5
   (290.6)
Total comprehensive income (loss), for the period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€    (32.3)
€   269.3 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Equality of Assets and Liabilities Plus Shareholders’ Equity The total of all 
assets equals the total of all liabilities and all shareholders’ equity amounts. This equation 
holds for both Great Deal and Thames:
 
 
Assets 
= Liabilities13 + Shareholders’ Equity
 
Great Deal 
$18,302 
= $11,338 
+ $6,964
 
Thames 
€18,007.6 = €14,253.8 
+ €3,753.8
A firm invests the resources it obtains from financing. The balance sheet views the same 
resources from two perspectives. First, as the assets the firm currently holds, having acquired 
them with funds. Second, as the claims of creditors and owners who provided the funds. Thus,
 
Assets  
=  Liabilities + Shareholder’s Equity
or
 
Investing  =  Financing
 
Resources  =  Sources of Resources
 
Resources  =  Claims on Resources
13 Neither Great Deal nor Thames reports a subtotal for total liabilities. To obtain total liabilities, sum the liability 
accounts. Thames shows Shareholders’ Equity = €3,743.6, and Minority Interest (another component of Share-
holders’ Equity) = €10.2. Minority interest (noncontrolling interest) is discussed in Chapter 14.
Thames Limited
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(amounts in millions of euros [€])
EXHIBIT 1.7
2013
2012
 
Net income (loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€ (201.6)
€  560.4 
Add (deduct):
Income tax expense (gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (175.3)
 103.0 
Share in net (income) loss of equity affiliates, net of dividends  . . . . . . 
 (21.5)
 (29.6)
Depreciation and amortization of tangible and intangible assets . . . . . 
 420.8 
 433.0 
Provisions for pensions and other employee benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 162.6 
 70.9 
Impairment of noncurrent operating assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 260.1 
 69.1 
Gain (loss) on disposals of assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1.0 
 (35.2)
Net allowance to restructuring provisions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 12.1 
 (85.9)
Other items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 26.6 
 49.4 
Change in working capital requirements and in reserves. . . . . . . . . . . 
 924.6 
 (44.5)
Payment of contributions / pension benefits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (156.2)
 (189.7)
Income tax paid (received) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (98.2)
 (80.1)
 
Net cash flows from operating activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,155.0 
 820.8 
Capital expenditure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (418.9)
 (534.6)
Proceeds from disposal of tangible and intangible assets  . . . . . . . . . . 
 5.8 
 11.7 
Acquisitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (148.0)
 (173.2)
Disposals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
 89.1 
Change in loans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4.1 
 (24.7)
Change in current assets with affiliated companies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (32.0)
 (6.8)
Decrease (increase) in marketable securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 24.0 
 (3.3)
 
Net cash flows from investing activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (565.0)
 (641.8)
Dividends paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (204.7)
 (195.3)
Exercise of stock options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4.6 
 12.3 
Proceeds from sale of treasury shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 17.0 
 (56.8)
Increase in debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,125.2 
 412.8 
Repayment of debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,103.9)
 (184.4)
 
Net cash flows from financing activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (161.8)
 (11.4)
Effect of exchange rate variations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 32.1 
 (131.9)
 
Total increase (decrease) in cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 460.3 
 35.7 
Cash at beginning of period  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,499.8 
 1,464.1 
Cash at end of period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,960.1 
 1,499.8 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information:
Interest received . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32.5 
32.5 
Interest paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
82.2 
82.2 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

15
Principal Financial Statements
The amounts of individual assets that make up total assets, represented by accounts receiv-
able, inventories, equipment, and other assets, reflect a firm’s investment decisions. The mix of 
liabilities plus shareholders’ equity reflects a firm’s financing decisions, each measured at the 
balance sheet date.
Balance Sheet Classification and Aggregation Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require 
that balance sheets separate current items from noncurrent items.14
■ 
Current assets include cash and assets that a firm expects to turn into cash, or sell, or con-
sume within one year from the date of the balance sheet. Examples are accounts receivable 
and inventory.
■ 
Current liabilities represent obligations a firm expects to pay within one year. Examples are 
accounts payable to suppliers and salaries payable to employees.
■ 
Noncurrent assets are assets that will be used for several years. Examples include land, 
buildings, equipment, and patents.
■ 
Noncurrent liabilities and shareholders’ equity are sources of funds whose suppliers do not 
expect to receive payment within the next year. Rather, they expect payment sometime after 
next year.
The line items on the balance sheet represent aggregated amounts. For example, the amount 
shown for the line item labeled “Merchandise inventories” on Great Deal’s balance sheet repre-
sents all of Great Deal’s inventories.
14 Great Deal displays its current assets and current liabilities first. Thames displays its noncurrent assets and 
noncurrent liabilities first. IFRS, but not U.S. GAAP, permits the display used by Thames.
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity and Minority Interests
(amounts in millions of euros [€] except share amounts)
EXHIBIT 1.8
Number 
of shares 
outstanding 
(in 000s)
Share 
capital
Paid-in 
surplus
Retained 
earnings
Cash flow 
hedge
AFS 
investments
Cumulative 
translation 
adjustment
Treasury 
shares
Share-
holders’ 
equity
Non- 
controlling 
interest
Total
Balance at December 31, 2011. . . . . .
195,401 
595.0 
3,638.2 (173.8)
86.0 
4.5 
(139.4)
(129.6)
3,880.9 
3.3 
3,884.2 
Net income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
559.9 
—
—
—
—
559.9 
0.5 
560.4 
Other comprehensive loss  . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
—
(29.7)
(0.5)
(260.4)
—
(290.6)
(0.5)
(291.1)
Total comprehensive income  . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
559.9 
(29.7)
(0.5)
(260.4)
—
269.3 
—
269.3 
Capital increase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
391 
1.2 
9.6 
—
—
—
—
—
10.8 
—
10.8 
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(195.3)
—
—
—
—
(195.3)
—
(195.3)
Share based payments. . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
27.9 
—
—
—
—
27.9 
—
27.9 
Changes in treasury shares  . . . . . . . . .
(811)
—
—
(20.4)
—
—
—
(20.6)
(41.0)
—
(41.0)
Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(3.7)
—
—
—
—
(3.7)
—
(3.7)
Changes in scope of consolidation. . . .
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
(0.4)
(0.4)
Total transactions with shareholders. . .
(420)
1.2 
9.6 
(191.5)
—
—
0.0 
(20.6)
(201.3)
(0.4)
(201.7)
Balance at December 31, 2012. . . . . .
194,981 
596.2 
3,647.8 
194.6 
56.3 
4.0 
(399.8)
(150.2)
3,948.9 
2.9 
3,951.8 
Net income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(201.8)
—
—
—
—
(201.8)
0.2 
(201.6)
Other comprehensive loss  . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
—
51.4 
1.5 
116.6 
—
169.5 
0.6 
170.1 
Total comprehensive income  . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(201.8)
51.4 
1.5 
116.6 
—
(32.3)
0.8 
(31.5)
Capital increase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
299 
0.9 
7.5 
—
—
—
—
—
8.4 
—
8.4 
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(204.7)
—
—
—
—
(204.7)
—
(204.7)
Share based payments. . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
22.5 
—
—
—
—
22.5 
—
22.5 
Changes in treasury shares  . . . . . . . . .
187 
—
—
(1.6)
—
—
—
8.7 
7.1 
—
7.1 
Other   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(6.3)
—
—
—
—
(6.3)
—
(6.3)
Changes in scope of consolidation. . . .
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
6.5 
6.5 
Total transactions with shareholders. . .
486 
0.9 
7.5 (190.1)
—
—
0.0 
8.7 
(173.0)
6.5 
(166.5)
Balance at December 31, 2013. . . . . .
195,467 
597.1 
3,655.3 
(197.3)
107.7 
5.5 
(283.2)
(141.5)
3,743.6 
10.2 
3,753.8 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
Balance Sheet Measurement Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS use two bases to measure the 
monetary amounts at which assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ equity appear on the balance 
sheet:
1. The historical amount, which reflects the acquisition cost of assets or the amount of funds 
originally obtained from creditors or owners.
2. The current amount, which reflects some measure of current value as of the balance sheet 
date. The notion of a current amount, or current value, can be applied to assets, to liabili-
ties, or to shareholders’ equity.
Some accounting information is reported at historical cost, a historical amount, and some at 
current cost, a current amount (one example of a current amount is fair value), depending on the 
requirements of U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Later chapters discuss and illustrate these measurement 
bases.
Analysis of the Balance Sheet Firms typically finance current assets with current liabil-
ities and finance noncurrent assets with noncurrent liabilities and shareholders’ equity. Current 
assets such as accounts receivable generally convert into cash within one year. Firms can use 
this near-term cash flow to pay current liabilities, which require payment within one year. Non-
current assets, such as buildings and equipment, generate cash flows over several years. Firms 
can use these more extended cash inflows to repay long-term liabilities as they come due.
Great Deal’s balance sheet as of February 27, 2013, shows the following (in millions of 
US$):
Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$10,566 
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 8,978
 
 
Noncurrent Liabilities and 
Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  7,736 
 Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . .  
  9,324
 Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$18,302 
 Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$18,302
Similar information presented in Thames’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2013, reveals 
the following (in millions of euros [€]):
Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  €11,003.5 
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  €11,486.9
 
 
Noncurrent Liabilities and 
Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7,004.1 
 Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . .    6,520.7
 Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  €18,007.6 
 Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  €18,007.6
These data show that Thames and Great Deal have raised funds from noncurrent sources (non-
current liabilities and shareholders’ equity) in amounts that exceed (in the case of Great Deal) 
or are less than (in the case of Thames) the amount of noncurrent assets.
INCOME STATEMENT
The income statement (sometimes called the statement of profit and loss by firms applying 
IFRS), provides information on profitability. The terms net income, earnings, and profit are 
interchangeable. Exhibit 1.2 shows Great Deal’s income statement for fiscal years 2012, 2011, 
and 2010. Great Deal refers to its income statement as the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Exhibit 1.6 shows Thames’s income statement for 2012 and 2013. Thames refers to its income 
statement as the Consolidated Profit and Loss Account.
The income statement reports a firm’s success in generating earnings during a given report-
ing period.15 Net income is equal to revenues minus expenses, adjusted for any gains or losses. 
(We ignore gains and losses in this chapter.) The income statement reports the sources and 
amounts of a firm’s revenues and the nature and amounts of its expenses. A firm strives to gen-
erate more revenues than expenses. Net income indicates a firm’s accomplishments (revenues) 
15 An income statement can report for a period of any length: a year, a quarter, or a month. In all cases, the report-
ing period is the time period between two successive balance sheets, and the time period over which the firm 
measures net income.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

17
Principal Financial Statements
relative to the efforts required (expenses) in pursuing its operating activities. When expenses for 
a period exceed revenues for that period, the result is a net loss.
Revenues (also called sales or sales revenue) measure the inflows of assets from selling goods 
and providing services to customers. In exchange for providing goods and services, firms receive 
assets (either cash or promises to pay cash, Accounts Receivable). The amount of revenue gen-
erated is equal to the net assets received. Great Deal reports revenue of $49,694 million for fis-
cal 2012. Thames reports revenue of €12,881.5 million for fiscal 2013.
Expenses measure the outflow of assets incurred in generating revenues. Cost of goods sold 
or cost of sales (an expense) measures the cost of inventories sold to customers. For a service 
firm, cost of sales measures the cost of providing services. Selling and administrative expenses 
measure the cost of selling and administrative services received during the period. An expense 
means that an asset decreases or a liability increases. The amount of the expense is equal to the 
asset decrease or the liability increase.
Classification of Revenues and Expenses Firms classify revenues and expenses in 
different ways and apply different levels of aggregation. For example, Thames reports expenses 
for research and development of €550.5 million in 2013. Some firms might include this expense 
in another line item. Thames’s income statement classifies some expenses by the department 
that carried out the activities (for example, marketing and selling expenses) and some expenses 
by their nature (for example, income taxes).
Relation Between the Income Statement and the Balance Sheet The income 
statement links the balance sheet at the beginning of the period with the balance sheet at the 
end of the period. The balance sheet amount for retained earnings represents the sum of all 
prior earnings (or losses) of a firm in excess of dividends.16 Net income (or net loss) for the cur-
rent period helps explain the change in retained earnings between the beginning and the end 
of the period. For example, Great Deal’s income for fiscal 2012, labeled on the income state-
ment “Net earnings attributable to Great Deal, Inc.” was $1,317 million. Exhibit 1.4 shows that 
Great Deal paid cash dividends of $234 million to shareholders in fiscal 2012. We can use this 
information to analyze the change in Great Deal’s retained earnings (in millions of US$):
Retained Earnings, February 28, 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,714
Add Net Income for Fiscal 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,317
Subtract Dividends Declared and Paid During Fiscal 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (234)
Retained Earnings, February 27, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,797
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The statement of cash flows reports information about cash generated from (or used by) oper-
ating, investing, and financing activities during the period. It shows where the firm obtains or 
generates cash and where it spends or uses cash. If a firm is to continue operating successfully, 
it must generate more cash than it spends. A firm generates cash from operations when it col-
lects more cash from customers than it spends on operating activities. While firms can borrow 
cash from creditors, future operations must generate cash to repay these loans.
Exhibit 1.3 presents the statements of cash flows for Great Deal for fiscal years 2012, 2011 
and 2010. Exhibit 1.7 shows this information for Thames for fiscal years 2013 and 2012. These 
statements have three sections, describing operating, investing, and financing activities that gen-
erate or use cash.
Operating Activities Most firms expect to collect more cash from customers than they 
pay to suppliers, employees, and others in carrying out operating activities. For many firms, 
operating activities provide the largest source of cash. Both Great Deal and Thames generated 
significant cash flows from operating activities in the years presented. For example, Thames’s 
16 Other items can also affect retained earnings. Later chapters discuss some of these and others are beyond the 
scope of this textbook.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
cash provided by operating activities in 2013 was €1,155.0 million. Great Deal’s cash provided 
by operating activities in 2012 was $2,206 million.17
Investing Activities Firms acquire buildings, equipment, and other noncurrent assets 
to maintain or expand their productive capacity. These acquisitions, referred to as 
 capital  expenditures, use cash. A firm can obtain the cash needed for capital expenditures from 
selling existing assets, from operating activities, and from financing activities. Great Deal’s cash 
paid for additions to property and equipment was $615 million in fiscal 2012. Thames’s capital 
expenditures in 2013 was €418.9 million.
Financing Activities Firms obtain financing to support operating and investing activities 
by issuing debt or common shares. The firm uses cash to pay dividends and to repay or retire 
existing debt financing, such as repaying long-term debt. For example, Great Deal’s statement 
of cash flows shows that in fiscal 2012 it used $5,342 million cash to repay long-term debt, it 
borrowed $5,132 by issuing debt, and it paid $234 million in cash dividends. Thames borrowed 
€1,125.2 million, it repaid €1,103.9 million, and it paid cash dividends of €204.7 million.
Relation of the Statement of Cash Flows to the Balance Sheet and Income 
 Statement The statement of cash flows explains the change in cash between the beginning 
and the end of the period. It also displays the changes in cash from operating, investing, and 
financing activities. The following table analyzes the changes in cash for Great Deal (for fiscal 
2012) and for Thames (for fiscal 2013). Numbers in parentheses ( ) are subtracted, indicating a 
net use of cash.
Changes in Cash for Great Deal (fiscal 2012) and Thames (fiscal 2013)
 
Great Deal 
Thames
Cash at the Start of Fiscal 2012 or 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  498 
€1,499.8
Cash Flow from Operations During the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,206 
1,155.0
Cash Flow from Investing During the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(540) 
(565)
Cash Flow from Financing During the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(348) 
(161.8)
Adjustment for Exchange Rate Differences18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    10 
    32.1
Cash at the End of Fiscal 2012 or 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,826 
€1,960.1
In addition to sources and uses of cash, the statement of cash flows shows the relation 
between net income and cash flow from operations. Cash flow from operations exceeds net 
income for each of the three years shown for Great Deal. Cash flow from operations is posi-
tive in fiscal 2013 for Thames, even though it reported a loss for that year, and cash flow from 
operations exceeded net income for fiscal 2012.19
STATEMENT OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
The fourth financial statement presents changes in shareholders’ equity. Firms use various titles 
for the statement of shareholders’ equity. For example, Great Deal’s statement, in Exhibit 1.4, 
is called Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity, while Thames’s state-
ment, in Exhibit 1.8, is called Consolidated Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity and 
Minority Interests. This statement displays components of shareholders’ equity, including com-
mon shares and retained earnings, and changes in those components. For example, Great Deal’s 
retained earnings changed between February 28, 2012, and February 27, 2013, because Great 
Deal earned net income (an increase of $1,317 million) and paid cash dividends (a decrease of 
$234 million).
17 Both of these statements begin with net income and make adjustments to net income to calculate cash flow 
from operations. Chapter 6 discusses these adjustments.
18 Both Great Deal and Thames operate in several countries, implying that their activities involve multiple curren-
cies. Thames reports a €32.1 million effect of exchange rate changes and includes that amount in its statement 
of cash flows. Great Deal reports the effects of exchange rate changes as $10 million. This book does not con-
sider the accounting effects of different currencies or of changes in exchange rates among currencies.
19 Chapter 6 discusses reasons for the difference between net income and cash flow from operations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

19
Principal Financial Statements
SUPPORTING SCHEDULES AND NOTES
The financial statements present aggregated information, for example, the total amount of 
land, buildings, and equipment. Financial reports provide more detail for some of the items 
reported in the financial statements. They provide additional explanatory material to help the 
user understand the information in the financial statements. The additional material appears in 
schedules and notes.
The notes to the financial statements describe the accounting guidance that the firm uses to 
prepare those financial statements. The notes also provide information that elaborates on, or 
disaggregates, items presented in the financial statements. Understanding a firm’s balance sheet, 
income statement, statement of cash flows, and statement of changes in shareholders’ equity 
requires understanding the notes.
SUMMARY: PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The financial statements provide information about a firm’s financial position (balance sheet), 
its profitability (income statement), its cash-generating activity (statement of cash flows), and 
its changes in shareholders’ equity. The balance sheet reports amounts of assets, liabilities, and 
shareholders’ equity at the balance sheet date. The income statement reports the outcome of 
using assets to generate earnings during a reporting period and helps explain the change in 
retained earnings on the balance sheet between the beginning and end of the period. The state-
ment of cash flows reports the cash inflows and outflows from operating, investing, and financ-
ing activities and explains the change in cash on the balance sheet between the beginning and 
end of the period. The statement of shareholders’ equity reports the reasons why the compo-
nents of shareholders’ equity increased or decreased during the reporting period. Users should 
read the financial statements in conjunction with the supporting notes and schedules, which 
provide additional information to help users understand the financial statements.
 PROBLEM  1.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Preparing a balance sheet and an income statement. The following information is based on 
the annual report of Sargent AG, a German multinational firm. Amounts are reported in 
millions of euros (€).
  
 
September 30
  
 
2013 
2012
Balance Sheet Items
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 8,382 
€ 8,443
Property and Equipment (net of accumulated depreciation)  . . . . . . . . . .  
10,555 
12,072
Cash and Cash Equivalents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,005 
10,214
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,823 
8,335
Intangible Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
17,120 
13,074
Other Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,371 
4,370
Long-Term Investment Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,577 
7,998
Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,930 
12,790
Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
9,860 
13,122
Other Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,174 
9,547
Other Shareholders’ Equity Items  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
351 
858
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
14,620 
15,148
Other Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
16,377 
11,862
Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
33,098 
28,939
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20,453 
16,702
Current Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,414 
1,582
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
  
 
September 30
  
 
2013
Income Statement Items
Cost of Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€51,572 
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,192 
Other (Nonoperating) Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
144 
Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
72,448 
Research & Development Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,399 
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,103 
a. Prepare a comparative balance sheet as of September 30, 2013 (fiscal 2013), and Sep-
tember 30, 2012 (fiscal 2012) in the format used in Exhibit 1.1. Classify the balance 
sheet items into the following categories: current assets, noncurrent assets, current 
liabilities, noncurrent liabilities, and shareholders’ equity. Refer to the Glossary at the 
back of the book if you have difficulty with any of the accounts. For each year, verify 
that assets equal liabilities plus shareholders’ equity on your balance sheet.
b. Prepare an income statement for the year ending September 30, 2013. Classify income 
statement items into revenues and expenses.
c. Based only on the information given here, did this firm pay cash dividends to its 
shareholders during the year ending September 30, 2013? If yes, what is the amount?
Solutions to self-study problems appear at the end of each chapter.
FINANCIAL REPORTING PROCESS
This section discusses participants in the financial reporting process:
1. Managers and governing boards of reporting entities.
2. Accounting standard setters and regulatory bodies.
3. Independent external auditors.
4. Users of financial statements.
This section also discusses three concepts and conventions that underpin the financial reporting 
process:
1. The distinction between recognition and realization.
2. Materiality.
3. The accounting period.
MANAGERS AND GOVERNING BOARDS OF REPORTING ENTITIES
Firms receive funds from owners with the expectation that managers will use the funds to 
increase shareholder value. Managers are agents of the shareholders and have responsibility for 
safeguarding and properly using the firm’s resources. Managers establish internal controls to 
ensure the proper recording of transactions and the appropriate measurement and reporting of 
the results of those transactions. Shareholders elect a governing board, sometimes called a board 
of directors. The governing board is responsible for selecting, compensating, and overseeing 
managers; for establishing dividend policy; and for making decisions on major issues such as 
acquisitions of other firms and divestitures of lines of business. Some governing boards, includ-
ing the boards of publicly traded U.S. firms, have a special committee charged with oversight of 
financial reporting.
Managers are responsible for preparing the firm’s financial reports. If the firm’s shares 
trade publicly, laws and regulations specify the accounting system the firm must follow (for 
example, U.S. GAAP or IFRS). Management is responsible for understanding the transactions, 
events, and arrangements that it reports in the firm’s financial statements and for properly 
applying accounting standards.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

21
Financial Reporting Process
ACCOUNTING STANDARD SETTERS AND REGULATORY BODIES
Firms apply accounting standards to prepare their financial reports. This book considers two 
systems of accounting standards, U.S. GAAP and IFRS. This section discusses these two sets 
of standards and their regulatory regimes.
U.S. GAAP In the United States the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), an agency 
of the federal government, has the authority to establish accounting standards. The SEC is also 
the enforcement agency for U.S. securities laws. These laws apply to firms that access the public 
debt and equity markets of the United States. The SEC enforces the application of required 
accounting standards for U.S. SEC registrants as well as non-U.S. SEC registrants (also called 
foreign private issuers). A U.S. SEC registrant is a firm incorporated in the United States that 
lists and trades its securities in the United States. A non-U.S. SEC registrant is a firm incorpo-
rated under non-U.S. laws that has filed the necessary documents with the SEC to list and trade 
its securities in the United States.
Although it occasionally issues authoritative accounting guidance, the SEC has largely 
delegated the task of setting U.S. financial accounting standards to the Financial  Accounting 
 Standards Board (FASB), a private-sector body with seven voting members. FASB members 
work full time for the FASB and sever all relations with their previous employers. As the FASB 
considers a financial reporting issue, its due-process procedures ensure that it receives input from 
constituencies, including preparers of financial reports, auditors, and financial statement users.20
Common terminology includes the pronouncements of the FASB in the compilation of 
accounting rules, procedures, and practices known as generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP). The applicable accounting guidance for preparing financial reports of U.S. firms is 
U.S. GAAP. The applicable guidance includes, as well, writings of the SEC, consensuses of the 
Emerging Issues Task Force (a committee that operates under the oversight of the FASB), and 
some pronouncements of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA, a 
professional association). From its inception in 1973 until 2009, the FASB issued its major pro-
nouncements in the form of Statements of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS), with both a 
number (for example, SFAS 95) and a title (for example, “Statement of Cash Flows”).
In 2009, the FASB completed a codification project that organized all of U.S. GAAP by 
topic (for example, revenues). The FASB Accounting Standards Codification is now the source 
of U.S. GAAP and can be accessed on the FASB’s Web site. Authoritative guidance is referred 
to in terms of its codification section (or ASC for Accounting Standards Codification); for 
example, Inventory is in FASB ASC 330; Revenue is in ASC 605; and Research and Develop-
ment is in ASC 730. The FASB issues new authoritative guidance in the form of Accounting 
Standards Updates (ASU) that are amendments to the Accounting Standards Codification.
FASB board members make standard-setting decisions guided by a conceptual framework 
that addresses the following issues:21
1. Objective of financial reporting. The conceptual framework establishes the objective of 
financial reporting as providing information to current and potential investors, creditors, 
and others to assist them in making resource allocation decisions.22
2. Qualitative characteristics of accounting information. The conceptual framework establishes 
two qualitative characteristics of financial information that enable the information to meet 
the objective of financial reporting. The two characteristics are relevance and representa-
tional faithfulness:
■ Relevance. The information should be pertinent to the decisions made by users of finan-
cial statements. This means that the information should have the capacity to affect their 
resource allocation decisions.
■ Representational faithfulness. The information should represent what it is supposed 
to represent. This means that the information should correspond to the phenomenon 
being reported, and it should be reasonably complete and free from bias and error.
20 Additional information is available on the FASB’s Web site (www.fasb.org).
21 The FASB’s conceptual framework is in Statements of Financial Accounting Concepts, available on the FASB’s 
Web site.
22 With one exception, a method of accounting for inventories and cost of goods sold, the accounting methods 
permitted or required by U.S. GAAP differ from the methods required for calculating taxable income in the 
United States. With the exception of inventories, you should assume there will be significant differences between 
tax accounting methods and financial accounting methods under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
 
 
The conceptual framework also establishes certain features of financial information 
that enhance the ability of that information to meet the objective of financial reporting.
■ Comparability. The information should facilitate comparisons across firms and over 
time. Accounting information is comparable if firms account for similar events and 
transactions the same way.
■ Verifiability. Information is verifiable if knowledgeable and independent observers of 
that information reach consensus that a specified depiction of an item is a faithful 
representation of that item. Information can be verified in several ways, including, for 
example, direct observation, such as counting the amount of cash or inventory.
■ Timeliness and understandability. In order to be useful for resource allocation decisions, 
information must be available to decision makers in time to be capable of influencing 
their decisions. Also, decision makers must be able to understand that information. 
Financial reports are prepared with the assumptions that users have reasonable business 
knowledge and analyze the reports diligently.
3. Elements of financial statements. The conceptual framework defines assets, liabilities, rev-
enues, expenses, and other items. An item can appear in the financial statements only if it 
meets these definitions. Items that do not meet these definitions may be disclosed in the 
notes.
4. Recognition and measurement principles. The conceptual framework defines recognition as 
the depiction of an item in words and numbers in the financial statements with the amount 
included in the totals. For example, the amount payable to suppliers is a recognized item 
that appears as a liability on the balance sheet, and its amount is part of total liabili-
ties. Other items in financial reports are not recognized in the financial statements but, if 
significant, appear as disclosures in the notes to the financial statements. The conceptual 
framework specifies criteria that an item must meet in order for it to be recognized in the 
financial statements. It also describes various ways to measure recognized items.
The conceptual framework guides the FASB in setting accounting standards. The con-
ceptual framework is not a rigorous, analytical structure from which the FASB can logically 
deduce acceptable accounting methods, however.23
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) At one time, accounting was 
a largely jurisdiction-specific activity. This meant that each country developed its own distinct 
accounting standards. As a result, firms based in different countries applied different standards 
in their financial reports, impeding comparisons of firms by investors and creditors. The glo-
balization of capital markets has increased the need for comparable financial statements across 
countries.
The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) is an independent account-
ing  standard-setting entity with voting members from several countries. (As of 2011, there 
were 15 voting members; this number is subject to change.) Standards set by the IASB are 
 International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The IASB’s conceptual framework is sim-
ilar to the FASB’s conceptual framework and is used for similar purposes. The IASB began 
operating in 2001.24 More than 100 countries require or permit firms to use IFRS, or a set of 
standards based on or adapted from IFRS. Each of these countries has its own regulatory 
arrangements for enforcing the application of IFRS. These enforcement arrangements differ 
considerably across countries.
In 2007 the U.S. SEC adopted rules that permit non-U.S. firms that list and trade their 
securities in the United States (non-U.S. SEC registrants) to apply IFRS in their financial 
reports filed with the SEC without any reconciliation to U.S. GAAP. Prior to this rule change, 
non-U.S. SEC registrants could use any set of accounting standards to prepare their finan-
cial reports, but they had to reconcile those reported numbers to the numbers that they would 
have reported had they prepared the financial statements using U.S. GAAP. The main effect 
of the 2007 rule change is to create two sets of acceptable financial reporting systems in the 
23 Chapter 17 discusses the FASB’s conceptual framework more fully.
24 The standards set by its predecessor body, the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), are 
called International Accounting Standards (IAS), and IFRS includes them.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

23
Financial Reporting Process
United States, specifically, U.S. GAAP for U.S. SEC registrants and IFRS for non-U.S. SEC 
registrants.25
The FASB and IASB have committed to converge their standards. The goal of the conver-
gence process is to eliminate differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS and to improve the 
resulting standards. The intention is produce a single set of high-quality financial reporting 
standards. In addition, a separate project is under way to converge, complete, and improve the 
conceptual frameworks.26
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS
Regulatory bodies require firms whose securities trade publicly to obtain an audit of their 
financial reports by an independent external auditor.27 Even if the securities do not trade pub-
licly, financing sources such as banks may require that the firm obtain an independent audit of 
its financial reports. An audit involves the following:
1. An assessment of the capability of a firm’s accounting system to accumulate, measure, and 
synthesize transactional data.
2. An assessment of the operational effectiveness of the accounting system.
3. A determination of whether the financial report complies with the requirements of the 
applicable authoritative guidance.
The auditor obtains evidence for the first assessment by studying the procedures and inter-
nal controls built into the accounting system. The auditor obtains evidence for the second 
assessment by examining a sample of actual transactions. The auditor obtains evidence for the 
third assessment through a combination of audit procedures. The auditor’s conclusions appear 
in the audit opinion, part of the financial report.
Concerns over the quality of financial reporting and auditing have led to government ini-
tiatives in the United States. For example, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 established the 
 Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which is responsible for monitoring the 
quality of audits of SEC registrants. This Act requires the PCAOB to register firms conducting 
independent audits; establish acceptable auditing, quality control, and independence standards; 
and provide for periodic inspections of registered auditors. In addition, for larger firms whose 
shares trade in the United States, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires the independent auditor to pro-
vide an assessment of the effectiveness of a firm’s internal control system for financial reporting.
USERS OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Standard setters and securities regulators intend that financial reports provide information that 
helps decision makers allocate resources (for example, lend funds or buy shares) and evaluate 
the results of their decisions. Financial reporting is not intended to measure firm value or to 
provide all the information decision makers may need to make resource allocation decisions. 
Financial reporting is intended to provide information that is useful in helping decision makers 
assess the amount, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
Users of financial statements must have reasonable business knowledge and reasonable 
knowledge of the kinds of transactions that firms engage in. They must also have reason-
able knowledge of the financial accounting guidance that firms follow to prepare financial 
reports, and reasonable understanding of the judgments and estimates required to apply those 
principles.
25 Non-U.S. SEC registrants could also choose to apply U.S. GAAP. Or they could apply some other accounting 
standards (not IFRS and not U.S. GAAP) and reconcile the resulting numbers to U.S. GAAP. As this book 
goes to press, the SEC has not decided whether to permit or require U.S. SEC registrants to apply IFRS.
26 Specific information about convergence activities appears on the FASB’s Web site (www.fasb.org) and on the 
IASB’s Web site (www.ifrs.org). Chapter 17 summarizes some of the differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
27 Employees of a firm may also conduct audits (called internal audits). The employees’ knowledge and familiarity 
with the activities of their firm enhance the quality of the audit work and increase the likelihood that the audit 
will generate suggestions for improving operations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
BASIC ACCOUNTING CONVENTIONS 
AND CONCEPTS
Recognition and realization are two fundamental accounting concepts. We have previously 
described recognized items as being depicted in words and numbers on the face of the financial 
statements, with their amounts included in the totals. Items must meet certain conditions in 
order for them to be recognized.28 Realization refers to converting a noncash item to cash. An 
example of a realized event is collecting cash on an account receivable.
Accounting conventions recognize many accounting items (that is, include them in the 
financial statements) before the firm realizes them (that is, converts them to cash). To illustrate, 
suppose a firm ships an item for $1,000 on account, payable in 30 days, to a creditworthy cus-
tomer. The firm recognizes revenue when it ships the goods but realizes revenue when it collects 
the cash.
Materiality captures the notion that financial reports need not include items that are so 
small as to be meaningless to users. Immaterial items do not appear in the financial reports. 
No precise quantitative materiality threshold exists, so financial statement preparers must apply 
judgment to decide whether a given item is immaterial.
The accounting period convention refers to the length of financial reporting periods. Most 
business activities do not divide into distinguishable pieces. For example, a firm acquires a plant 
and uses it in manufacturing products for 30 years. A firm purchases delivery equipment and 
uses it to transport merchandise to customers for five years. Because there is no natural stop-
ping point in business activities, the convention is to prepare financial statements for periods of 
specified length. This approach facilitates timely comparisons and analyses among firms.
An accounting period (also called a reporting period) is the time between two successive bal-
ance sheet dates. Balance sheets prepared at the end of the day on December 31 of one year 
and at the end of the day on December 31 of the next year bound a calendar-year accounting 
period. The December 31 balance sheet is also the beginning balance sheet for the next year. 
Balance sheets prepared at the end of the day on November 30 and at the end of the day on 
December 31 bound a one-month accounting period—the month of December.
Some firms use the calendar year as the accounting period, while others use a 
 natural  business year that coincides with changes in the level of operating activities. For exam-
ple, firms often establish their year-end as the point in time when inventories are at their lowest 
level. Retailers, like Great Deal, use a year-end close to the end of January or February, the 
natural end of the holiday sales season. The ending date of a natural business year is therefore 
associated with the activities of the particular firm’s business.
Firms may prepare interim reports for periods shorter than a year. Preparing interim reports 
does not eliminate the need to prepare an annual report. Firms with publicly traded securities 
in the United States must prepare and file with the SEC quarterly reports as well as annual 
reports. Firms file quarterly reports on SEC form 10-Q (the 10-Q report) and file annual 
reports using SEC form 10-K (the 10-K report). Some firms use the 10-K report as their annual 
report to shareholders. Other firms incorporate the 10-K report into their annual report. Still 
others prepare a separate annual report to shareholders in addition to the 10-K report.
ACCOUNTING METHODS FOR 
MEASURING PERFORMANCE
Many operating activities start in one accounting period and finish in another. For example, a 
firm may acquire a building in one period and use it in operations for 30 years. Firms may pur-
chase merchandise in one accounting period, pay for it in a second, sell it in a third, and collect 
cash from customers in a fourth. Cash collection can precede the sale of merchandise, as occurs 
when customers make advance payments, or follow it, as occurs with sales made on account. 
Measuring performance for a specific accounting period requires measuring the amount of 
28 For example, Chapter 4 discusses the recognition criteria for items to be included as assets and liabilities on the 
balance sheet. Chapter 8 discusses the criteria for recognizing revenues on the income statement.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

25
Accounting Methods for Measuring Performance
revenues and expenses from operating activities that span more than one accounting period. 
The following are two approaches to measuring operating performance:
1. The cash basis of accounting.
2. The accrual basis of accounting.
CASH BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
Under the cash basis of accounting, a firm measures performance from selling goods and pro-
viding services as it receives cash from customers and makes cash expenditures to providers of 
goods and services. To understand performance measurement under the cash basis of account-
ing, consider the following information.
Example 3 Joan Adam opens an art supply store (Adam-Art Supply) on January 1, 2013. 
The financing of the store consists of €150,000 in cash, provided by Joan in exchange for all 
the common stock of the firm. The firm rents space on January 1 and pays two months’ rent of 
€14,000 in advance. During January it acquires merchandise costing €140,000, paying €86,000 
in cash and acquiring the rest (€54,000) on account for payment in February. Sales to custom-
ers during January total €140,000, of which €114,000 is for cash and €26,000 is on account 
for collection in February and March. The cost of the merchandise sold during January was 
€42,000. The firm paid €25,000 in salaries.
Using the cash basis of accounting, the firm records sales as it receives cash. Income is cash 
receipts less cash disbursements for goods and services. Adam-Art Supply made €140,000 in 
total sales during January, but it records performance equal to cash receipts of €114,000. It 
will record the remaining €26,000 as performance when customers pay the amounts owed in 
later months. The firm acquires merchandise costing €140,000 during January but pays €86,000 
cash to suppliers. Under cash-basis accounting, the performance measure subtracts only the 
cash paid from cash receipts. The firm also subtracts January’s cash expenditures for salaries 
(€25,000) and rent (€14,000), even though it paid the rent for both January and February. Cash 
expenditures for merchandise and services (€125,000 = €86,000 + €25,000 + €14,000) exceeded 
cash receipts from customers (€114,000) during January by €11,000:
Cash Inflows
Cash Receipts from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 114,000
Total Cash Inflows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
114,000
Cash Outflows
Cash Paid for Rent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(14,000)
Cash Paid for Merchandise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(86,000)
Cash Paid for Salaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (25,000)
Total Cash Outflows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (125,000)
Net Cash Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ (11,000)
As a basis for measuring performance for a particular accounting period, the cash basis of 
accounting has three weaknesses.
1. The cash basis does not match the cost of the efforts required to generate inflows with the 
inflows themselves. Cash outflows of one period can relate to operating activities whose 
cash inflows occur in preceding or succeeding periods. For example, the store rental pay-
ment of €14,000 provides rental services for both January and February. Yet the cash basis 
subtracts the full amount in measuring performance during January and none for Feb-
ruary. As a result, February’s performance will look better than January’s for no reason 
except the timing of cash payments for rent.
 
 
The cash basis does a better job of matching the cost of the efforts required in generat-
ing inflows with the inflows themselves over a longer period than over a shorter period. For 
example, if Adam-Art Supply calculates cash-basis performance over two months, January 
and February, the €14,000 cost of rental services exactly matches the period over which 
the firm receives the benefits. Delaying performance measurement is not a good solution, 
however, because users of financial statements want timely information and because of the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
reasons given in the description of the accounting period convention—business activities 
do not divide neatly into discrete projects and discrete periods.
2. The cash basis separates the recognition of revenue from the process of earning those 
revenues. A firm should recognize revenues when it earns them by delivering goods and 
services to customers. Delivery often occurs before the firm collects cash from customers. 
Waiting to recognize revenues until the firm collects cash results in reporting the effects of 
operating activities one or more periods after the critical revenue-generating activity—the 
customer’s purchase of goods and service—has occurred. For example, sales to customers 
during January by Adam-Art Supply were €140,000. Under the cash basis, the firm will not 
recognize €26,000 of this amount until it collects the cash in February or later.
3. Performance measured using the cash basis is sensitive to the timing of cash expenditures. 
For example, the cash-basis measure reduces the performance for Adam-Art Supply in 
January by the entire €14,000 cash payment for rent, even though the firm will benefit from 
the results of those expenditures for two months in the future. A delay of even a few days 
in cash expenditures near the end of the accounting period will increase earnings for that 
period.
ACCRUAL BASIS OF ACCOUNTING
The accrual basis of accounting recognizes revenue when a firm sells goods (manufacturing 
and retailing firms) or renders services (service firms). And it recognizes expenses in the period 
when the firm recognizes the revenues that the costs helped produce. Thus accrual accounting 
attempts to match expenses with revenues. When the usage of an asset’s future benefits does not 
match with particular revenues, the firm recognizes those costs as expenses in the period when 
the firm uses the benefits.
Example 4 Under the accrual basis of accounting, Adam-Art Supply recognizes, for January 
2013, the entire €140,000 of sales during January as revenue, even though it has received only 
€114,000 in cash by the end of January. The firm reasonably expects to collect the remaining 
accounts receivable of €26,000 in February or soon thereafter. The sale of the goods, rather 
than the collection of cash from customers, triggers the recognition of revenue. The merchan-
dise sold during January cost €42,000. Recognizing this amount as an expense (cost of goods 
sold) matches the cost of the merchandise sold with revenue from sales of those goods. Of 
the advance rental payment of €14,000, only €7,000 applies to the cost of benefits consumed 
during January. The remaining rental of €7,000 purchases benefits for the month of Febru-
ary and will therefore appear on the January 31 balance sheet as an asset. Unlike the cost of 
merchandise sold, January’s salaries and rent expenses do not match January revenues. These 
costs become expenses of January to the extent that the firm consumed salary and rent services 
during the month. Using the accrual basis of accounting, Adam-Art would report January net 
income of €66,000:
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€140,000
Cost of Goods Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(42,000)
Rent Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(7,000)
Salaries Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (25,000)
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 66,000
The accrual basis of accounting illustrates the matching convention: it matches expenses 
with their related revenues by subtracting their amount in measuring performance. The accrual 
basis focuses on revenues and expenses in measuring performance. This measure of perfor-
mance is independent of whether the firm has collected cash for the inflows from generating 
revenues or spent cash for the outflows from the expenses.
The accrual basis of accounting provides a better measure of January operating perfor-
mance for Adam-Art Supply than does the cash basis, for two reasons.
1. Revenues more accurately reflect the results of sales activity during January than does cash 
received from customers during that period.
2. Expenses more closely match reported revenues than expenditures match receipts.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

27
Solutions to Self-Study Problems 
The accrual basis also provides a superior measure of performance for future periods 
because activities of future periods will bear their share of the costs of rent and other services 
the firm will consume.
Most firms use the accrual basis of accounting. From this point on, all discussions assume 
use of the accrual basis.
 PROBLEM  1.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Cash versus accrual basis of accounting. Thompson Hardware Store commences 
operations on January 1, 2013, when Jacob Thompson invests $30,000 for all of the 
common stock of the firm. The firm rents a building on January 1 and pays two months’ 
rent in advance in the amount of $2,000. On January 1 it also pays the $1,200 premium 
for property and liability insurance coverage for the year ending December 31, 2013. The 
firm purchases $28,000 of merchandise inventory on account on January 2 and pays 
$10,000 of this amount on January 25. On January 31 the cost of unsold merchandise 
is $15,000. During January the firm makes cash sales to customers totaling $20,000 
and sales on account totaling $9,000. The firm collects $2,000 from these credit sales by 
the end of January. The firm pays other costs during January as follows: utilities, $400; 
salaries, $650; and taxes, $350. What are Thompson Hardware Store’s revenues, expenses, 
and income for January, assuming (1) the accrual basis of accounting and (2) the cash 
basis of accounting?
SUMMARY
This chapter shows how business activities relate to the financial statements. The chapter 
provides a broad overview of the four basic financial statements. Later chapters examine the 
concepts and procedures underlying each statement. This chapter also describes the financial 
reporting process and introduces U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Now we turn to the study of financial accounting. To comprehend the concepts and pro-
cedures in the book, you should study the numerical examples presented in each chapter and 
prepare solutions to several problems, including the self-study problems.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 1.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Preparing a balance sheet and an income statement using data of Sargent AG)
a. Balance sheet for years ended September 30, 2013, and September 30, 2012.
September 30
2013
2012
Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 4,005
€10,214
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14,620
15,148
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,930
12,790
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
September 30
2013
2012
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 16,377
 11,862
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 47,932
 50,014
Property and Equipment (net of accumulated depreciation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,555
12,072
Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17,120
13,074
Long-Term Investment Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,577
7,998
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  3,371
  4,370
 
Total Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 43,623
 37,514
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€91,555
€87,528
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity 
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 8,382
€ 8,443
Current Income Taxes Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,414
1,582
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 33,098
 28,939
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 43,894
 38,964
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 9,860
13,122
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  8,174
  9,547
 
Total Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 18,034
 22,669
 
Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 61,928
 61,633
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,823
8,335
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20,453
16,702
Other Shareholders’ Equity Items . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    351
    858
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 29,627
 25,895
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€91,555
€87,528
 
Assets 
= Liabilities 
+ Shareholders’ Equity
 
Fiscal 2013: €91,555 million = €61,928 million + €29,627 million
 
Fiscal 2012: €87,528 million = €61,633 million + €25,895 million
b. Income statement for year ended September 30, 2013:
Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€72,448
Cost of Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(51,572)
Research and Development Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(3,399)
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (12,103)
Operating Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,374
Other (Nonoperating) Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (144)
Earnings Before Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,230
Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (1,192)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 4,038
c. Yes. The change in Retained Earnings is €3,751 million, and Net Income is €4,038 million. 
Based on this information only, dividends are €287 million (= €4,038 – €3,751).
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 1.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Thompson Hardware Store: cash versus accrual basis of accounting)
Calculation of revenues, expenses, and income for January 2013 under the cash basis and 
accrual basis of accounting:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

29
Key Terms and Concepts 
Cash Basis
Accrual Basis
Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$22,000
$29,000
Expenses:
Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,000
$ 1,000
Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,200
100
Costs of Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
13,000
Utilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
400
400
Salaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
650
650
Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    350
    350
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$14,600
$15,500
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,400
$13,500
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Goals 
Strategies
Financing
Shareholders, stockholders
Publicly traded
Dividends
Creditors
Investing activities
Operating activities
Annual report to shareholders
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
(MD&A)
Fiscal year
Monetary amount
Balance sheet or statement of financial 
position
Assets
Liabilities
Shareholders’ equity
Retained earnings
Historical amount
Current amount
Income statement or statement of profit 
and loss
Net income, earnings, profit
Net loss
Revenues, sales, sales revenue
Expenses
Statement of cash flows
Capital expenditures
Statement of shareholders’ equity
Schedules and notes
Financial reporting process
Managers
Governing board
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
U.S. SEC registrant
Non-U.S. SEC registrant, foreign private 
issuer
Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB)
U.S. GAAP (generally accepted accounting 
principles)
Statements of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS)
Accounting Standards Codification
Conceptual framework
Relevance
Representational faithfulness
Comparability
Verifiability
Timeliness
Understandability
Recognition
Disclosure
International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB)
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS)
Convergence
Audit opinion
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB)
Realization
Materiality
Accounting period convention, reporting 
period
Natural business year
Cash basis of accounting
Accrual basis of accounting
Matching convention
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. The chapter describes four activities common to all entities: setting goals and strategies, 
financing activities, investing activities, and operating activities. How would these four 
activities likely differ for a charitable organization versus a business firm?
 3. “The photographic analogy for a balance sheet is a snapshot, and for the income statement 
and the statement of cash flows it is a motion picture.” Explain.
 4. What is involved in an audit by an independent external auditor?
 5. Who prepares a firm’s financial statements?
 6. In what sense can suppliers of raw materials, merchandise, or labor services (employees) 
also be sources of financing for firms?
 7. In what sense are a firm’s accounts receivable a source of financing for that firm’s customers?
 8. Investing activities pertain to the acquisition of productive capacity to enable a firm to 
carry out its activities. Examples of this capacity include (1) land, buildings, and equipment 
and (2) patents and licenses. How are these two kinds of capacity the same, and how are 
they different?
 9. When will a firm’s fiscal year differ from a calendar year?
10. Financial statements include amounts in units of currency. What is the most common 
determinant of a firm’s choice of currency for financial reporting?
11. Assets and liabilities appear on balance sheets as either current or noncurrent. What is the 
difference between a current item and a noncurrent item? Why would users of financial 
statements likely be interested in this distinction?
12. The measurement basis for reporting items on a firm’s balance sheet can be either histori-
cal amounts or current amounts. What is the difference between these two measurement 
bases?
13. How does an income statement connect two successive balance sheets? How does a state-
ment of cash flows connect two successive balance sheets?
14. What is the role of the following participants in the financial reporting process: the U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB); the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)?
15. This chapter introduces both U.S. GAAP and International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS). Which of these systems may U.S. firms use, and which may non-U.S. firms that list 
and trade their securities in the United States use?
16. What is the purpose of the FASB’s and IASB’s conceptual frameworks?
17. What is the advantage of the accrual basis of accounting, relative to the cash basis of 
accounting, for measuring performance?
EXERCISES
18. Understanding the balance sheet. Refer to Exhibit 1.9, which contains balance sheet infor-
mation from the financial report of Palmer Coldgate, a U.S. consumer products manufac-
turer. This firm reports all amounts in millions of U.S. dollars ($). Answer the following 
questions that pertain to the information in this exhibit.
a. What is the firm’s largest asset, and what is the asset’s carrying value on the balance 
sheet?
b. What is the total amount of the firm’s noncurrent assets?
c. What is the firm’s largest liability, and what is the liability’s carrying value on the bal-
ance sheet?
d. By how much do the firm’s current assets differ from its current liabilities?
e. Has the firm been profitable since its inception? How do you know?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

31
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
f. What fraction of its assets does the firm finance with liabilities?
g. Verify that the firm’s assets equal the sum of liabilities plus shareholders’ equity.
19. Understanding the income statement. Refer to Exhibit 1.10, which contains income state-
ment information that is based on the financial report of Capcion, an Austrian paper and 
packaging manufacturer. Capcion reports all amounts in thousands of euros (€). Answer 
the following questions that pertain to the information in this exhibit.
a. What is Capcion’s largest expense on its income statement, and what is the amount?
b. What is Capcion’s second largest expense on its income statement, and what is the amount?
Palmer Coldgate
Consolidated Balance Sheet
As of year end 
 
2013
ASSETS
Current Assets
 
Cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   428.7
 
Receivables (net of allowances of $50.6 and $46.4, respectively) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,680.7
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,171.0
 
Other current assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   338.1
 
 
Total current assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,618.5
Property, plant, and equipment, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,015.2
Goodwill, net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,272.0
Other intangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
844.8
Other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    361.5
 
Total assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,112.0
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
 
Notes and loans payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   155.9
 
Current portion of long-term debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
138.1
 
Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,066.8
 
Accrued income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
262.7
 
Other accruals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,539.2
 
 
Total current liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,162.7
Long-term debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,221.9
Deferred income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
264.1
Other liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,177.1
 
Total liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,825.8
Commitments and contingent liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
Shareholders’ Equity
 
Preference stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
197.5
 
Common stock, $1 par value (1,000,000,000 shares authorized, 
 
 
732,853,180 shares issued)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
732.9
 
Additional paid-in capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,517.7
 
Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,627.5
 
Accumulated other comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,666.8)
 
 
 
 
11,408.8
Unearned compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(218.9)
Treasury stock, at cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (8,903.7)
 
Total shareholders’ equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2,286.2
 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,112.0
EXHIBIT 1.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
c. What is the ratio of Capcion’s gross margin to sales (this ratio is the gross margin 
percentage)?
d. What amount does Capcion report as operating profit for 2013? What amount does it 
report as profit before tax? What explains the difference between the two?
e. What is Capcion’s effective tax rate for the year? (The effective tax rate is the ratio of 
income tax expense to profit before tax.)
f. Did Capcion generate profit for the year, or incur a loss? How much?
20. Understanding the statement of cash flows. Information based on and adapted from the 
statement of cash flows of Seller Redbud, a U.S. retailer, appears in Exhibit 1.11. This firm 
reports all amounts in thousands of U.S. dollars ($). Answer the following questions that 
pertain to the information in this exhibit.
a. Did Seller Redbud generate cash inflows or outflows from operating activities in the 
year presented, and in what amount?
b. Did Seller Redbud generate cash inflows or outflows from investing activities in the year 
presented, and in what amount?
c. Did Seller Redbud generate cash inflows or outflows from financing activities in the 
year presented, and in what amount?
d. What was Seller Redbud’s net cash flow for the year presented?
e. What was the change in the cash balance between the beginning and end of the year 
presented? What caused this change?
21. Balance sheet relations. The balance sheet of EuroTel, a European Union communications 
firm, shows current assets of €20,000 million, current liabilities of €15,849 million, share-
holders’ equity of €17,154 million, and noncurrent assets of €29,402 million. What is the 
amount of noncurrent liabilities on EuroTel’s balance sheet?
22. Balance sheet relations. The balance sheet of GoldRan, a South African mining company, 
shows current assets of R6,085.1, noncurrent assets of R49,329.8, noncurrent liabilities 
of R13,948.4, and current liabilities of R4,360.1. GoldRan reports in millions of South 
African rand (R). What is the amount of GoldRan’s shareholders’ equity?
23. Income statement relations. The income statement of GrandRider, a U.K. automotive man-
ufacturer, reported revenues of £7,435, cost of sales of £6,003, other operating expenses of 
£918, a loss of £2 on the sale of a business, and net financing income of £221. Tax expense 
Capcion
Consolidated Income Statement
 
 
 
 
Year ended
(amounts in thousands of euros [€]) 
 
Dec. 31, 2013
Sales   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€ 1,736,959.2
Cost of sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,331,292.1)
Gross margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
405,667.1
Other operating income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,746.7
Selling and distribution expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(172,033.4)
Administrative expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(74,204.0)
Other operating expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       (758.2)
Operating profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
169,418.2
Financial expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(9,082.9)
Financial income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,534.1
Share of profit (loss) of associated companies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
377.9
Other income (expenses)—net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (4,383.4)
Profit before tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170,863.9
Income tax expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     (54,289.9)
Profit for the year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€  116,574.0
EXHIBIT 1.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

33
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
for the year was £133. GrandRider reports in millions of pounds sterling (£). Compute net 
income or net loss for GrandRider.
24. Income statement relations. The income statement of AutoCo, a U.S. automotive manufac-
turer, reported revenues of $207,349, cost of sales of $164,682, other operating expenses, 
including income taxes, of $50,335, and net financing income, after taxes, of $5,690. 
Amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars ($). Compute net income or loss for AutoCo.
25. Retained earnings relations. The balance sheet of Veldt, a South African firm, showed a 
balance in retained earnings of R5,872.4 at the end of 2013 and R4,640.9 at the end of 
Seller Redbud
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
 
 
Year ending 
 
 
January 31, 
(in thousands of US$) 
 
2013
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
 
Net earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 562,808
 
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
 
Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
157,770
 
Amortization of bond premium  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,538
 
Stock-based compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
43,755
 
Tax benefit from stock-based compensation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,719
 
Deferred income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,315
 
(Increase) decrease in assets, net of effect of acquisition:
 
 
Merchandise inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(96,673)
 
 
Trading investment securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(3,020)
 
 
Other current assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(16,217)
 
 
Other assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
529
 
(Decrease) increase in liabilities, net of effect of acquisition:
 
 
Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(31,764)
 
 
Accrued expenses and other current liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
15,774
 
 
Merchandise credit and gift card liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
24,430
 
 
Income taxes payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(74,530)
 
 
Deferred rent and other liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   25,102
 
Net cash provided by operating activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  614,536
Cash Flows from Investing Activities:
 
Purchase of held-to-maturity investment securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
—
 
Redemption of held-to-maturity investment securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
494,526
 
Purchase of available-for-sale investment securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(1,495,155)
 
Redemption of available-for-sale investment securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,546,430
 
Capital expenditures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(358,210)
 
Payment for acquisition, net of cash acquired  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (85,893)
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  101,698
Cash Flows from Financing Activities:
 
Proceeds from exercise of stock options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
22,672
 
Excess tax benefit from stock-based compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,990
 
Repurchase of common stock, including fees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(734,193)
 
Payment of deferred purchase price for acquisition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
      —
 
Net cash used in financing activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (705,531)
 
Net increase (decrease) in cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,703
Cash and cash equivalents:
 
Beginning of period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  213,381
 
End of period . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 224,084
EXHIBIT 1.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
2012. Net income for the year was R2,362.5 million. All amounts are in millions of South 
African rand (R). Compute the amount of dividends declared during the year.
26. Retained earnings relations. The balance sheet of Delvico, an Indian firm, showed retained 
earnings of Rs26,575 at the start of a year and Rs70,463 at the end of that year. The 
firm declared dividends during the year of Rs3,544. All amounts are in millions of Indian 
rupees (Rs). Compute net income for the year.
27. Cash flow relations. The statement of cash flows for BargainPurchase, a retailer, showed a 
net cash inflow from operations of $4,125, a net cash outflow for investing of $6,195, and a 
net cash inflow for financing of $3,707. The balance sheet showed a beginning-of-year bal-
ance in cash of $813. All amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars ($). Compute the amount 
of cash on the balance sheet at the end of the year.
28. Cash flow relations. The statement of cash flows for Buenco, a firm in Argentina, showed 
a net cash inflow from operations of Ps427,182 and a net cash outflow for financing of 
Ps21,806. The comparative balance sheets showed a beginning balance in cash of Ps32,673 
and an ending balance in cash of Ps101,198. All amounts are in millions of pesos (Ps). 
Compute net cash provided or used by investing activities.
29. Preparation of simple balance sheet; current and noncurrent classifications. Kenton Limited 
began retail operations on January 1, 2013. On that date it issued 10,000 shares of common 
stock for £50,000. On January 31, Kenton used £48,000 of the proceeds to rent a store, 
paying in advance for the next two years. Kenton also purchased £12,000 of merchandise 
on credit, agreeing to pay the supplier within 30 days. Kenton applies IFRS. Prepare, in 
good format, Kenton’s balance sheet as of January 31, 2013.
30. Preparation of simple balance sheet; current and noncurrent classifications. Heckle Group 
began operations as an engineering consulting firm, on June 1, 2013. On that date it issued 
100,000 shares of common stock for €920,000. During June, Heckle used €600,000 of the 
proceeds to purchase office equipment. It acquired a patent for €120,000, agreeing to pay 
the seller within 30 days. On June 30 Heckle signed a bank loan for €400,000, bearing inter-
est at 8% per year and payable in full on June 30, 2016. Prepare, in good format, Heckle’s 
balance sheet as of June 30, 2013.
31. Accrual versus cash basis of accounting. The following information is based on the financial 
statements of Hewston, a large manufacturing firm. Annual revenues are $66,387 million 
and net expenses (including income taxes) are $62,313 million. During the year, the firm 
collected $65,995 million in cash from customers and had cash outflows associated with 
payments to suppliers and vendors of $56,411 million.
a. Calculate net income and net cash flow for the year.
b. How can cash collected from customers be less than revenues?
c. How can cash payments to suppliers and vendors be less than expenses?
32. Accrual versus cash basis of accounting. Consider the following information reported by 
DairyLamb, a New Zealand firm; all figures are in millions of New Zealand dollars ($). 
The firm reported revenues of $13,882, cost of goods sold of $11,671, interest and other 
expenses of $2,113, and tax expense of $67. It also reported $13,894 in cash receipts from 
customers, $102 in miscellaneous cash receipts, $5,947 in cash payments to employees and 
creditors, $6,261 in cash payments for milk, $402 in cash payments for interest, and $64 in 
cash payments for taxes. Calculate net income and its net cash flow.
PROBLEMS
33. Balance sheet relations. Selected balance sheet amounts for ComputerCo, a manufacturer 
located in Singapore, appear next. All amounts are in millions of Singapore dollars ($). 
Compute the missing amounts.
2013
2012
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$199,824
?
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,010
?
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

35
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
2013
2012
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
$ 17,368
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
139,941
126,853
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
53,721
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
170,879
170,234
34. Balance sheet relations. Selected balance sheet amounts for SinoTwelve, a Chinese manu-
facturer, appear next. All amounts are in thousands of U.S. dollars ($). Compute the miss-
ing amounts.
2013
2012
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
$5,450,838
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$4,488,461
3,527,504
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
3,062,449
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,199,847
?
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,098,123
?
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
1,134,276
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,494,481
?
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
35. Income statement relations. Selected income statement information for EastonHome, a U.S. 
consumer products manufacturer, appears next. All amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars 
($). Compute the missing amounts.
2013
2012
2011
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$13,790
?
$11,397
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
$5,536
5,192
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,973
4,355
3,921
Other (Income) Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
186
69
Interest Expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157
159
136
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
759
648
728
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,738
1,354
?
36. Income statement relations. Selected income statement information for YankeeFashion, a 
U.S. clothing retailer, appears next. All amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars ($). Com-
pute the missing amounts.
2013
2012
2011
Net Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,295.4
$3,746.3
$3,305.4
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,959.2
1,723.9
1,620.9
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,663.4
1,476.9
1,377.6
Other (Income) Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34.0
?
2.7
Interest (Income) Expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
(1.2)
6.4
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
242.4
194.9
107.4
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400.9
308.0
?
37. Statement of cash flows relations. The following information is based on data reported in 
the statement of cash flows for AB Brown, a Swedish firm. All amounts are in millions of 
Swedish kronor (SEK).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
2013
2012
2011
Inflows of Cash
Proceeds from Borrowings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SEK15,587
SEK 1,290
SEK   657
Sale of Common Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
124
174
Revenues, Net of Expenses, from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . .
19,210
18,489
16,669
Sale of Property and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
152
185
362
Sale of Short-Term Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,499
6,180
6,375
Other Financing Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
406
58
—
Other Investing Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
663
—
Outflows of Cash
Acquisition of Property and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,319
3,827
3,365
Acquisition of Businesses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26,292
18,078
1,210
Repayment of Borrowings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,291
9,510
2,784
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,132
7,343
4,133
Other Financing Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
288
Other Investing Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
573
—
1,131
 
 
Prepare a statement of cash flows for AB Brown for the three years presented using 
the format in Exhibit 1.3. Set cash flow from operations equal to revenues, net of expenses, 
from operations. The balance in cash at the beginning of 2011 was SEK30,412. AB Brown 
classifies changes in short-term investments as investing activities.
38. Statement of cash flows relations. Selected data from the statement of cash flows for Jack-
son Corporation for the years ended October 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011 appear as follows 
(amounts in millions of US$):
2013
2012
2011
Inflows of Cash
Proceeds from Long-Term Borrowings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   836
$ 5,096
$ 3,190
Revenues from Operations Increasing Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19,536
19,083
17,233
Issue of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
37
3
Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
332
401
220
Other Investing Transactions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     71
      0
    268
 
Total Inflows. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$20,842
$24,617
$20,914
Outflows of Cash
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 3,678
$ 3,640
$ 1,881
Expenses for Operations Decreasing Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,394
18,541
18,344
Repayments of Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
766
922
687
Other Investing Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      0
  1,501
      0
 
Total Outflows. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$20,838
$24,604
$20,912
 
 
Prepare a statement of cash flows for each of the three years 2013, 2012 and 2011 
using the format in Exhibit 1.3. Set cash flow from operations equal to revenues providing 
cash minus expenses using cash. The balance in cash at October 31, 2010, was $102 million.
39. Preparing a balance sheet and income statement. The accounting records of JetAway Air-
lines reveal the following. The fiscal year ends on September 30 and amounts are in thou-
sands of US$:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

37
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
September 30
Balance Sheet Items
2013
2012
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  157,415
$  156,755
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
88,799
73,448
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
378,511
418,819
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
352,943
449,934
Current Maturities of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,996
7,873
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,035
65,152
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
623,309
871,717
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
56,810
73,586
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
681,242
795,838
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,231
12,942
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
844,116
984,142
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,137,610
5,008,166
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,044,975
2,385,854
Income Statement Items
For the Year Ended
September 30, 2013
Fuel Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  892,415
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22,883
Interest Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,918
Maintenance Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
767,606
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,938,753
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,735,587
Salaries and Benefits Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,455,237
a. Prepare a comparative balance sheet for JetAway Airlines as of September 30, 2013, and 
September 30, 2012, in the format used in Exhibit 1.1. Classify each balance sheet item 
into one of the following categories: current assets, noncurrent assets, current liabilities, 
noncurrent liabilities, and shareholders’ equity.
b. Prepare an income statement for JetAway Airlines for the year ended September 30, 
2013. 
c. Prepare a schedule explaining the change in retained earnings between September 30, 
2012, and September 30, 2013. JetAway declared and paid dividends during fiscal 2013.
40. Cash versus accrual accounting. Jack Block opens a tax and bookkeeping services business, 
Block’s Tax and Bookkeeping Services, on July 1, 2013. He invests $40,000 for all the com-
mon stock of the business, and the firm borrows $20,000 from the local bank, promising to 
repay the loan on December 31, 2013, along with interest at 8% per year, or approximately 
$133 per month (= [0.08 × $20,000]/12 months). The firm rents space on July 1 and pays 
$6,000 for three months rent in advance, and leases office equipment for the year, prepay-
ing $12,000 for six months rent. The firm hires an office assistant whom it will pay $72,000 
per year with payments every two months, issuing the first paycheck on August 31. Finally, 
the firm pays cash for office supplies during July costing $370; a physical count at the 
end of July shows that $280 of office supplies are on hand. During July, Block’s Tax and 
Bookkeeping Services performs services and bills customers for $44,000. On July 31, 2013, 
customers had paid $13,000 of the amount owed.
a. What is income for Block’s Tax and Bookkeeping Services for July 2013:
 
(1) Applying cash-basis accounting.
 
(2) Applying accrual accounting. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
b. How much cash on hand does Block’s Tax and Bookkeeping Services have as of July 
31, 2013? Why is the amount of cash on hand not a good representation of the firm’s 
performance during July?
41. Cash versus accrual accounting. Dina Richards opens a high-end stationery store, Stationery 
Plus, on November 1, 2013. She finances the store by investing $80,000 in cash in exchange 
for all the common stock of the firm. She also obtains a bank loan for $100,000, which she 
promises to repay in four equal installments of $25,000 at the end of each of the next four 
months, beginning December 31. The interest rate on the loan’s outstanding amount owed 
is 12% per year (or 1% per month); interest is to be paid along with each principal repay-
ment. The store rents space, paying $9,000 for six months’ rent, and acquires goods costing 
$40,000. The supplier agrees to allow Stationery Plus to pay half ($20,000) immediately 
and half on December 15. To attract customers, the firm allows customers 40 days to pay 
for their purchases. Stationery Plus’s other monthly costs are $10,000 in salaries and $480 
in utilities and insurance, all paid in cash at the end of every month. During November 
total sales to customers were $56,000; Stationery Plus had collected $23,000 by the end 
of November; it collected the remainder by December 15. During December total sales to 
customers were $62,000; the firm had collected $34,000 by the end of December. So far, no 
customers have failed to pay the amount owed within 40 days. During December Stationery 
Plus acquired more merchandise costing $55,000, paying half immediately and agreeing to 
pay half in January. During November, Stationery Plus sold goods for which it had paid 
$29,000, and during December, Stationery Plus sold goods for which it had paid $33,600.
a. What is income for Stationery Plus for November 2013:
 
(1) Applying cash-basis accounting.
 
(2) Applying accrual accounting.
b. What is income for Stationery Plus for December 2013:
 
(1) Applying cash-basis accounting.
 
(2) Applying accrual accounting.
42. Relations between net income and cash flows. The ABC Company starts the year in fine 
shape. The firm makes widgets—just what the customer wants. It makes them for $0.75 
each and sells them for $1.00. The ABC Company keeps an inventory equal to shipments 
of the past 30 days, pays its bills promptly, and collects cash from customers within 30 days 
after the sale. The sales manager predicts a steady increase in sales of 500 widgets each 
month beginning in February. It looks like a great year, and it begins that way.
 
January 1 
Cash, $875; receivables, $1,000; inventory, $750
 
January 
 In January the firm sells, on account for $1,000, 1,000 widgets costing $750. 
Net income for the month is $250. The firm collects receivables outstanding 
at the beginning of the month. Production equals 1,000 units at a total cost 
of $750. The books at the end of January show the following:
 
February 1  Cash, $1,125; receivables, $1,000; inventory, $750
 
February 
 This month’s sales jump, as predicted, to 1,500 units. With a correspond-
ing step-up in production to maintain the 30-day inventory, ABC Company 
makes 2,000 units at a cost of $1,500. It collects all receivables from January 
sales. Net income so far is $625. Now the books look like this:
 
March 1 
 Cash, $625; receivables, $1,500; inventory, $1,125
 
March 
 March sales are even better, increasing to 2,000 units. Collections are on time. 
Production, to adhere to the inventory policy, is 2,500 units. Operating results 
for the month show net income of $500. Net income to date is $1,125. The 
books show the following:
 
April 1 
Cash, $250; receivables, $2,000; inventory, $1,500
 
April 
 In April, sales jump another 500 units to 2,500, and the manager of ABC 
Company shakes the sales manager’s hand. Customers are paying right on 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

39
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
time. Production increases to 3,000 units, and the month’s business nets $625 
for a net income to date of $1,750. The manager of ABC Company takes off 
for Miami before the accountant issues a report. Suddenly a phone call comes 
from the treasurer: “Come home! We need cash!”
 
May 1 
 Cash, $0; receivables, $2,500; inventory, $1,875
a. Prepare an analysis that explains what happened to ABC Company. (Hint: Compute 
the amount of cash receipts and cash disbursements for each month during the period 
January 1 to May 1.)
b. How can a firm show increasing net income but a decreasing amount of cash?
c. What insights does this problem provide about the need for all three financial state-
ments—balance sheet, income statement, and statement of cash flows?
d. What actions would you suggest that ABC Company take to deal with its cash flow 
problem?
43. Balance sheet and income statement relations. (Prepared by Professor Wesley T. Andrews Jr. 
and reproduced, with adaptation, by permission.)
 
Once upon a time many, many years ago, a feudal landlord lived in a small province of 
central Europe. The landlord, called the Red-Bearded Baron, lived in a castle high on a hill. 
This benevolent fellow took responsibility for the well-being of many peasants who occu-
pied the lands surrounding his castle. Each spring as the snow began to melt, the Baron 
would decide how to provide for all his serf dependents during the coming year.
 
 
One spring the Baron was thinking about the wheat crop of the coming growing sea-
son. “I believe that 30 acres of my land, being worth five bushels of wheat per acre, will 
produce enough wheat for next winter,” he mused, “but who should do the farming? I 
believe I’ll give Ivan the Indefatigable and Igor the Immutable the task of growing the 
wheat.” Whereupon he summoned Ivan and Igor, two gentry noted for their hard work and 
not overly active minds, for an audience.
 
 
“Ivan, you will farm on the 20-acre plot of ground, and Igor will farm the 10-acre 
plot,” the Baron began. “I will give Ivan 20 bushels of wheat for seed and 20 pounds of 
fertilizer. (Twenty pounds of fertilizer are worth two bushels of wheat.) Igor will get 10 
bushels of wheat for seed and 10 pounds of fertilizer. I will give each of you an ox to pull a 
plow, but you will have to make arrangements with Feyador, the Plowmaker, for two plows. 
The oxen, incidentally, are only three years old and have never been used for farming, so 
they should have a good 10 years of farming ahead of them. Take good care of them, 
because an ox is worth 40 bushels of wheat. Come back next fall and return the oxen and 
the plows along with your harvest.” Ivan and Igor bowed and withdrew from the Great 
Hall, taking with them the things provided by the Baron.
 
 
The summer came and went. After the harvest Ivan and Igor returned to the Great 
Hall to account to their master for the things given them in the spring. Ivan, pouring 223 
bushels of wheat onto the floor, said, “My Lord, I present you with a slightly used ox, 
a plow broken beyond repair, and 223 bushels of wheat. I, unfortunately, owe Feyador, 
the Plowmaker, three bushels of wheat for the plow I got from him last spring. And, as 
you might expect, I used all the fertilizer and seed you gave me last spring. You will also 
remember, my Lord, that you took 20 bushels of my harvest for your own personal use.”
 
 
Igor, who had been given 10 acres of land, 10 bushels of wheat, and 10 pounds of fer-
tilizer, spoke next. “Here, my Lord, is a partially used-up ox, the plow for which I gave Fey-
ador, the Plowmaker, three bushels of wheat from my harvest, and 105 bushels of wheat. 
I, too, used all my seed and fertilizer last spring. Also, my Lord, you took 30 bushels of 
wheat several days ago for your own table. I believe the plow is good for two more seasons.”
 
 
“Knaves, you did well,” said the Red-Bearded Baron. Blessed with this benediction, 
the two serfs departed. After the servants had taken their leave, the Red-Bearded Baron, 
watching the two hungry oxen slowly eating the wheat piled on the floor, began to contem-
plate what had happened. “Yes,” he thought, “they did well, but I wonder which one did 
better?”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40
Chapter 1 
Introduction to Business Activities
a. What measuring unit should the Red-Bearded Baron use to measure financial position 
and operating performance?
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Ivan and for Igor at both the beginning and the end of the 
period.
c. Prepare an income statement for Ivan and for Igor for the period.
d. Prepare a schedule reconciling the change in owner’s equity between the beginning and 
the end of the period.
e. Did Ivan or Igor perform better during the period? Explain.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FACMU14
P a r t
2
Accounting Concepts 
and Methods
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B
usinesses engage in transactions with customers, suppliers, employees, governmental entities, 
and others. This chapter demonstrates how the accountant records transactions and prepares 
financial statements. This chapter focuses on record-keeping procedures, while the rest of this 
book focuses on accounting principles and judgments, which form the core of financial account-
ing. Record-keeping procedures organize and present transactions in a standardized manner that 
guides the user in understanding and interpreting financial statements.
You may think, “I don’t intend to be an accountant. Why do I need to learn record-keeping 
procedures?” Understanding both the recording of transactions and the preparation of financial 
statements helps you develop two skills: (1) the ability to communicate the results of transac-
tions, and (2) the ability to understand how transactions affect the financial statements and how 
the financial statements reflect the transactions. We adopt a user perspective throughout this text, 
which means we focus on how a user of financial statements can best understand and analyze 
financial reports. You will limit your ability to analyze financial statements if you do not understand 
how the statements reflect both the record-keeping process and management’s choices of accounting 
principles and its professional judgments.
This chapter considers three record-keeping concepts:
1. The dual nature (duality) of transactions and events.
2. The use of T-accounts and journal entries for recording the duality of a transaction or event.
3. The preparation of a simple balance sheet.
Because each of these concepts relies on common record-keeping terminology, we begin with an 
overview of key terms and their definitions. Subsequent chapters describe the terms in more detail.
ACCOUNTS
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
Accounting relies on a system of accounts to record transactions. The name or title of each 
account describes the nature of the items in the account. Common accounts include Cash, Build-
ings, and Equipment. The amount in each account appears on a line of a balance sheet or income 
statement. A detailed system of accounts allows the preparer of financial statements to decom-
pose, or disaggregate, each transaction to convey information about the effects of the transaction. 
For example, separate information on Cash, Accounts Receivable, and Inventories conveys more 
information than combining all transactions affecting these three accounts into a single account 
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
The Basics of Record Keeping 
and Financial Statement 
Preparation: Balance Sheet
C h a p t e r
2
1. Learn the conventions for record-
ing transactions, including the dual 
nature of transactions and the use of 
T-accounts and journal entries.
2. Understand how the recording of trans-
actions is the foundation for preparing 
financial statements.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

44
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
called Current Assets. The accounts also group the effects of similar transactions that occur 
during the reporting period. For example, if a firm sells one million copies of a piece of soft-
ware during a year, little benefit would result from reporting the individual effect of each of the 
one million transactions. The accounting process combines, or aggregates, the effects of similar 
transactions for financial reporting.
Accounting does not prescribe a list of accounts that firms must use. Management’s flex-
ibility to choose account names results from the complexity and differing nature of businesses, 
proprietary information considerations,1 and the amount of space that a long list of accounts 
would require. Although firms need this flexibility, following conventional naming practices 
increases the understandability of financial statements to knowledgeable users who apply their 
common understanding of the account titles. We believe that you will increase your effective-
ness as a user of financial statements if you also follow conventions—by choosing account 
titles that are descriptive and unambiguous, by using identical (or similar) account titles for 
identical (or similar) items, and as your accounting vocabulary grows, by selecting titles that 
others commonly use to describe the item.
The word accounts refers to items on both the balance sheet, discussed in this chapter, and 
the income statement, discussed later. Balance sheet accounts are permanent accounts in the 
sense that they remain open, with nonzero balances, at the end of the reporting period. In con-
trast, income statement accounts, discussed in the next chapter, are temporary accounts in the 
sense that they start a period with a zero balance, accumulate information during the report-
ing period, and have a zero balance at the end of the reporting period. As a result, a balance 
sheet account shows an amount at the end of a period of time, such as a month, or quarter, 
or year, whereas an income statement account shows the amount for a period of time.2 The 
recording of transactions during a period causes amounts in accounts to increase and decrease. 
For balance sheet accounts, the total additions during the period increase the (beginning) bal-
ance carried forward from the previous balance sheet date, and the total subtractions decrease 
this balance.
Chapter 1 taught that the balance sheet is one of the principal financial statements. The 
balance sheet shows the assets of a firm and the sources of financing for those assets—the 
 liabilities and shareholders’ equity, which have a claim on the assets. The next section describes 
several typical balance sheet accounts.
THE BALANCE SHEET
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
Typical Asset Accounts This section discusses several typical asset accounts.
Cash: Coins and currency, bank checks and money orders, bank deposits against which the 
firm can draw checks, and time deposits, usually savings accounts and certificates of deposit. 
Although money orders are claims against individuals or institutions, they are treated as cash.
Marketable Securities: Government bonds or corporate stocks and bonds that the firm will 
hold for a relatively short time. The word marketable implies that the firm can readily buy and 
sell them, perhaps through an exchange such as the New York Stock Exchange or the London 
Stock Exchange.
Accounts Receivable: Amounts due from customers from the sale of goods or services on 
account. Accounts Receivable describes the total amount of cash owed by (that is, receivable 
from) customers. The reporting entity maintains a separate record for each customer and fol-
lows up with customers who have not paid within the agreed-upon period of time.
 1 All else equal, a user of financial statements would prefer to have more disaggregated data, since a user can 
always aggregate data (but cannot do the reverse). Readers of a firm’s financial statements include, however, 
competitors, so accounting guidance provides some amount of flexibility to combine information in ways that 
mask competitively sensitive (that is, proprietary) information. Authoritative guidance nevertheless requires dis-
aggregated information in some instances. For example, both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the disclosure of 
segment information, which details resources (assets) and results of operations (income or loss) by segment. 
(The Glossary defines both segment and segment reporting.)
 2 The closing process, discussed in Chapter 3, ensures that each income statement account has a zero balance 
at the end of the reporting period and that the amounts that had been in the income statement accounts get 
transferred to the balance sheet account, Retained Earnings, at the end of the period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

45
The Balance Sheet
Notes Receivable: Amounts due from customers or from others to whom a firm has made 
loans or extended credit. The customer or other borrower puts the claim into writing in a for-
mal note, which distinguishes the claim from an account receivable.
Interest Receivable: Interest on assets such as promissory notes or bonds, which the bor-
rower owes to the reporting entity because of the passage of time, but the reporting entity has 
not collected.
Inventory: Goods available for sale, partially completed goods, and materials used in the 
manufacture of products. (Outside the United States, common usage refers to inventories as 
stocks.3) Merchandise Inventory reflects goods on hand purchased for resale, such as canned 
goods on grocery store shelves or suits on the racks of a clothing store. Raw Materials Inven-
tory includes materials as yet unused for manufacturing products. Work-in-Process Inventory 
includes partially completed manufactured products. Finished Goods Inventory is completed but 
unsold manufactured products.
Advances to Suppliers: Payments the firm has made in advance to a supplier for goods 
(such as raw materials) or services (such as for Web advertising that has not yet run) that it will 
receive at a later date.
Prepaid Rent: Rent paid in advance for the future use of land, buildings, equipment, and 
other resources; a particular form of Advances to Suppliers.
Prepaid Insurance: Insurance premiums paid for future coverage; a particular form of 
Advances to Suppliers.
Investments in Securities: Bonds or shares of common or preferred stock that the firm plans 
to hold for more than one year.
Land: Land used in operations or occupied by buildings used in operations.
Buildings: Factory buildings, store buildings, warehouses, and other buildings.
Equipment: Lathes, machine tools, boilers, computers, cranes, conveyors, automobiles, and 
so forth.
Furniture and Fixtures: Desks, tables, chairs, showcases, and other selling and office equipment.
Accumulated Depreciation: The cumulative amount of the acquisition cost of long-term 
assets (such as buildings and equipment) that the firm has allocated to production costs or to 
current and prior period expenses. The amount in this account is subtracted from the cost of 
the long-term asset to which it relates, to measure the carrying value (sometimes called the book 
value or net book value) of the asset.
Patents: Rights granted for varying numbers of years (depending on the country that issues 
the patent) to exclude others from manufacturing, using, or selling certain processes or devices. 
The accounting treatment of a cost to acquire a patent depends on whether the firm applies 
U.S. GAAP or IFRS. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that the firm recognize as an asset 
the cost to purchase a patent from an external third party. Under U.S. GAAP, firms expense 
the research and development costs incurred to develop a patentable process or device. IFRS 
requires firms to expense research costs as incurred but, under some circumstances, to recog-
nize development costs as an asset.4
Goodwill: When one firm acquires another firm, it measures the identifiable assets acquired 
and liabilities assumed at their current fair values. If the purchase price exceeds the sum of 
the fair values of the identifiable assets less the identifiable liabilities, the excess is goodwill. 
Goodwill is an asset that includes intangibles that the acquiring firm cannot separately iden-
tify, such as customer loyalty. These desirable attributes cause the buyer to pay more for the 
acquired firm than the sum of the fair values of all the other assets, less liabilities, identified in 
the acquisition.5
Typical Liability Accounts This section describes typical liability accounts.
Accounts Payable: Amounts owed for goods or services acquired under an informal credit 
agreement. The firm typically pays these liabilities within one or two months after the balance 
sheet date. (The same items appear as Accounts Receivable on the creditor’s balance sheet.)
Notes Payable: The face amount of promissory notes that the firm gives in connection 
with loans from a bank or with the purchase of goods or services. (The same items appear as 
Notes Receivable on the creditor’s [lender’s] balance sheet.) Most Accounts Payable, Accounts 
 3 Do not confuse the use of stocks to describe inventory with the term common stock, which refers to a compo-
nent of shareholders’ equity.
 4 Chapter 9 discusses the treatment of internally developed and externally purchased patents in more detail.
 5 Chapter 4 describes fair values in detail.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

46
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
Receivable, Notes Payable, and Notes Receivable are current items, due within a year of the bal-
ance sheet date. Similar items due more than one year after the balance sheet date could have 
the same account titles, but would appear in the noncurrent assets or noncurrent liabilities sec-
tions of the balance sheet.
Interest Payable: Interest on obligations that has accrued or accumulated but that the firm 
has not yet paid as of the balance sheet. (The same item appears as Interest Receivable on the 
creditor’s balance sheet.) Firms often include this item with the preceding one in an account 
called Notes and Interest Payable.
Income Taxes Payable: The estimated liability for income taxes, accumulated and unpaid, 
based on the taxable income of the business.
Advances from Customers: An obligation incurred when a firm receives payments in 
advance for goods or services it will furnish to customers in the future. This is a nonmonetary 
liability, because the firm has an obligation to deliver goods or services, not to return the cash. 
Even so, the firm records this liability as the amount of cash received.6
Advances from Tenants, or Rent Received in Advance: Another example of a nonmonetary 
liability that is an advance from a customer. For example, a tenant may prepay for its rented 
office space for several months in advance. The owner of the office space cannot include in 
income the amounts paid by the tenant for future months until the owner provides rental ser-
vices. Meanwhile the advance payment results in a liability payable in services—the use of the 
building. (On the balance sheet of the tenant, the same amount appears as an asset an advance, 
often called Prepaid Rent.)
Mortgage Payable: A form of long-term promissory note, or loan, where the borrower has 
pledged specific pieces of property as security for payment. If the borrower does not pay the 
loan or interest according to the agreement, the lender can require the sale of the property to 
generate cash to repay the loan.
Bonds Payable: A form of long-term loan. The borrower has signed a formal written con-
tract called an indenture. The borrower usually raises the funds from a number of lenders, each 
of whom receives written evidence of its share of the loan.
Deferred Income Taxes: Income tax amounts that are delayed beyond the current account-
ing period.7
Typical Shareholders’ Equity Accounts This section describes typical shareholders’ 
equity accounts.
Common Stock (at par): The amount of cash or other assets received equal to the par or 
stated value of a firm’s principal class of voting stock; part of contributed capital.
Additional Paid-In Capital: The amount of cash or other assets received at the time of the 
issuance of stock in excess of the stock’s par value or stated value. Some firms use the title Cap-
ital Contributed in Excess of Par (or Stated) Value. Accountants and analysts often refer to the 
sum of the amounts in this account and the Common Stock at par account as contributed capi-
tal, because the sum of these two items represents the cash and other assets directly provided by 
shareholders to a firm. The distinction between this account and the preceding one often mat-
ters in law, but not in economics: the owners have contributed assets, usually cash, and that’s all 
that matters in most business analyses.
Preferred Stock: The amount of cash or other assets received for shares of a class of a 
firm’s stock that has some preference relative to common stock. Common forms of preference 
include a higher dividend or a higher priority in terms of asset distribution in the event the firm 
liquidates. Preferred stock, if a company has it, is part of contributed capital.
Retained Earnings: Net assets (defined as all assets minus all liabilities) increase as a firm 
generates earnings in excess of cash (or other assets) distributed as dividends. When a firm 
earns income, it generates new net assets. The firm can distribute these assets or keep them 
for various uses. Retained Earnings is the balance sheet account that shows the amount of 
net assets a firm has generated from earnings, but has not distributed to owners as dividends. 
Retained earnings are not assets, but are the source of the financing of the assets retained.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income: An account that accumulates changes in net 
assets that are not included in net income.
 6 Chapter 8 discusses this account in more detail.
 7 Chapter 12 discusses this item, which appears on the balance sheets of most corporations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

47
The Balance Sheet
A TYPICAL BALANCE SHEET
The balance sheet groups individual accounts by type (asset, liability, or shareholders’ equity) 
and lists these accounts with their balances as of a specific date. The date of the balance sheet 
appears at the top of the balance sheet. The asset and liability categories further group individ-
ual accounts by the expected timing of cash receipts (for assets) or cash payments (for liabili-
ties). Common terminology describes items whose cash receipts or payments the firm expects 
will occur within one year as current assets or current liabilities, respectively. If the firm expects 
to collect or pay more than one year after the balance sheet date, the balance sheet classifies 
these as noncurrent assets and noncurrent liabilities, respectively.8
The balance sheet begins with a list of assets and then lists liabilities and shareholders’ 
equity. Exhibit 2.1 shows the balance sheet for Toothpaste Soap Company (“Toothpaste”) for 
 8 Chapter 4 describes the balance sheet classifications in more detail.
Toothpaste Soap Company
Balance Sheet
As of December 31,
Year 7
Year 6
ASSETS 
Current Assets
 
Cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   428.7
$  489.5
 
Receivables (net of allowances of $50.6 and $46.4, respectively) . . . . 
1,680.7
1,523.2
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,171.0
1,008.4
 
Other current assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
338.1
   279.9
 
 
Total current assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,618.5
3,301.0
Property, plant, and equipment, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,015.2
2,696.1
Goodwill, net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,272.0
2,081.8
Other intangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
844.8
831.1
Other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
361.5
   228.0
 
 
Total assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,112.0
$9,138.0
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY 
Current Liabilities
 
Notes and loans payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   155.9
$  174.1
 
Current portion of long-term debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
138.1
776.7
 
Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,066.8
1,039.7
 
Accrued income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
262.7
161.5
 
Other accruals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,539.2
 1,317.1
 
 
Total current liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,162.7
3,469.1
Long-term debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,221.9
2,720.4
Deferred income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
264.1
309.9
Other liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,177.1
 1,227.7
 
 
Total liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,825.8
7,727.1
Commitments and contingent liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
Shareholders’ Equity
 
Preference stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
197.5
222.7
 
Common stock, $1 par value (1,000,000,000 shares authorized, 
 
 
732,853,180 shares issued)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
732.9
732.9
 
Additional paid-in capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,517.7
1,218.1
 
Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,627.5
9,643.7
 
Accumulated other comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,666.8)
(2,081.2)
11,408.8
9,736.2
Unearned compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(218.9)
(251.4)
Treasury stock, at cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (8,903.7)
(8,073.9)
 
Total shareholders’ equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,286.2
 1,410.9
 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,112.0
$9,138.0
EXHIBIT 2.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
the fiscal year ended December 31, Year 7.9 Toothpaste is a leading consumer products com-
pany that operates in two principal segments: (1) oral, personal, and home care (including 
products such as toothpaste, soaps, and shampoo), and (2) pet nutrition.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to report balance sheet accounts for the prior 
year in addition to the current year. Toothpaste reports the results for the prior year in the 
rightmost column (the column labeled Year 6), and the results for the current year in the col-
umn to the left of this one (the column labeled Year 7).10 The lists of asset, liability, and share-
holders’ equity accounts include many of the accounts described earlier, as well as a few (such 
as treasury stock) described in later chapters. Under U.S. GAAP, assets and liabilities appear in 
order of decreasing closeness-to-cash; many firms that report under IFRS reverse this ordering.
DUAL EFFECT OF TRANSACTIONS
Firms engage in transactions, or exchanges, with other entities and individuals. For example, 
firms acquire merchandise from suppliers, pay employees for labor services, sell merchandise 
to customers, pay taxes to governments, and so on. In addition, other events not involving 
exchanges occur during a period. For example, firms consume the services of buildings and 
equipment as they use them in operations and incur an obligation to pay interest on outstand-
ing loans. Accountants record the effects of each of these transactions and events as they occur, 
and then accumulate the effects of all transactions and events for presentation in the financial 
statements.
Individual
Transactions
and Events
Principal
Financial
Statements
Accounting System for
Accumulating Information
About Transactions and Events
The balance sheet equation provides the analytical framework that we use throughout this 
book to understand the effects of transactions and events on the financial statements. This 
equation captures the financial statement effects of operating, investing, and financing transac-
tions—three key activities of business firms. It shows the equality of assets with liabilities plus 
shareholders’ equity:
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
This equation requires that an entity’s assets exactly balance, or offset, an equal amount 
of financing provided by creditors and owners of the corporation. Total liabilities plus share-
holders’ equity shows the sources of all the firm’s financing, and the assets show how the firm 
holds or has invested those funds. The balance sheet equation maintains this equality by report-
ing the financial statement effects of each event and transaction in a dual manner, called the 
dual effect of transactions. Any single event or transaction will have one of the following four 
effects or some combination of these effects:
1. It increases an asset and increases either a liability or shareholders’ equity.
2. It decreases an asset and decreases either a liability or shareholders’ equity.
3. It increases one asset and decreases another asset.
4. It increases one liability or shareholders’ equity and decreases another liability or share-
holders’ equity.
To understand the dual effects of various transactions on the balance sheet equation, con-
sider the following transactions for Miller Corporation (Miller) during January as it prepares to 
open for business on February 1:
(1) On January 1, Miller issues 10,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $100,000 
cash.
(2) On January 5, Miller pays $12,000 cash to rent equipment for one year. In this transaction, 
Miller’s asset is prepaid rent, not the equipment itself.
(3) On January 15, Miller purchases merchandise inventory costing $15,000 from a supplier, 
agreeing to pay later.
 9 We have adapted this balance sheet from the published financial statements of the Colgate Palmolive Company.
10 Firms do not use the same ordering for showing the current year’s results and the prior year’s results. Some 
firms order the columns oldest to most recent, while others order most recent to oldest.
© Cengage 
Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

49
The Balance Sheet
(4) On January 21, it pays the supplier in (3) $8,000 of the amount due.
(5) On January 25, the supplier in (3) accepts 700 shares of Miller common stock at par value 
in settlement of the $7,000 amount still owed.
(6) On January 31, Miller pays $600 cash for a one-year insurance premium for coverage 
beginning February 1.
(7) On January 31, Miller receives $3,000 from a customer for merchandise Miller will deliver 
during February.
(8) On January 31, Miller purchases a building for $40,000 and finances this purchase by sign-
ing a note payable with a local bank. Miller promises to repay the note in full in three years 
and to pay interest at 10% per year.
Exhibit 2.2 illustrates the dual effect of these transactions on the balance sheet equation. 
After each transaction, assets equal liabilities plus shareholders’ equity.
Each transaction has at least two effects. For example, in transaction (1) Miller issues com-
mon stock to shareholders and receives cash. In transaction (2) Miller makes a cash expen-
diture and receives the right to use equipment. In transaction (3) Miller promises to make a 
future cash payment to a supplier and receives merchandise inventory. These and other transac-
tions recorded in the accounting system result from exchanges. The accounting records reflect 
effects on assets, liabilities, and shareholders equity arising from these exchanges.
The recording of each transaction maintains the balance sheet equality. Transactions 
(1), (3), (7), and (8) increase assets and increase either a liability or shareholders’ equity. 
Miller Corporation
Illustration of Dual Effect of Transactions on Balance Sheet Equation
Transaction
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(1)
On January 1, Miller Corporation issues 10,000 shares of $10 par value 
common stock for $100,000 cash (an increase in an asset and shareholders’ 
equity).
+$100,000
  $     0
+$100,000
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
=
$     0
+
$100,000
(2) On January 5, the firm pays $12,000 cash to rent some equipment 
(an increase in one asset and a decrease in another asset).
+  12,000
−  12,000
             
             
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
=
$     0
+
$100,000
(3) On January 15, the firm purchases merchandise inventory costing $15,000 
from a supplier on account (an increase in an asset and a liability).
+ 
15,000
+ 15,000
             
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$115,000
=
$15,000
+
$100,000
(4) On January 21, the firm pays the supplier in (3) $8,000 of the amount due 
(a decrease in an asset and a liability).
−   8,000
−  8,000
             
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$107,000
=
$ 7,000
+
$100,000
(5)
On January 25, the supplier in (3) accepts 700 shares of Miller common 
stock in settlement of the $7,000 still owed (an increase in shareholders’ 
equity and a decrease in a liability).
 
−  7,000
+   7,000
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$107,000
=
$     0
+
$107,000
(6)
On January 31, the firm pays $600 cash for a one-year insurance premium 
for coverage beginning February 1 (an increase in one asset and a decrease 
in another asset).
+     600
−     600
             
             
 
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$107,000
=
$     0
+
$107,000
(7)
On January 31, the firm receives $3,000 from a customer for merchandise 
Miller will deliver during February (an increase in an asset and a liability).
+   3,000
+  3,000
             
 
Subtotal—January 31  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$110,000
=
$ 3,000
+
$107,000
(8)
On January 31, the firm purchases a building for $40,000, financed by a 
note payable with a local bank (an increase in an asset and a liability).
+  40,000
+ 40,000
             
 
Total—January 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  $150,000
=
   $43,000
+
   $107,000
EXHIBIT 2.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
Transaction (4) decreases assets and a liability. Transactions (2) and (6) increase one asset and 
decrease another asset. Transaction (5) increases shareholders’ equity and decreases a liability.
 PROBLEM  2.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Dual effect of transactions on balance sheet equation. Using the format in Exhibit 2.2, 
indicate the effects of each of the following transactions of Gaines Corporation on the 
balance sheet equation.
1. The firm issues 20,000 shares of £10 par value common stock for £12 cash per share.
2. The firm issues £100,000 principal amount of bonds for £100,000 cash.
3. The firm acquires, with £220,000 in cash, land costing £40,000 and a building costing 
£180,000.
4. The firm acquires, on account, equipment costing £25,000 and merchandise inventory 
costing £12,000. (“On account” means that the firm agrees to pay later for the equip-
ment and inventory.)
5. The firm signs an agreement to rent equipment from its owner and pays £1,500 rental 
in advance.
6. The firm pays £28,000 to the suppliers in 4.
T-ACCOUNTS
Although Exhibit 2.2 illustrates the dual effect of individual transactions, it does not provide 
a process for preparing a balance sheet. Specifically, the exhibit does not describe how much 
of the total assets of $150,000 at the end of the period (January 31 for Miller Corporation) 
represents cash, how much represents inventory, how much represents equipment, and so on. A 
disaggregated display of balance sheet items provides users of financial statements with infor-
mation about the sources of a firm’s financing and how management has invested the cash and 
other assets received from shareholders and creditors in specific assets. For example, Exhibit 2.1 
shows that as of December 31, Year 7, Toothpaste has invested over $1 billion in inventories. To 
move to a disaggregated reporting format, we introduce the use of T-accounts for accumulating 
information about how transactions and events during a period affect specific asset, liability, 
and shareholders’ equity accounts.
A T-account is a device or convention for organizing and accumulating the accounting 
entries of transactions that affect an individual account, such as cash, accounts receivable, 
bonds payable, or additional paid-in capital. As the name implies, the T-account looks like the 
letter T, with a horizontal line bisected by a vertical line. Conventionally, the name of the spe-
cific individual account title appears on the horizontal line.
Account Title
Increases and Decreases to the T-Account One side of the space formed by the 
vertical line records increases in the account, and the other side records decreases. Which side 
records increases and which side records decreases differs depending on whether the T-account 
represents an asset, liability, or shareholders’ equity account. Long-standing custom follows 
three rules:
1. Increases in assets appear on the left side, and decreases in assets appear on the right side 
of T-accounts.
2. Increases in liabilities appear on the right side, and decreases in liabilities appear on the left 
side of T-accounts.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

51
The Balance Sheet
3. Increases in shareholders’ equity appear on the right side, and decreases in shareholders’ 
equity appear on the left side of T-accounts.
This custom reflects the fact that in the balance sheet equation, assets appear to the left of 
the equal sign, while liabilities and shareholders’ equity appear to the right side. Following this 
format, asset balances appear on the left side of T-accounts; liability and shareholders’ equity 
balances appear on the right side.11
The net amount or balance in an account results from summing the amounts recorded on 
the left side and right side of the account and netting the two sums. As we noted previously, the 
balance in an asset account typically appears as an amount on the left side, whereas liability 
and shareholders’ equity accounts typically have net balances on the right side. The balance in 
an account at the end of one reporting period is that account’s opening balance at the start of 
the next reporting period. By convention, the first line in the T-account reports the beginning 
or opening balance, and the last line reports the ending or closing balance. Thus, the following 
equation describes a typical asset account with a left side balance:
 
Beginning Balance in Asset Account (left side)
+ Sum of the transactions affecting the left side of the Asset Account
− Sum of the transactions affecting the right side of the Asset Account
= Ending Balance in Asset Account (left side)
For a typical liability or equity account, the T-account equation is as follows:
 
Beginning Balance in Liability or Shareholders’ Equity Account (right side)
+ Sum of the transactions affecting the right side of the Liability or Shareholders’ Equity Account
− Sum of the transactions affecting the left side of the Liability or Shareholders’ Equity Account
= Ending Balance in Liability or Shareholders’ Equity Account (right side)
The equality of the amounts recorded on the left and right for any transaction provides a 
powerful check for the accuracy of record keeping. If you analyze a transaction and get unequal 
amounts for left and right amounts, you will know you have erred.
Debit and Credit Accountants use two abbreviations: debit (Dr.) and credit (Cr.). Debit, 
used as a verb, means “record an entry on the left side of an account.” Used as a noun or 
an adjective, it means “an entry on the left side of an account.” (Many use the word charge 
to mean debit, as either a verb or a noun.) Credit, used as a verb, means “record an entry on 
the right side of an account.” Used as a noun or an adjective, it means “an entry on the right 
side of an account.” Combining these terms with the three rules for T-accounts, we see the 
following:
■ 
A debit or charge indicates (1) an increase in an asset, or (2) a decrease in a liability, or 
(3) a decrease in a shareholders’ equity item.
■ 
A credit indicates (1) a decrease in an asset, or (2) an increase in a liability, or (3) an 
increase in a shareholders’ equity item.
Maintaining the equality of the balance sheet equation requires that the amounts debited 
to various accounts for each transaction equal the amounts credited to various accounts. As 
a result, the sum of balances in accounts with debit balances at the end of each period must 
equal the sum of balances in accounts with credit balances. “Debits equal credits” applies to 
each individual transaction and to the balance sheet as a whole.
Summary of Account Terminology and Procedure The following T-accounts 
summarize the conventional use of the account form and the terms debit and credit.
11 As we describe in a subsequent section of this chapter, some accounts that appear in the asset section of the bal-
ance sheet accumulate subtractions from an asset. These are contra accounts, the general term for accounts that 
accumulate subtractions from another account. An increase in a contra-asset account appears on the right side, 
not the left side. A contra-asset account appears on the asset side of the balance sheet as a subtraction from an 
asset, not among the liability or shareholders’ equity accounts. Contra-liability and contra-equity accounts also 
exist; in subsequent chapters, we discuss these contra accounts as they arise.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
Asset Account
Liability Account
Shareholders’ Equity Account
Beginning 
Balance
Increases
+
Dr.
Decreases
−
Cr.
Decreases
−
Dr.
Beginning 
Balance
Increases
+
Cr.
Decreases
−
Dr.
Beginning 
Balance
Increases
+
Cr.
Ending Balance
Ending Balance
Ending Balance
REFLECTING THE DUAL EFFECT OF TRANSACTIONS IN T-ACCOUNTS
To show how the dual effect of transactions changes the T-accounts, Exhibit 2.3 records the 
transactions of Miller Corporation for January using separate T-accounts for each balance 
sheet item. The numbers in parentheses refer to the eight January transactions. The data in 
Exhibit 2.3 show that Miller Corporation’s total assets of $150,000 as of January 31 comprise 
$82,400 in cash, $15,000 in merchandise inventory, $600 in prepaid insurance (advances to the 
insurance provider), $12,000 in prepaid rent (advances to landlords), and $40,000 in building. 
Total liabilities plus shareholders’ equity of $150,000 comprises $3,000 of advances from cus-
tomers, $40,000 in notes payable, and $107,000 of common stock.
Miller Corporation
Individual T-Accounts Showing Transactions
Cash (Asset)
Accounts Payable (Liability)
Increases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Increases
(Cr.)
(1)
100,000
12,000
(2)
(4)
8,000
15,000
(3)
(7)
3,000
  8,000
(4)
(5)
7,000
     600
(6)
0
Balance
Balance
82,400
Merchandise Inventory (Asset)
Advances from Customer (Liability)
Increases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Cr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Increases
(Cr.)
(3)
15,000
3,000
(7)
Balance
15,000
3,000
Balance
Prepaid Insurance (Asset)
Note Payable (Liability)
Increases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Cr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Increases
(Cr.)
(6)
600
 40,000
(8)
Balance
600
 40,000
Balance
Prepaid Rent (Asset)
Common Stock (Shareholders’ Equity)
Increases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Increases
(Cr.)
(2)
12,000
100,000
(1)
Balance
12,000
7,000
(5)
107,000
Balance
Buildings (Asset)
Retained Earnings (Shareholders’ 
Equity)
Increases
(Dr.)
Decreases
(Cr.)
Decreases
(Dr.)
Increases
(Cr.)
(8)
40,000
0
Balance
Balance
40,000
EXHIBIT 2.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

53
The Balance Sheet
One can prepare the balance sheet using the amounts shown as balances in the T-accounts. 
The balance sheet of Miller Corporation after the eight transactions of January appears in 
Exhibit 2.4.
 PROBLEM  2.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
T-accounts for various transactions. Set up T-accounts for the following accounts:
 
Cash 
Bonds Payable
 
Merchandise Inventory 
Land
 
Prepaid Rent 
Buildings
 
Equipment 
Common Stock—Par Value
 
Accounts Payable 
Additional Paid-In Capital
Indicate whether each account is an asset, a liability, or a shareholders’ equity item. Enter 
in the T-accounts the transactions of Gaines Corporation in Problem 2.1 for Self-Study.
JOURNAL ENTRIES
The preceding section illustrated the use of T-accounts to do the following:
1. Record the effects of transactions on individual balance sheet accounts.
2. Sum the effects of all transactions affecting a particular account during a period, obtain an 
ending balance in that account, and then prepare a balance sheet.
Miller Corporation
Balance Sheet
January 31
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 82,400
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
15,000
Prepaid Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
600
Prepaid Rent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  12,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$110,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$150,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Advances from Customer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  3,000
Noncurrent Liabilities
Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  40,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 43,000
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$107,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            —
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$150,000
EXHIBIT 2.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
T-accounts are a useful pedagogical device to understand how individual transactions flow 
to and accumulate within various accounts, and they provide the information needed to prepare 
a balance sheet. If the resulting balance sheet does not balance, however, then it becomes nec-
essary to retrace the recording of every transaction to find the error. Tracking down the error 
using T-accounts can be awkward and time consuming because the effects of each transaction 
spread across two or more T-accounts.
To address this problem, we introduce a step that precedes the recording of transactions 
in T-accounts: the journal entry. A journal entry uses a standardized format to indicate the 
accounts and amounts affected by each transaction. Each journal entry reflects equal debits 
and credits to various accounts. The accountant transfers the amounts from the journal entry 
to the appropriate T-accounts. Assuming proper recording in the T-accounts and summing all 
entries in the T-accounts, the resulting balance sheet will balance (that is, total assets will equal 
the sum of total liabilities plus shareholders’ equity). Journal entries formalize the reasoning 
that supports entering the results of transactions directly in the T-accounts.12
The standard format of a journal entry is as follows:
 
Account Title. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Amount
  
Account Title. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
Amount
The journal entry indicates the dual effect of a transaction on both the accounts and the 
balances in accounts. By convention, the first line of the journal entry is the debit line, and the 
second (indented) line of the journal entry is the credit line.
 
Account Debited  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Amount Debited
  
Account Credited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
Amount Credited
The recording of journal entries follows the same rules for increases and decreases in asset, 
liability, and shareholders’ equity accounts as illustrated earlier for entries in T-accounts:
1. Debits increase an asset account, or decrease a liability or shareholders’ equity account.
2. Credits decrease an asset account, or increase a liability or shareholders’ equity account.
Journal entries may have multiple debit lines or multiple credit lines, or both. The dual 
effect rule requires that the sum of the amounts debited equals the sum of the amounts credited 
so that the journal entry balances. Ensuring that all individual journal entries balance simul-
taneously guarantees that total assets equal the sum of total liabilities plus total shareholders’ 
equity.
Journal entries generally include the date of the transaction and an explanation for the 
transaction(s) journalized. Often they include an identifying number as well. In this book we 
sometimes show you how journal entries affect the balance sheet equation. This equation is not 
part of the journal entries made in the accounting records, but it helps explain the transac-
tion.13 Thus, the standard format for journal entries in the early chapters of this book is as 
follows:
12 We sometimes use T-accounts, sometimes use journal entries, and sometimes use both to illustrate the effects 
of transactions in this book. They are both pedagogical devices to assist your understanding of the effects of 
transactions. Firms initially record transactions in journal entries in a general journal and then periodically post 
(that is, record) the entries to accounts in the general ledger. The use of T-accounts mimics the use of posting to 
the general ledger. 
13 Another approach that is sometimes used, for pedagogical purposes, is to include abbreviations for assets (A), 
liabilities (L) and shareholders’ equity (SE) to describe the type of account affected by each portion of the jour-
nal entry. For example, the acquisition of equipment in exchange for a promise to pay the equipment supplier 
in the future would be journalized (recorded) as follows:
 
Equipment (A)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount Debited
  
Notes Payable (L)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount Credited
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

55
The Balance Sheet
(#)  Date
Account Debited  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount
 
Account Credited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
Journal entry explanation.
Later chapters omit the box with the accounting equation. We use the column labeled 
“(Class.)” to indicate the classification of the shareholders’ equity account that the transaction 
affects.
The journal entries for the eight transactions of Miller Corporation appear next.
(1)  January 1
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+100,000
+100,000
ContriCap
Issue 10,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for cash. The issuance of 
common stock increases the contributed capital, specifically, common stock.
(2)  January 5
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+12,000
–12,000
Pay annual rent of $12,000 for use of equipment.
(3)  January 15
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+15,000
+15,000
Purchase merchandise inventory costing $15,000 on account.
(4)  January 21
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–8,000
–8,000
Pay liabilities of $8,000 with cash.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
(5)  January 25
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–7,000
+7,000
ContriCap
Issue 700 shares of $10 par value common stock in settlement of $7,000 
accounts payable.
(6)  January 31
Prepaid Insurance (or Advances to Insurance Company) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+6,000
–6,000
Pay one-year insurance premium of $600 in advance.
(7)  January 31
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+3,000
+3,000
Receive $3,000 from customer for merchandise to be delivered in February.
(8)  January 31
Buildings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+40,000
+40,000
Purchase building costing $40,000, financed by note payable from local bank.
 PROBLEM  2.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for various transactions. Prepare journal entries for each of the six 
transactions of Gaines Corporation in Problem 2.1 for Self-Study.
 PROBLEM  2.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries, T-accounts, and balance sheet preparation. Electronics Appliance 
Corporation begins operations on September 1 and engages in the following transactions 
during September:
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

57
Summary
(1) September 1: Issues 4,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $12 cash per 
share.
(2) September 2: Gives 600 shares of $10 par value common stock to acquire a patent 
from another firm. The two entities agree on a price of $7,200 for the patent.
(3) September 5: Pays $10,000 as two months’ rent in advance on a factory building that 
it leases for the three years beginning October 1. Monthly rental payments are $5,000.
(4) September 12: Purchases raw materials on account for $6,100.
(5) September 15: Receives a check for $900 from a customer as a deposit on a special 
order for equipment that Electronics plans to manufacture. The contract price is 
$4,800.
(6) September 20: Acquires office equipment with a list price of $950. After deducting a 
discount of $25 for prompt payment, it issues a check in full payment.
(7) September 28: Issues a cash advance totaling $200 to three new employees who will 
begin work on October 1.
(8) September 30: Purchases factory equipment costing $27,500. It issues a check for 
$5,000 and assumes a long-term note payable for the balance.
(9) September 30: Pays $450 for the labor costs of installing the new equipment in (8).
 
a. Prepare journal entries for each of the nine transactions.
 
b.  Set up T-accounts and enter each of the nine transactions. Note that all account 
balances are zero at the beginning of September.
 
c.  Prepare a balance sheet for Electronics Appliance Corporation as of September 30.
SUMMARY
Recording the effects of each transaction in a dual manner in the accounts maintains the bal-
ance sheet equation: assets = liabilities + shareholders’ equity. The format of a journal entry to 
record a transaction is as follows:
 
Debit Account (Asset Increases and Liability and 
 
 Shareholders’ Equity Decreases)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Debit Amount
 
Credit Account (Asset Decreases and Liability and  
 
 Shareholders’ Equity Increases). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Credit Amount
T-accounts provide an alternative way of organizing the recording of transactions. They are 
also convenient devices for collecting the records of a series of transactions that affect a single 
account during a period. Like journal entries, T-accounts reflect the dual effect of transactions 
as shown by the following T-account format:
Asset Account
Liability (or Shareholders’ Equity) Account
Beg. Bal.
Increases
Dr.
Decreases
Cr.
Decreases
Dr.
Beg. Bal.
Increases
Cr.
End. Bal.
End. Bal.
The record-keeping process for the balance sheet generally involves the following steps:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
1. Recording each transaction in a file or other record in the form of a journal entry.
2. Posting the amounts from the journal entries to individual balance sheet accounts in a 
general ledger. T-accounts are useful devices for textbook illustrations and end-of-chapter 
problems to accumulate the effects of transactions on balance sheet.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 2.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Gaines Corporation; dual effects of transactions on balance sheet equation)
Transaction
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
1.  The firm issues 20,000 shares of £10 par value 
common stock for £12 cash per share . . . . . . . . . .
+£240,000
=
0
+
+£240,000
2.  The firm issues £100,000 principal amount of 
bonds for £100,000 cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+100,000
=
+100,000
+
0
3.  The firm acquires, with £220,000 cash, land 
costing £40,000 and a building costing 
£180,000  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+220,000
−220,000
=
0
+
0
4.  The firm acquires, on account, equipment 
costing £25,000 and merchandise inventory 
costing £12,000  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+37,000
=
+37,000
+
0
5.  The firm signs an agreement to rent equipment 
from its owner and pays £1,500 rental in 
advance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+1,500
−1,500
=
0
+
0
6.  The firm pays £28,000 to the suppliers in 4. . . . . .
 −28,000
=
 −28,000
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£349,000
=
£109,000
+
£240,000
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 2.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Gaines Corporation; T-accounts for various transactions)
Cash (Asset)
Merchandise Inventory (Asset)
Prepaid Rent (Asset)
(1)
240,000
220,000
(3)
(4)
12,000
(5)
1,500
(2)
100,000
1,500
 (5)
28,000
(6)
Land (Asset)
Buildings (Asset)
Equipment (Asset)
(3)
40,000
(3)
180,000
(4) 
25,000
Accounts Payable (Liability)
Bonds Payable (Liability)
Common Value 
(Shareholders’ Equity)
(6)
28,000
37,000
(4)
100,000
(2)
200,000
(1)
Additional Paid-In Capital 
(Shareholders’ Equity)
40,000
(1)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

59
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 2.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Gaines Corporation; journal entries for various transactions)
(1) 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
240,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+240,000
+200,000
ContriCap
 +40,000
ContriCap
Issue 20,000 shares of £10 par value common stock for £12 cash per share.
(2) 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+100,000
+100,000
Issue £100,000 principal amount of bonds for £100,000 cash.
(3) 
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
220,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+40,000
+180,000
−220,000
Acquire for £220,000 land costing £40,000 and a building costing £180,000.
(4) 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
37,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+25,000
+37,000
+12,000
Purchase equipment costing £25,000 and merchandise inventory costing 
£12,000 on account.
(5) 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,500
−1,500
Pay £1,500 as advance rental on equipment.
(cont
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
(6) 
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
28,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
28,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−28,000
−28,000
Pay £28,000 to the supplier in (4).
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 2.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Electronics Appliance Corporation; journal entries, T-accounts, and balance sheet preparation)
a. Journal entries for the nine transactions follow:
(1) 
Sept. 1
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
48,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+48,000
+40,000
ContriCap
 +8,000
ContriCap
Issue 4,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $12 cash per share.
(2) 
Sept. 2
Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,200
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,200
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+7,200
+6,000
ContriCap
+1,200
ContriCap
Issue 600 shares of $10 par value common stock in the acquisition of a 
patent; the market value of the shares is $12/share.
(3) 
Sept. 5
Prepaid Rent or Advances to Landlord . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−10,000
+10,000
Prepay rent for October and November on factory building.
(4) 
Sept. 12
Raw Materials Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,100
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,100
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+6,100
+6,100
Purchase raw materials costing $6,100 on account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

61
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
(5) 
Sept. 15
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
900
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
900
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+900
+900
Receive an advance of $900 from a customer as a deposit on equipment to 
be manufactured in the future.
(6) 
Sept. 20
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
925
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
925
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+925
−925
Acquire equipment with a list price of $950 for $925 after taking a discount 
for prompt payment.
(7) 
Sept. 28
Advances to Employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+200
−200
Give cash advances of $200 to employees beginning work on Oct. 1.
(8) 
Sept. 30
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
27,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
22,500
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+27,500
+22,500
−5,000
Acquire equipment for $5,000 cash and assume a $22,500 note payable for 
the balance of the purchase price.
(9) 
Sept. 30
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
450
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
450
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+450
−450
Pay installation cost of $450 on equipment acquired in (8).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
b. Exhibit 2.5 presents T-accounts for Electronics Appliance Corporation and shows the 
recording of the nine entries in the accounts. The letters A, L, and SE after the account 
titles indicate the balance sheet category of the accounts.
c. 
Exhibit 2.6 presents a balance sheet as of September 30.
Electronics Appliance Corporation
T-Accounts and Transactions During September
(Problem 2.4 for Self-Study)
Cash (A)
Advances to Employees (A)
Raw Materials Inventory (A)
(1)
48,000
(7)
200
(4)
6,100
(5)
900
10,000 (3)
925 (6)
200 (7)
5,000 (8) 
450 (9)
✓
32,325
✓
200
✓
6,100
Prepaid Rent (A)
Equipment (A)
Patent (A)
(3)
10,000
(6)
925
(2)
7,200
(8)
27,500
(9)
450
✓
10,000
✓
28,875
✓
7,200
Accounts Payable (L)
Advances from Customers (L)
Note Payable (L)
6,100 (4)
900 (5)
22,500 (8)
6,100
✓
900
✓
22,500
✓
Common Stock (SE)
Additional Paid-In Capital (SE)
40,000 (1)
8,000 (1)
6,000 (2)
1,200 (2)
46,000
✓
9,200
✓
EXHIBIT 2.5
Electronics Appliance Corporation
Balance Sheet
September 30
(Problem 2.4 for Self-Study)
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$32,325
Advances to Employees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
200
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6,100
Prepaid Rent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 10,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$48,625
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$28,875
Intangibles
Patent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  7,200
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$84,700
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 6,100
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    900
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 7,000
Long-Term Debt
Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 22,500
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$29,500
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock, $10 Par Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$46,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  9,200
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$55,200
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . .  
$84,700
EXHIBIT 2.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

63
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Account
Permanent accounts
Temporary accounts
Asset
Liability
Shareholders’ equity
Current and noncurrent assets 
and liabilities
Balance sheet equation
Dual effect of transactions
T-account
Contra account
Debit
Charge
Credit
Journal entry
Posting
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. Why does every accounting transaction have two effects?
 3. What is the relation between a T-account and a journal entry?
 4. What distinguishes noncurrent assets from current assets?
 5. What is the purpose of using contra accounts? What is the alternative to using them?
EXERCISES
 6. Dual effects on balance sheet equation. Fresh Foods Group, a European food retailer that 
operates supermarkets in seven countries, engaged in the following three transactions dur-
ing 2013: (1) purchased and received inventory costing €678 million on account from vari-
ous suppliers; (2) returned inventory costing €45 million because of damage that occurred 
during shipment; (3) paid the various suppliers the total amount due. Indicate the effects of 
each of these three transactions on the balance sheet equation. Fresh Foods Group applies 
IFRS and reports its results in millions of euros (€).
 7. Dual effects on balance sheet equation. Cement Plus, a firm specializing in building materi-
als, engaged in the following four transactions during 2014: (1) purchased and received 
inventory costing $14,300 million, of which $12,000 million was on account with the rest 
paid in cash; (2) purchased a machine for $3,000 million with cash; (3) issued 2,000 shares 
of common stock for $6,500 million in cash; (4) issued shares of common stock to its sup-
pliers for the remaining amount due on purchases of inventory. Indicate the effects of each 
of these four transactions on the balance sheet equation. Cement Plus applies U.S. GAAP 
financial reporting standards and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars ($).
 8. Balance sheet classification. GAAP classifies items on the balance sheet in one of the fol-
lowing ways:
Asset (A)
Liability (L)
Shareholders’ equity (SE)
 Item that would not appear on the balance sheet as conventionally prepared under 
GAAP. (N/A)
 
Using the abbreviations, indicate the appropriate classification of each of the following 
items. If you can find no basis in the chapter for giving an answer, then speculate.
a. Salaries payable
b. Retained earnings
c. Notes receivable
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
d. Unfilled customers’ orders
e. Land
f. Interest payable
g. Work-in-process inventory
h. Mortgage payable
i. Organization costs
j. Advances by customers
k. Advances to employees
l. Patents
m. Good credit standing
n. Common stock
 9.  Balance sheet classification. GAAP classifies items on the balance sheet in one of the fol-
lowing ways:
Asset (A)
Liability (L)
Shareholders’ equity (SE)
Item that would not appear on the balance sheet as conventionally prepared under 
GAAP. (N/A)
 
Using the abbreviations, indicate the appropriate classification of each of the following 
items. If you can find no basis in the chapter for giving an answer, then speculate.
a. Preferred stock
b. Furniture and fixtures
c. Potential liability under lawsuit (case has not yet gone to trial); attorneys estimate 40% 
chance of losing a material amount.
d. Prepaid rent
e. Capital contributed in excess of par value
f. Cash on hand
g. Goodwill
h. Estimated liability under warranty contract
i. Raw materials inventory
j. Rental fees received in advance
k. Bonds payable
l. Prepaid insurance
m. Income taxes payable
n. Treasury stock
PROBLEMS
10. Dual effects of transactions on balance sheet equation and journal entries. Assume that 
during Year 15, Bullseye Corporation, a U.S. retailer, engages in the following six transac-
tions. Bullseye Corporation applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. 
dollars ($). Do not be concerned that after these transactions, the balance in the Cash 
account is negative. The firm will deal with that issue in transactions not shown here.
(1) The firm issues 20 million shares of $0.0833 par value common stock for a total of 
$960 million cash.
(2) It purchases merchandise costing $1,500 million on account.
(3) The firm acquires a new store location, consisting of a building costing $3,200 million 
and land costing $930 million. It pays cash to the owner of the property.
(4) The firm purchases fixtures for the new store costing $860 million, on account.
(5) The firm pays the merchandise supplier in transaction (2) the amount due.
(6) The firm pays the supplier of the fixtures in transaction (4) half of the amount due 
in cash. The firm pays the other half by issuing 8.6 million common shares to the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

65
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
supplier. At the time of this transaction, Bullseye Corporation’s shares traded at $50 
per share in the market.
a. Indicate the effects of these six transactions on the balance sheet equation using this 
format:
Transaction Number
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ Equity
(1)
+$960
$0
+$960
Subtotal
 $960
=
$0
+
$960
b. Give the journal entries for each of the six transactions. 
11. Dual effects of transactions on balance sheet equation and journal entries. Assume that dur-
ing Year 14, Inheritance Brands, a U.S. manufacturer and distributor, engaged in the fol-
lowing five transactions. Inheritance Brands applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in 
millions of U.S. dollars ($). You may round to one significant digit after the decimal point.
(1) The firm issues 10 million shares of $3.125 par value common stock for $55 cash per 
share.
(2) At the end of Year 14, the firm acquires land costing $250 million and a building cost-
ing $900 million. It pays for the purchase by giving $400 million in cash and promising 
to pay the remainder in Year 15. It signed a note payable for the remainder.
(3) The firm pays $30 million cash for a one-year insurance policy on the land and build-
ing. The policy period begins at the start of Year 15.
(4) The firm acquires merchandise inventory costing $400 million on account from various 
suppliers.
(5) The firm pays cash to the suppliers in transaction (4) for its purchases on account.
a. Indicate the effects of these five transactions on the balance sheet equation using this 
format:
Transaction Number
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ Equity
(1)
+$550
$0
+$550
Subtotal
 $550
=
$0
+
$550
b. Give the journal entries for each of the five transactions.
12. Journal entries for various transactions. Express the following transactions of Winkle Gro-
cery Store, Inc., in journal entry form. If an entry is not required, indicate the reason. You 
may omit explanations for the journal entries. The store:
(1) Receives $30,000 from John Winkle in return for 1,000 shares of the firm’s $30 par 
value common stock.
(2) Gives a 60-day, 8% note to a bank and receives $5,000 cash from the bank.
(3) Rents a building and pays the annual rental of $12,000 in advance.
(4) Acquires display equipment costing $8,000 and issues a check in full payment.
(5) Acquires merchandise inventory costing $25,000. The firm issues a check for $12,000, 
with the remainder payable in 30 days.
(6) Signs a contract with a nearby restaurant under which the restaurant agrees to pur-
chase $2,000 of groceries each week. The firm receives a check for the first two weeks’ 
orders in advance.
(7) Obtains a fire insurance policy providing $50,000 coverage beginning next month. It 
pays the one-year premium of $1,200.
(8) Pays $600 for advertisements that will appear in newspapers next month.
(9) Places an order with suppliers for $35,000 of merchandise to be delivered next month.
13. Recording transactions and preparing a balance sheet. Moulton Corporation engaged in 
the following seven transactions during December, Year 12, in preparation for opening the 
business on January 1, Year 13. We continue with data for Moulton Corporation in Chap-
ter 3, Problem 3.22. You will not need some of the information given here until you work 
that problem. We give this information here, as the firm would often learn this information 
at the time of the transaction described here.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
(1) Issued for cash 80,000 shares of $10 par value at par.
(2) Acquired for cash land costing $50,000 and a building costing $450,000. Information 
for later use: The building has an expected useful life of 25 years beginning on January 
1, Year 13.
(3) Purchased merchandise inventory costing $280,000 on account from various suppliers.
(4) Paid for inventory purchased in (3) with an original invoice price of $250,000 in time to 
take advantage of a 2% discount for prompt payment. The firm treats discounts taken 
as a reduction in the cost of inventories. The firm has not yet paid for the remaining 
$30,000 of purchases on account.
(5) Paid $12,000 for a one-year insurance policy on the land and building. The insurance 
coverage begins January 1.
(6) Borrowed $300,000 from a bank on December 31, Year 12. Information for later use: 
The loan bears interest at an annual rate of 8% and is due in five years. The interest 
is payable on January 1 of each year, beginning January 1, Year 14, and the $300,000 
amount borrowed is due on December 31, Year 17.
(7) Acquired equipment on December 31 costing $80,000 and signed a 6% note payable to 
the supplier. The note is due on June 30, Year 13. Information for later use: The equip-
ment has an estimated useful life of 5 years.
a. Record these seven transactions in T-accounts.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Moulton Corporation as of December 31.
14. Recording transactions and preparing a balance sheet. Patterson Corporation begins opera-
tions on January 1, Year 13. See the assumptions given at the end of the list. Problem 3.23 
continues this problem. The firm engages in the following transactions during January:
 (1) Issues 15,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $210,000 in cash.
 (2) Issues 28,000 shares of common stock in exchange for land, building, and equipment. 
The land appears at $80,000, the building at $220,000, and the equipment at $92,000 
on the balance sheet.
 (3) Issues 2,000 shares of common stock to another firm to acquire a patent. The price 
per share is $14 per share.
 (4) Acquires merchandise inventories with a list price of $75,000 on account from 
suppliers.
 (5) Acquires equipment with a list price of $6,000. It deducts a $600 discount and pays 
the net amount in cash. The firm treats cash discounts as a reduction in the acquisi-
tion cost of equipment.
 (6) Pays freight charges of $350 for delivery of the equipment in (5). The firm treats 
freight charges as part of the acquisition cost of the equipment.
 (7) Discovers that merchandise inventories with a list price of $800 are defective and 
returns them to the supplier for full credit. The merchandise inventories had been 
purchased on account—see (4)—and no payment had been made as of the time that 
the goods were returned.
 (8) Signs a contract for the rental of a fleet of automobiles beginning February 1. Pays 
the $1,400 rental for February in advance.
 (9) Pays invoices for merchandise inventories purchased in (4) with an original list price 
of $60,000, after deducting a discount of 3% for prompt payment. The firm treats 
cash discounts as a reduction in the acquisition cost of merchandise inventories.
(10) Obtains fire and liability insurance coverage from Southwest Insurance Company. 
The two-year policy, beginning February 1, carries a $2,400 premium that has not yet 
been paid.
(11) Signs a contract with a customer for $20,000 of merchandise that Patterson plans to 
deliver in the future. The customer advances $4,500 toward the contract price.
(12) Acquires a warehouse costing $60,000 on January 31. The firm makes a down pay-
ment of $7,000 and assumes a 20-year, 6% mortgage for the balance. Information for 
later use: Interest is payable on January 31 each year.
(13) Discovers that merchandise inventories with an original list price of $1,500 are defec-
tive and returns them to the supplier. This inventory was paid for in (9). The returned 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

67
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
merchandise inventories are the only items purchased from this particular supplier 
during January. A cash refund has not yet been received from the supplier.
(14) On January 31, the firm purchases 6,000 shares of $10 par value common stock of 
the General Cereal Corporation for $95,000. This purchase is a short-term use of 
excess cash. The shares of General Cereal Corporation trade on the New York Stock 
Exchange.
 
The following assumptions will help you resolve certain accounting uncertainties:
■ 
Transactions (2) and (3) occur on the same day as transaction (1).
■ 
The invoices paid in (9) are the only purchases for which suppliers made discounts 
available to the purchaser.
a. Enter these 14 transactions in T-accounts.
b. Prepare a balance sheet as of January 31, Year 13.
15. Recording transactions in T-accounts and preparing a balance sheet. Veronica Regaldo cre-
ates a new business in Mexico on January 1, Year 8, to operate a retail store. Transactions 
of Regaldo Department Stores during January Year 8 in preparation for opening its first 
retail store in February Year 8 appear below. Regaldo applies IFRS and reports its results 
in thousands of Mexican pesos ($).
(1) January 1, Year 8: Receives $500,000 from Veronica Regaldo for all of the common 
stock of Regaldo Department Stores. The stock has no par or stated value.
(2) January 5, Year 8: Pays another firm $20,000 for a patent, and pays the Mexican gov-
ernment $4,000 to register the patent. IFRS treats the cost to register the patent as part 
of its acquisition cost.
(3) January 10, Year 8: Orders merchandise from various suppliers at a cost of $200,000. 
See transactions (5), (6), and (7) for later information regarding these merchandise 
orders.
(4) January 15, Year 8: Signs a lease to rent land and a building for $30,000 a month. The 
rental period begins February 1, Year 8. Regaldo pays $60,000 for the first two months’ 
rent in advance.
(5) January 20, Year 8: Receives the merchandise ordered on January 10, Year 8. Regaldo 
delays payment for the merchandise until it receives an invoice from the supplier—see 
transaction (7) below.
(6) January 21, Year 8: Discovers that merchandise costing $8,000 is defective and returns 
the items to the supplier.
(7) January 25, Year 8: Receives invoices for $160,000 for the merchandise received on 
January 20, Year 8. After subtracting an allowed discount of 2% of the invoice for 
paying promptly, Regaldo pays the suppliers the amount due of $156,800 (0.98 × 
$160,000). The firm treats cash discounts taken as a reduction in the acquisition cost 
of the merchandise.
(8) January 30, Year 8: Obtains fire and liability insurance coverage from Windwards 
Islands Insurance Company for the period beginning February 1, Year 8. It pays the 
one-year insurance premium of $12,000.
a. Record these eight transactions in T-accounts.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Regaldo Department Stores on January 31, Year 8.
16. Recording transactions and preparing a balance sheet. Whitley Products Corporation begins 
operations on April 1. The firm engages in the following transactions during April:
(1) Issues 25,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $15 per share in cash.
(2) Acquires land costing $25,000 and a building costing $275,000 by paying $50,000 in 
cash and signing a note payable to a local bank for the remainder of the purchase 
price.
(3) Acquires equipment costing $125,000 for cash.
(4) Pays $2,800 to transport the equipment to the office of Whitley Products Corporation. 
U.S. GAAP treats the cost to transport the equipment as part of the acquisition cost 
of the equipment.
(5) Pays $3,200 to install and test the equipment. U.S. GAAP treats the cost to install and 
test the equipment as part of the acquisition cost of the equipment.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
 (6) Pays the one-year premium of $12,000 for property and liability insurance on the 
building and equipment for coverage beginning May 1.
 (7) Agrees to manufacture custom-ordered merchandise for a particular customer begin-
ning in May at a selling price of $15,000. The customer advances $1,500 of the selling 
price with the order.
 (8) Orders raw materials costing $60,000 from various suppliers.
 (9) Receives notification from the suppliers that the raw materials ordered in transaction 
(8) were shipped. The merchandise belongs to the suppliers until received by Whitley 
Products Corporation.
(10) Receives the raw materials shipped in transaction (9).
(11) Discovers that raw materials costing $8,000 are damaged and returns them to the sup-
plier. The firm has not yet paid the supplier.
(12) Pays the raw materials suppliers in transactions (8), (9), (10), and (11) the amounts 
due, after subtracting 2% for prompt payment. The firm treats cash discounts as a 
reduction in the acquisition cost of the raw materials.
a. Enter these twelve transactions in T-accounts.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Whitley Products Corporation as of April 30.
17. Effect of recording errors on the balance sheet equation. Using the notation O/S (overstated), 
U/S (understated), or No (no effect), indicate the effects on assets, liabilities, and share-
holders’ equity of failing to record or recording incorrectly each of the following transac-
tions or events. For example, a failure to record the issuance of common stock for $10,000 
cash would be shown as follows:
■ 
Assets—U/S $10,000
■ 
Liabilities—No
■ 
Shareholders’ equity—U/S $10,000
(1) A firm ordered $23,000 of merchandise from a supplier but did not record anything in 
its accounts.
(2) The firm received the merchandise in transaction (1) and recorded it by debiting Mer-
chandise Inventory and crediting Accounts Payable for $32,000.
(3) The firm acquired an automobile costing $20,000 by paying $2,000 in cash and signing 
a note payable for the remainder of the purchase price. It recorded the acquisition by 
debiting Automobile for $20,000, crediting Cash for $18,000, and crediting Note Pay-
able for $2,000.
(4) The firm paid the $1,800 annual insurance premium on the automobile in transaction 
(3) by debiting Automobile and crediting Cash for $1,800. The insurance period begins 
next month.
(5) The firm received an order from a customer for $5,500 of merchandise that the firm 
will deliver next month. The customer included a check for $1,500. The firm made no 
entry for this transaction.
(6) The firm issued 2,000 shares of its $10 par value common stock having a market value 
of $32,000 in exchange for land. It recorded the transaction by debiting Land and 
crediting Common Stock for $20,000.
(7) The firm signed a three-year employment agreement with its chief executive officer at 
an annual salary of $275,000. The employment period begins next month. The firm did 
not record anything in its accounts related to this agreement.
18. Effect of recording errors on the balance sheet equation. A firm recorded various trans-
actions with the journal entries shown below. Using the notation O/S (overstated), U/S 
(understated), or No (no effect), indicate the effects on assets, liabilities, and sharehold-
ers’ equity of any errors in recording each of these transactions. For example, if a firm 
recorded the issue of $10,000 of common stock by debiting Cash and crediting Bonds 
Payable, the effects of the error are shown as follows:
■ 
Assets—No
■ 
Liabilities—O/S $10,000
■ 
Shareholders’ equity—U/S $10,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

69
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
(1) 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
 
Note Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+10,000
−2,000
−8,000
To record acquisition of equipment using $2,000 cash and signing of an 
$8,000 promissory note for the balance.
(2) 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+4,000
+3,000
−1,000
To record the placing of an order for equipment to be delivered next month. 
The firm made a $1,000 deposit with the order.
(3) 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800 
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+800
−800
To record an advance from a customer on merchandise to be shipped next 
month. The customer did not owe the firm any amounts at the time of this 
transaction.
(4) 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000 
 
Rent Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
To record the signing of a rental agreement for warehouse space for a one-
year period beginning next month. The monthly rental fee of $1,000 is due 
on the first day of each month.
(5) 
Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,500
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+2,500
−2,500
To record the issuance of common stock in the acquisition of a patent.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70
Chapter 2 
The Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Balance Sheet
(6) 
Merchandise Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,900 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,900
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+4,900
−4,900
To record the acquisition of office equipment for cash.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T
his chapter shows how the accountant records operating transactions and then combines 
transaction records to prepare the income statement. This chapter, as did Chapter 2, focuses 
on record-keeping procedures, not on accounting principles and judgments.
This chapter considers four record-keeping concepts:
1. The dual nature (duality) of transactions and events.
2. The use of T-accounts and journal entries for recording the duality of a transaction or event.
3. The preparation of a simple income statement and statement of cash flows.
4. The link, or articulation, between the balance sheet and the income statement.
These concepts rely on the record-keeping terminology introduced in Chapter 2.
The word account refers to items on both the balance sheet and the income statement. An 
account is a device for keeping track of the amount on a line of the balance sheet or the income 
statement. Balance sheet accounts are permanent accounts in the sense that they remain open, with 
nonzero balances, at the end of the reporting period. In contrast, income statement accounts are 
temporary accounts in the sense that they start a period with a zero balance, accumulate informa-
tion during the reporting period, and have a zero balance at the end of the reporting period. An 
income statement account shows the amount for a period of time.
The closing process (discussed below) ensures that each income statement account has a zero 
balance at the end of the reporting period and that the amounts that had been in the income state-
ment accounts get transferred to the balance sheet account, Retained Earnings, at the end of the 
period for which the income statement reports data.
THE INCOME STATEMENT
COMMON TERMINOLOGY
Chapter 2 described the application of three record-keeping conventions (dual effects of transac-
tions, T-accounts, and journal entries) to transactions affecting the balance sheet and emphasized 
the usefulness of the balance sheet equation in understanding how the recording of transactions 
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
The Basics of Record Keeping 
and Financial Statement 
Preparation: Income Statement
C h a p t e r 
3
1. Continue mastering the conventions of 
recording transactions, including the 
dual nature of transactions and the use 
of T-accounts and journal entries.
2. Understand the recording of income 
statement transactions in temporary 
accounts, which the record-keeping 
process closes at the end of the period 
to the Retained Earnings account on 
the balance sheet.
3. Understand the need for adjusting 
entries and begin to learn how accoun-
tants use a variety of clues and data to 
compute the amounts for such entries.
4. Understand the difference between 
transaction entries, adjusting entries, 
and closing entries.
5. Understand how the balance sheet and 
the income statement articulate.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
maintained the equality of assets and liabilities plus shareholders’ equity. We now consider 
operating transactions that affect the income statement, a second principal financial statement 
that firms prepare to report on their business activities. First, we describe some account titles 
used in income statements to provide a sense of typical names (sometimes called “rows” or 
“line items”) used in published income statements.
Revenues or Sales: a measure of the assets received (for example, cash) in exchange for goods 
sold and services rendered. Outside the United States, sales or revenues are sometimes called 
turnover.
Cost of Goods Sold: the cost of products sold. Cost of services is a similar concept and refers 
to the cost of services sold.
Selling, General, and Administrative (SG&A): costs incurred to sell products and services (such 
as salaries of the sales force) as well as costs of administration (such as the salaries of top 
executives and rent and insurance on corporate headquarters buildings and furnishings).
Research and Development (R&D) Expense: costs incurred to create and develop new products, 
processes, and services.
Advertising Expense: costs incurred with the goal of increasing sales by attracting more custom-
ers or inducing existing customers to increase their purchases. No rule requires that the income 
statement separately show these items, which can be part of SG&A.
Interest Expense: the cost of using borrowed funds.
Interest Income: income earned on amounts lent to others or from investments in interest-
yielding securities.
Income Tax Expense: federal, state, and local taxes levied on income.
A TYPICAL INCOME STATEMENT
Just as the balance sheet lists accounts, grouped by type, so too does the income statement. 
The income statement displays, for a given period, revenues (net asset inflows) and expenses 
(net asset outflows); the difference is net income (also called earnings or profit). If the expenses 
exceed the revenues of a period, the result is a loss or a net loss.
The income statement begins with revenues (sometimes called the “top line”) and then sub-
tracts expenses associated with operating the business (for example, cost of goods sold, SG&A, 
R&D, and advertising). The next line items display other sources of income (such as interest 
income) and other expenses (such as interest expense) to arrive at income before taxes. Income 
tax expense is then subtracted to arrive at net income (sometimes called the “bottom line”). 
Some firms declare, then pay, dividends to their shareholders. A dividend is a distribution 
of net assets generated by earnings—not a cost incurred in generating earnings—so it never 
appears as an expense on the income statement.
The income statement of Toothpaste Company for the fiscal year ended December 31, Year 7, 
appears in Exhibit 3.1. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the display of income statements for 
the current year as well as the two prior years. Toothpaste reports the results for the current year, 
Toothpaste Company Income Statement
For the years ended December 31
 Year 7
 Year 6
 Year 5
Net sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$13,789.7
$12,237.7
$11,396.9
Cost of sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  6,042.3
  5,536.1
  5,191.9
 
Gross profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,747.4
$ 6,701.6
$ 6,205.0
Selling, general, and administrative expenses  . . . . . . 
4,973.0
4,355.2
3,920.8
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    121.3
    185.9
     69.2
 
Operating profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,653.1
$ 2,160.5
$ 2,215.0
Interest expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    156.6
    158.7
    136.0
 
Income before income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,496.5
$ 2,001.8
$ 2,079.0
Provision for income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    759.1
    648.4
    727.6
 
Net income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,737.4
$ 1,353.4
$ 1,351.4
EXHIBIT 3.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

73
Relation Between the Balance Sheet and the Income Statement
Year 7, in the first (leftmost) column of numbers, with the results for Year 6 and Year 5 reported 
in the remaining two columns. Toothpaste’s income statement reflects a relatively sparse listing of 
accounts. Most firms’ income statements contain more detail, that is, more line items or rows.
Firms have considerable flexibility in the way they present income items. Toothpaste, for 
example, reports subtotals for Gross Profit, Operating Profit, and Income Before Income Taxes. 
A later section of this chapter and subsequent chapters discuss these terms more fully.
RELATION BETWEEN THE BALANCE 
SHEET AND THE INCOME STATEMENT
The income statement links the beginning and ending balance sheets. The beginning balance of 
the shareholders’ equity account Retained Earnings plus net income from the income statement 
less dividends equals the ending balance of Retained Earnings. The equation that describes the 
relation between the balance sheet and the income statement through the Retained Earnings 
account is as follows:
Retained Earnings (beginning) + Net Income − Dividends = Retained Earnings (ending)
In this sense, common terminology often says that the income statement “articulates” with 
the balance sheet. Retained earnings measures the cumulative excess of net income over divi-
dends for the life of a firm. Cumulative means that retained earnings aggregates all undistrib-
uted earnings.
Inspection of Toothpaste’s balance sheet, shown in Exhibit 2.1, reveals that Tooth-
paste’s Retained Earnings balance increased from $9,643.7 million on December 31, Year 6, 
to $10,627.5 million on December 31, Year 7. From Exhibit 3.1 we see that Toothpaste’s net 
income for Year 7 was $1,737.4 million. Elsewhere in its annual report, Toothpaste reported 
Year 7 dividends of $721.6 million for common shareholders and $28.0 million for preferred 
shareholders, or a total of $749.6 million in dividends. Using this information, we can calculate 
whether Toothpaste’s balance sheet and income statement articulate by examining whether the 
retained earnings relation holds:
Retained Earnings (beginning) + Net Income − Dividends = Retained Earnings (ending)
=  $9,643.7 + $1,737.4
− $749.6
= $10,631.5
The calculated amount, $10,631.5, is $4.0 million higher than Toothpaste’s reported balance 
in Retained Earnings at the end of Year 7, $10,627.5 million. The difference of $4.0 million 
results from an adjustment for the application of a new accounting standard, which Toothpaste 
charged to Retained Earnings.
In summary, the retained earnings relation does not hold for Toothpaste for Year 7 because 
of other transactions that affected its Retained Earnings during the year.1
The following disaggregation of the balance sheet equation shows the relation of revenues, 
expenses, and dividends to the components of the balance sheet.
Assets = Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ Equity
Assets = Liabilities
+
Contributed 
Capital
+
Retained Earnings
Assets = Liabilities
+
Contributed 
Capital
+
Retained 
Earnings, 
Beginning 
of Period
+
Net Income for Period
−
Dividends 
for Period
Assets = Liabilities
+
Contributed 
Capital
+
Retained 
Earnings, 
Beginning 
of Period
+
Revenues 
for 
Period
−
Expenses 
for 
Period
−
Dividends 
for Period
 1 We ignore these kinds of items here and revisit them in Chapter 15.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
The preceding diagram shows that items that affect net income (revenues and expenses) 
also affect shareholders’ equity. It is, therefore, possible to record revenue and expense amounts 
directly in the Retained Earnings account. Measuring net income would then involve solving 
the retained earnings relation for net income, as follows:
Net Income = Retained Earnings
at End of Period
−Retained Earnings at
Beginning of Period
+ Dividends
The purpose of the income statement is not the calculation of net income, because the reader 
can do this by analyzing the retained earnings relation. Recording revenues and expenses directly 
in the Retained Earnings account suppresses information about the causes of net income. The 
line items or rows on the income statement display the sources and amounts of revenues as well 
as the nature and amounts of expenses that net to earnings for the period. Knowing these com-
ponents helps the user to understand the causes of the firm’s performance. Knowing the pur-
pose of the income statement—to display the line items for components of net income—will 
help you understand the procedures for preparing it.
Accountants maintain individual revenue and expense accounts during an accounting 
period to permit preparation of an income statement. Recall from our discussion in Chapter 2 
that income statement accounts are temporary accounts, as opposed to the permanent accounts 
that appear on the balance sheet. All temporary accounts begin with a zero balance and accu-
mulate information for the period. After preparing the income statement at the end of the 
period, the accountant transfers the balance in each temporary revenue and expense account 
to the Retained Earnings account. This procedure is called closing the revenue and expense 
accounts, because after closing (that is, the transfer to Retained Earnings), each revenue and 
expense account has a zero balance. Retained Earnings increases by the amount of net income 
(or decreases by the amount of net loss) for the period.
Maintaining separate revenue and expense accounts during the period and transferring 
their balances to the Retained Earnings account at the end of the period has the same effect on 
the balance sheet equation as initially recording revenues and expenses directly in the Retained 
Earnings account. The separate revenue and expense accounts collect the information needed 
to display the specific types of revenues and expenses in the income statement, which other-
wise could show the total amount of net income but not its components. Once revenue and 
expense accounts serve their purpose of accumulating specific revenue and expense items for an 
accounting period, they have no further purpose for that period. The accountant closes these 
accounts so that they begin the following accounting period with a zero balance, ready for the 
revenue and expense entries of the new period.
ACCOUNTING PROCESS FOR REVENUES, 
EXPENSES, AND DIVIDENDS
Revenues, expenses, and dividends increase or decrease retained earnings, so the recording pro-
cedures for these items are the same as for any other transaction affecting shareholders’ equity 
accounts.
Shareholders’ Equity
Decreases
(Debit)
Expenses
Dividends
Increases
 (Credit)
Revenues
Issues of 
Capital Stock
A transaction generating revenue increases net assets (either by increasing assets or decreas-
ing liabilities) and increases shareholders’ equity. The usual journal entry to record a revenue 
transaction is therefore as follows:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

75
Accounting Process for Revenues, Expenses, and Dividends
 
Asset Increase or Liability Decrease (or both). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount
 
Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
or
–
+
IncSt → RE
Typical entry to recognize revenue.
We use the designation IncSt → RE in the “(Class.)” column to indicate an income state-
ment account that is closed to retained earnings at the end of the period.
A transaction generating an expense decreases net assets (either by decreasing assets or 
increasing liabilities) and decreases shareholders’ equity. The usual journal entry to record an 
expense transaction is therefore as follows:
 
Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount
 
Asset Decrease or Liability Increase (or both). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–
or
+
–
IncSt → RE
Typical journal entry to recognize expense.
Dividends, which a firm may pay in cash or in other assets, decrease net assets and decrease 
shareholders’ equity. We assume that firms pay dividends in cash unless we have contrary infor-
mation. The following journal entry records the declaration of a dividend by the board of 
directors:
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount
 
Dividend Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
–
RE
Typical entry to record dividend declaration.
The following journal entry records the payment of the dividend:
 
Dividend Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–
–
Typical entry to record dividend payment.
Although the journal entries for dividends resemble those for expenses, dividends are not 
expenses. They are not costs incurred in generating revenues. Rather, dividends represent distri-
butions, to owners, of assets that the firm obtained from its operations. Because dividends are 
not expenses, they do not affect the measurement of net income and, therefore, are not included 
in the calculation of net income. Note that Toothpaste’s income statement in Exhibit 3.1 shows 
no deduction for the $749.6 million dividends paid in Year 7.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
ILLUSTRATION OF DUAL EFFECTS AND JOURNAL 
ENTRIES FOR INCOME TRANSACTIONS
In Chapter 2, we illustrated the transactions of Miller Corporation for January. None of those 
transactions involved income statement accounts. Exhibit 2.4 shows a zero balance in the 
Retained Earnings account on January 31 because during January Miller did not generate rev-
enues nor incur expenses nor declare a dividend.
In this section, we consider transactions that affect both the income statement and the bal-
ance sheet. We consider seven transactions of Miller during February.
Transaction 1 On February 5 Miller purchases an additional $25,000 of merchandise on 
account.
(1) 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+25,000
+25,000
Purchase of inventory costing $25,000 on account.
Transaction 2 During February, Miller sells merchandise to customers for $50,000. Of 
this amount, $3,000 represents sales to customers who paid $3,000 to Miller on January 31. We 
recorded this amount as Advances from Customer (Chapter 2, transaction (7) that occurred 
during January). Miller makes the remaining $47,000 of sales on account. Retail firms such as 
Miller typically recognize revenue at the time they deliver merchandise to customers, regardless 
of whether the customers have paid cash. The journal entry to record these sales is:
(2)  Advances from Customer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
47,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+47,000
−3,000
+50,000
IncSt → RE
Sales of merchandise for $50,000, $3,000 of which relates to cash received 
in January for merchandise delivered to customers in February and $47,000 
of which relates to sales on account during February for which Miller will 
receive cash sometime after the delivery of merchandise to customers.
Sales Revenue is a temporary income statement account that Miller will close to Retained 
Earnings at the end of February.
Transaction 3 The acquisition cost of the merchandise sold to customers in transaction (2) 
is $30,000. Because Miller has sold and delivered this merchandise to customers, it is no lon-
ger Miller’s asset. The following journal entry reduces the balance in Miller’s inventory account 
and recognizes the cost of the inventory sold as an expense. (Firms often delay the computation 
of cost of goods sold until the end of the period and compute that cost for all sales in a single 
computation. In this example, we show only one sales transaction, so there is only one cost of 
goods sold computation to make, which we can make at the time of sale or at the end of the 
period.)
(3)  Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

77
Accounting Process for Revenues, Expenses, and Dividends
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−30,000
−30,000
IncSt → RE
The cost of merchandise sold to customers during February is $30,000.
Cost of Goods Sold is a temporary income statement account that Miller will close to the 
Retained Earnings account at the end of February. The minus sign under the Shareholders’ 
Equity column shows the effect on shareholders’ equity, not on Cost of Goods Sold.
Transaction 4 Miller Corporation incurs and pays $14,500 of selling and administrative 
costs during February. The journal entry to record this transaction is:
(4)  Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14,500
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−14,500
−14,500
IncSt → RE
Selling and administrative expenses paid in cash during February total 
$14,500.
We assume that Miller Corporation received all the benefits of these selling and administrative 
services during February, so the full amount of cost is an expense for the month. None of the 
expenditure results in an asset that would appear on the balance sheet at the end of February.
Transaction 5 Miller Corporation collects $35,000 from customers for sales previously 
made on account. Miller recognized revenue from these sales at the time of sale (see transac-
tion (2) for February); it will not record those revenues again. Collecting cash from customers 
increases the balance in the cash account and decreases accounts receivable.
(5)  Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
35,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+35,000
−35,000
 Cash collections of $35,000 from sales previously made on account.
Transaction 6 Miller pays $20,000 to suppliers for merchandise previously purchased on 
account. The journal entry to record this payment is:
(6)  Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−20,000
−20,000
Cash payments of $20,000 for purchases previously made on account.
Transaction 7 Miller Corporation declares and pays a dividend to shareholders of $1,000. 
The entry to record the dividend is:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
(7)  Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−1,000
−1,000
RE
Dividends declared and paid during February total $1,000.
These seven journal entries summarize Miller Corporation’s activities during February. 
Each entry records an exchange between Miller and its suppliers or its customers or its share-
holders. We have simplified the journal entries by aggregating the month’s transactions into a 
single summary number.
The accounting system transfers the information in these journal entries to the balance sheet 
and income statement accounts affected; this activity is the posting process. We use T-accounts 
to show the account balances at the beginning of February (from Exhibit 2.3) and the post-
ing of these seven transactions during February for Miller Corporation. Exhibit 3.2 shows the 
T-accounts, with the seven entries recorded in blue. We discuss the entries recorded in red and 
gold next. The balance sheet accounts have beginning-of-February balances equal to their end-
ing balances at the end of January. The income statement accounts have zero balances at the 
beginning of February (by design, because they are temporary accounts). Both the balance sheet 
accounts and the income statement accounts reflect the effects of the seven February transactions.
 PROBLEM   3.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journalizing transactions during a period. Harris Equipment Corporation began 
operations on January 2, Year 2, by issuing 10,000 shares of $10-par value common stock 
for $15 cash per share. The firm engages in the following transactions during Year 2:
1. January 2, Year 2: Acquires a building costing $80,000 and equipment costing 
$40,000. It pays cash in the amount of $60,000 and assumes a 10% mortgage for the 
balance of the purchase price. (“Assumes a mortgage” means the company borrows 
the cash and signs a mortgage note to give to the lender.) Interest is payable on Janu-
ary 2 of each year, beginning one year after the purchase.
2. January 2, Year 2: Obtains a two-year fire insurance policy on the building and equip-
ment. It pays the insurance premium of $1,200 for the two-year period in advance.
3. During Year 2: Acquires merchandise on account totaling $320,000. It makes pay-
ments to these suppliers during Year 2 totaling $270,000.
4. During Year 2: Makes sales of merchandise totaling $510,000, of which $80,000 is 
for cash and $430,000 is on account. Collections from credit customers during Year 2 
total $360,000.
5. During Year 2: Pays employees’ salaries totaling $80,000.
6. During Year 2: Pays utility bills totaling $1,300.
7. November 1, Year 2: Receives a $600 cash advance from a customer toward the pur-
chase price of merchandise to be delivered during January, Year 3.
8. November 1, Year 2: Receives a $1,000, 9%, 90-day note from a customer to settle an 
open account receivable.
9. December 1, Year 2: Rents out a portion of its building for a three-month period, 
at the rate of $300 per month. The firm received the rent for the period, $900, in 
advance.
Give the journal entries to record these nine transactions during Year 2. (The next self-
study problem analyzes adjusting entries at the end of Year 2, including recognizing cost 
of goods sold.) Omit explanations for the journal entries and the box, which shows the 
effect on the balance sheet equation.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

79
Accounting Process for Revenues, Expenses, and Dividends
ADJUSTING ENTRIES
Transactions (1) to (7) involve exchanges between Miller Corporation and other entities or 
individuals during February. Each of the seven transactions involves a transaction or exchange 
that triggers accounting recognition in the form of a journal entry. For example, the events in 
transactions (1) and (2) are a purchase of inventory and the sale of merchandise to a customer, 
respectively. In addition to accounting entries that result from transactions or exchanges, some 
entries result from the passage of time. For example, interest expense on borrowing accrues as 
time passes. The costs of rent and insurance accrue as the firm uses these services.
Most firms record journal entries that result from the passage of time at the end of the 
accounting period. These entries are called adjusting entries, because they adjust the accounting 
records for changes in balance sheet and income statement accounts that continually occur and 
reflect changes in the firm’s resources (assets) and claims on those assets (liabilities and share-
holder’s equity). The adjusting entries are part of the measurement of net income for the period 
and financial position at the end of the period. Some companies record cost of goods sold 
as an adjusting entry, making this computation once per period, rather than every time they 
make a sale. Unless we give explicit contrary instructions, assume the firms in our examples 
and problems make cost of goods sold computations once per period, as an adjusting entry. In 
this example, for Miller Corporation, we showed this computation earlier, in Transaction (3), 
because we had not yet introduced the concept of and procedures for adjusting entries.
Miller Corporation will make five adjusting entries at the end of February (shown in red in 
Exhibit 3.2).
Transaction 8 Miller records the cost of insurance, which is the portion of prepaid insur-
ance attributable to insurance services received during February. Miller paid the $600 one-year 
insurance premium on January 31 for coverage from February 1 of this year through Janu-
ary 31 of next year. Assuming the allocation of an equal amount of this insurance premium 
to each month of the year, the cost of insurance during February is $50 (= $600/12 months). 
Miller includes the cost of insurance in selling and administrative expenses. The entry is:
(8)  Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
 
Prepaid Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–50
–50
IncSt → RE
The cost of insurance services received during February is $50.
The remaining $550 of prepaid insurance becomes an expense during the next 11 months. 
In the meantime, it remains an asset on the balance sheet.
Transaction 9 Miller Corporation records the cost of rent, which is the portion of pre-
paid rent that is attributable to rental services consumed during February. Miller paid $12,000 
on January 31 to prepay its rent for February 1 of this year through January 31 of next year. 
Assuming the allocation of an equal amount of rental cost to each month, February’s rent 
expense is $1,000 (= $12,000/12 months). Miller Corporation includes rent expense in selling 
and administrative expenses. The entry is:
(9)  Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–1,000
–1,000
IncSt → RE
The cost of rental services received during February is $1,000.
The remaining $11,000 of prepaid rent becomes an expense during the next 11 months.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
Transaction 10 Accumulated Depreciation shows the cumulative amount of the acqui-
sition cost of long-lived assets that the firm has allocated to the cost of production or to 
expenses. On February 1, Miller Corporation begins consuming the services of the build-
ing that it purchased on January 31 for $40,000 and recorded as an asset on that date.2 Miller 
records depreciation on the building starting from February 1 (the date that it began using the 
building) to reflect the consumption over time of building services. Assume that Miller expects 
the building to last for 20 years and that Miller believes the building will have no value at that 
time (that is, the salvage value at the end of 20 years is zero). Miller will depreciate the cost 
of the building over its useful life by recording an expense proportional to the amount of the 
asset’s life that has elapsed during the period. The depreciation charge each month is thus $167 
[= $40,000/(20 years × 12 months per year)]. Miller includes depreciation on the building in 
selling and administrative expenses.
One way to record depreciation is to reduce the amount in the Buildings account by $167 
and recognize an expense of $167. Instead of reducing the amount in the Buildings account 
directly, firms use the balance sheet contra account Accumulated Depreciation to accumulate 
the subtractions for depreciation charges. That is, each accounting period Miller will add to the 
 2 Chapter 10 describes the judgments and estimates involved in measuring depreciation on long-lived assets; 
Transaction (10) illustrates only the mechanics and the accounts affected.
Miller Corporation
Individual T-Accounts Showing Transactions During February
Cash (A)
Accounts Receivable (A)
✓
82,400
✓
0
(5)
35,000
14,500
(4)
(2)
47,000
35,000
(5)
20,000
(6)
1,000
(7)
✓
81,900
✓
12,000
Merchandise Inventory (A)
Prepaid Insurance (A)
✓
15,000
✓
600
(1)
25,000
30,000
(3)
50
(8)
✓
10,000
✓
550
Prepaid Rent (A)
✓
12,000
1,000
(9)
✓
11,000
Buildings (A)
Accumulated Depreciation (A)
✓
40,000
0
✓
167
(10)
✓
40,000
167 
✓
Accounts Payable (L)
Advances from Customer (L)
0
✓
3,000
✓
(6)
20,000
25,000
(1)
(2)
3,000
5,000
✓
0
✓
Note Payable (L)
Accrued Interest Payable (L)
40,000
✓
0
✓
333
(11)
40,000
✓
333
✓
(continued)
EXHIBIT 3.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

81
Accounting Process for Revenues, Expenses, and Dividends
balance in Accumulated Depreciation the cost of the building services used during the period. 
The Accumulated Depreciation account appears on the balance sheet as a subtraction from the 
acquisition cost of the building.3 An account, such as Accumulated Depreciation, that accumu-
lates subtractions from another account is a contra account. Thus, Miller will record deprecia-
tion for February as follows:
The minus sign under Assets in the balance sheet equation indicates the effect on assets, not 
on Accumulated Depreciation. Likewise, the minus sign under Shareholders’ Equity indicates 
the effect on shareholders’ equity, not on Selling and Administrative Expense.
Transaction 11 Miller Corporation records interest expense on the note payable for the 
month of February. On January 31, Miller signed a note payable promising to repay the bank 
the $40,000 of principal borrowed in three years’ time and to make yearly interest payments at 
the rate of 10% per annum, or $4,000 (= 10% × $40,000) per year. Whenever Miller prepares 
financial statements, it will compute the amount of interest that has accumulated or accrued 
 3 Chapter 10 explains the extra, useful information provided by this separate recording.
(10)  Selling and Administrative Expenses (Depreciation Expense) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
167
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
167
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–167
–167
IncSt → RE
 Depreciation of building for February of $167.
Income Tax Payable (L)
Income Tax Expense (SE)
0
✓
✓
0
1,382
(12)
(12)
1,382
1,382
(13)
1,382
✓
✓
0
Common Stock (SE)
Retained Earnings (SE)
107,000
✓
0
✓
(7)
1,000
2,568
(13)
107,000
✓
1,568
✓
Sales Revenue (SE)
Cost of Goods Sold (SE)
0
✓
✓
0
(13)
50,000
50,000
(2)
(3)
30,000
30,000
(13)
0
✓
✓
0
Interest Expense (SE)
Selling and Administrative Expenses (SE)
✓
0
✓
0
(11)
333
333
(13)
(4)
14,500
✓
0
(8)
50
(9)
1,000
(10)
167
15,717
(13)
✓
0
Black = Balances
Red = Adjusting Entries
Blue = Transaction Entries
Gold = Closing Entries
Miller Corporation (continued)
Individual T-Accounts Showing Transactions During February
EXHIBIT 3.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
since the previous financial statement date. At the end of February, Miller will recognize 
(accrue) $333 (= $4,000/12) of interest, which is 1/12th of the total yearly interest amount, by 
making an adjusting entry:
(11) Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
333
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
333
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+333
–333
IncSt → RE
The cost of interest on the note payable for the month of February is $333.
Transaction 12 Miller Corporation recognizes income tax expense on February’s income 
before income taxes. Assume an income tax rate of 35%. Net income before income taxes for 
February is $3,950 (= $50,000 − $30,000 − $14,500 − $50 − $1,000 − $167 − $333). Income 
tax expense is therefore $1,382 (= 0.35 × $3,950). Firms pay income taxes quarterly, so Mill-
er’s income taxes remain unpaid at the end of February. Income taxes are an expense of the 
accounting period, regardless of when the firm pays them. The adjusting entry to record 
income tax expense is:
(12)  Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,382
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,382
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,382
–1,382
IncSt → RE
Income tax expense for February is $1,382.
In addition to recording effects that arise with the passage of time, adjusting entries also 
correct recording errors that the firm detects at the end of the period. These entries are some-
times called correcting entries. For example, property taxes on the headquarters buildings may 
appear as a debit to Cost of Goods Sold instead of Selling and Administrative Expenses, or a 
payment to a supplier for purchases on account may appear as a debit to Accounts Receivable 
instead of Accounts Payable. There were no such errors for Miller Corporation during Febru-
ary so it need not make adjusting entries to correct errors. After all the adjusting entries are 
complete, the accountant posts those entries to the accounts affected. Adjusting entries appear 
in red in Exhibit 3.2.
 PROBLEM  3.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journalizing adjusting entries at the end of the period. Refer to the data for Harris 
Equipment Corporation in Problem 3.1 for Self-Study. Give the adjusting entries on 
December 31, Year 2, to reflect the following items. You may omit explanations to the 
journal entries and the box, which shows the effect on the balance sheet equation.
10. The building acquired on January 2, Year 2 (see transaction (1) in Problem 3.1 for 
Self-Study), has a 20-year estimated life and zero salvage value. The equipment has 
a seven-year estimated life and $5,000 salvage value. The firm uses the straight-line 
depreciation method.
11. The firm recognizes insurance expense on the fire insurance policy obtained on Jan-
uary 2, Year 2 (see transaction (2) in Problem 3.1 for Self-Study).
12. After the firm takes a physical inventory at the end of the year, it finds the cost of 
merchandise sold during Year 2 to be $180,000 (see transaction (3) in Problem 3.1 
for Self-Study).
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

83
Financial Statement Preparation
13. The firm recognizes interest expense on the mortgage liability for Year 2 (see trans-
action (1) in Problem 3.1 for Self-Study).
14. Salaries earned by employees during the last three days of December total $800. The 
firm will pay them on January 4, Year 3.
15. The firm recognizes interest revenue on the note receivable (see transaction (8) in 
Problem 3.1 for Self-Study).
16. The firm makes an adjusting entry to record the proper amount of rent revenue for 
Year 2 (see transaction (9) in Problem 3.1 for Self-Study).
17. The firm declares dividends of $25,000. It will pay the dividend on January 15, Year 3.
18. The income tax rate is 40% of net income before income taxes.
 PROBLEM  3.3 FOR SELF-STUDY 
Preparing adjusting entries. To achieve efficient recording of day-to-day cash receipts 
and disbursements relating to operations, a firm may credit all cash receipts to revenue 
accounts and debit all cash disbursements to expense accounts. The efficiency stems from 
treating all receipts in the same way and all disbursements in the same way. The firm can 
program its computer to automatically record operating cash receipts and disbursements 
in this way. In the day-to-day recording of transactions, the computer program need 
not be concerned with whether a specific cash transaction reflects settlement of a past 
accrual, or a revenue or expense correctly assigned to the current period, or a prepayment 
relating to a future period. At the end of the period, accountants analyze the existing 
account balances and construct the adjusting entries required to correct them. This 
process results in temporarily incorrect balances in some balance sheet and income 
statement accounts during the accounting period.
 
Construct the adjusting entry required for each of the following scenarios.
a. On May 1, Year 2, a tenant paid $12,000 rent for the one-year period starting at that 
time. The tenant debited the entire amount to Rent Expense and credited Cash. The 
tenant made no adjusting entries for rent between May 1 and December 31. Con-
struct the adjusting entry to be made on December 31, Year 2, to recognize the proper 
balances in the Prepaid Rent and Rent Expense accounts. What is the amount of 
Rent Expense for Year 2?
b. The tenant’s books for December 31, Year 2, after adjusting entries, show a balance 
in the Prepaid Rent account of $10,000. This amount represents rent for the period 
January 1 through April 30, Year 3. On May 1, Year 3, the tenant paid $36,000 for 
rent for the one-year period starting May 1, Year 3. The tenant debited this amount 
to Rent Expense and credited Cash but made no adjusting entries for rent during 
Year 3. Construct the adjusting entry required on December 31, Year 3. What is Rent 
Expense for Year 3?
c. The tenant’s books for December 31, Year 3, after adjusting entries, show a balance in 
the Prepaid Rent account of $20,000. This amount represents rent for the period Janu-
ary 1 through April 30, Year 4. On May 1, Year 4, the tenant paid $48,000 for rent for 
the 12-month period starting May 1, Year 4. The tenant debited this amount to Rent 
Expense and credited Cash but made no adjusting entries during Year 4. Construct the 
adjusting entry required on December 31, Year 4. What is Rent Expense for Year 4?
FINANCIAL STATEMENT PREPARATION
PREPARATION OF THE INCOME STATEMENT
The revenue and expense accounts show the effects of income transactions during February and 
adjusting entries at the end of February. We can use these amounts to prepare an income state-
ment for the month. Exhibit 3.3 shows Miller Corporation’s income statement for February.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
This income statement uses the convention that parentheses indicate numbers to be sub-
tracted. Numbers without parentheses are revenues, income subtotals, or net income. 
Exhibit  3.3 shows a measure of income before financing charges (that is, interest expense) 
and before taxes. This measure is called operating income in Exhibit 3.3; in Exhibit 3.1 Tooth-
paste uses the term operating profit. Operating income (or profit) is usually sales revenues less 
expenses associated with core operations, where core refers to transactions that are central to a 
firm’s business. Miller Corporation operates a retailing business model: it buys and resells mer-
chandise. Its operating income calculation includes the revenues associated with sales of mer-
chandise and the expenses associated with operating this business. These expenses include, for 
example, the cost of merchandise sold and selling and administrative expenses. Neither U.S. 
GAAP nor IFRS defines operating income and profit, although both subtotals often appear on 
income statements. Managers can exercise judgment in deciding whether to report this number, 
and, if reported, managers can use judgment in how to calculate it. In addition, IFRS requires 
separate presentation of financing costs, as shown in Exhibit 1.6 for Thames. In particular, 
Thames reports financial expenses of €91.6 million for Year 9.
CLOSING ENTRIES
The revenue and expense accounts have now served their purpose in accumulating the amounts 
to be included as line items on the income statement. That is, each revenue account contains a 
total of that revenue, and each expense account contains a total for that expense. Income state-
ment accounts are temporary accounts and, as such, will have beginning and ending balances 
of zero. The next step is to transfer the amounts in the revenue and expense accounts to the 
Retained Earnings account—that is, to close each revenue and expense account for the period. 
The closing process involves reducing to zero the balance in each income statement account by:
1. Debiting the revenue accounts and crediting Retained Earnings for the amounts in the 
revenue accounts.
2. Crediting the expense accounts and debiting Retained Earnings for the amounts in the 
expense accounts.
Closing entries are shown in gold in Exhibit 3.2.
An income statement account with a debit balance requires a closing entry that credits 
that account, because a credit closing entry will result in a zero ending balance in the account. 
Miller’s Cost of Goods Sold account has a debit balance of $30,000. The closing entry for this 
account is:
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–30,000
IncSt → RE
+30,000
IncSt → RE
To close the Cost of Goods Sold account to Retained Earnings at the end of 
February.
Miller Corporation
Income Statement
For the Month of February
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 50,000
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(30,000)
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (15,717)
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  4,283
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (333)
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  3,950
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (1,382)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  2,568
EXHIBIT 3.3 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

85
Financial Statement Preparation
An income statement account with a credit balance requires a closing entry that debits that 
account, because a debit closing entry will result in a zero ending balance in the account. For 
example, Miller’s Sales Revenue account has a credit balance of $50,000. The closing entry for 
this account is:
 
Sales Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–50,000
IncSt → RE
+50,000
IncSt → RE
To close the Sales Revenue account to Retained Earnings at the end of 
February.
Exhibit 3.2 shows, in gold, the closing entry for the revenue and expense accounts; the entry 
nets all of the income statement accounts in a single journal entry:
(13)  Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,000
 
Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,717
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
333
 
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,382
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,568
To close the income statement accounts to Retained Earnings at the end of 
February.
The net effect of journal entry (13) changes the balance in the Retained Earnings account 
to reflect the net income of the period. In the case of Miller Corporation, the net effect cred-
its Retained Earnings for February net income of $2,568 (as reported in the income statement 
shown in Exhibit 3.3).
If you look at the journal entries for transactions (3)–(12) on pages 76 through 82, you will 
see that any entry for a revenue or expense shows in the (Class.) box of the balance sheet equa-
tion the notation “NI → RE.” The designation indicates that, later, there will be a closing entry 
that reclassifies the amount from an income statement account to the balance sheet account for 
Retained Earnings.  
PREPARATION OF THE BALANCE SHEET
After the closing process is completed, the accounts with nonzero balances are all balance sheet 
accounts. We can use these accounts to prepare the balance sheet as at the end of the period. 
Exhibit 3.4 presents the comparative balance sheets for Miller Corporation on January 31 and 
February 28.
The balance in Retained Earnings has increased from zero at the end of January to $1,568 
at the end of February. The change in Retained Earnings equals net income of $2,568 minus 
dividends of $1,000. Retained Earnings will begin March with a balance of $1,568. Net income 
less dividends (if any) for March will be added to $1,568 to yield the balance in Retained Earn-
ings at the end of March. The balance in the Retained Earnings account, like all other balance 
sheet accounts, reflects the cumulative effect of transactions affecting that account.
PREPARATION OF A STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The statement of cash flows describes the sources and uses of cash during a period and classi-
fies them into operating, investing, and financing activities. It provides a detailed explanation 
for the change in the balance of the cash account during that period. For example, a statement 
of cash flows for Miller Corporation explains why the cash balance decreased from $82,400 on 
February 1 to $81,900 on February 28.4 The first approach, called the direct method, involves 
 4 Chapter 6 and Chapter 16 focus on the statement of cash flows and describe two approaches used to compute 
cash flow from operations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
Miller Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheets
February 28
January 31
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 81,900
$ 82,400
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,000
—
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
15,000
Prepaid Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
550
600
Prepaid Rent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  11,000
  12,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$115,450
$110,000
Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (167)
       0
Buildings, Net of Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 39,833
$ 40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$155,283
$150,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  5,000
$     —
Advances from Customer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
3,000
Accrued Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
333
—
Income Tax Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   1,382
      —
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  6,715
$  3,000
Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  40,000
  40,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 46,715
$ 43,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$107,000
$107,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   1,568
      —
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$108,568
$107,000 
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$155,283
$150,000
EXHIBIT 3.4
a relatively straightforward listing of the sources and uses of cash from operating activities, as 
one would understand from identifying and understanding the transactions that affect the Cash 
account. The second approach, called the indirect method, reconciles net income to cash flows 
from operations by adjusting net income for noncash income statement components. Although 
the indirect method dominates in practice, you would find it difficult to understand at this 
point because we have not yet discussed the adjustments necessary to reconcile net income to 
cash flow from operations.5
As noted previously, Miller’s cash balance declined by $500 during February. A simplified 
statement of cash flows for February, shown in Exhibit 3.5, explains this change.
The rows reported in Exhibit 3.5 correspond to all transactions that generated cash and all 
transactions that consumed cash during February. One way to identify these transactions is to 
look at the T-account for the cash account (shown in Exhibit 3.2 and reproduced below):
Cash (A)
82,400
(5)
35,000
14,500
(4)
20,000
(6)
1,000
(7)
81,900
Recall from transaction (2) that the $50,000 in February sales revenues consists of $3,000 
in the form of a cash advance received in January (so it is a cash inflow on the January state-
ment of cash flows) and $47,000 in the form of customers’ promise to pay in the future (so 
this amount will be a cash inflow in the accounting period when the cash is collected). For the 
latter, transaction (5) tells us that Miller collected $35,000 in cash from customers in February 
 5 For this reason, we illustrate the direct method in this chapter and defer the discussion of the indirect method 
to Chapter 6.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

87
 Summary
Miller Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows—Direct Method
For the Month of February
Sources of Cash
 
Cash Received from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 35,000
Uses of Cash
 
Cash Paid for Selling and Administrative Items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(14,500)
 
Cash Paid to Suppliers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(20,000)
 
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1,000)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   (500)
Cash, Beginning of Month  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  82,400
Cash, End of Month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 81,900
EXHIBIT 3.5 
for goods that customers purchased on credit in February. Therefore, Miller has a $35,000 
cash inflow for February associated with collections of cash from customers on sales made in 
February.
Cash outflows in February consist of $14,500 for selling, general, and administrative 
expenses and $20,000 for items purchased on account in February; Miller also paid a cash 
dividend of $1,000. Total cash outflows ($35,500) exceed cash inflows ($35,000), meaning that 
Miller used some cash on hand to cover the shortfall of $500. As shown in Exhibit 3.5, the 
shortfall explains the decrease in the cash balance from $82,400 at the beginning of February to 
$81,900 at the end of February.
The statement of cash flows in Exhibit 3.5 is a simplified presentation based on a statement 
of cash flows prepared using the direct method. Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the state-
ment of cash flows displays sources and uses of cash by activity. That is, the statement contains 
separate sections for operating cash flows, investing cash flows, and financing cash flows.6
SUMMARY
The income statement reports the results of operating activities. The process of recording oper-
ating activities involves recording
■ 
Transaction entries, but not all operating activities involve transactions during the cur-
rent period, so to record the effects of events that occur without transactions, the 
company records
■ 
Adjusting entries and, after the company has prepared the income statement, it makes
■ 
Closing entries, to transfer revenue and expense amounts to Retained Earnings.
All income statement accounts are temporary: they begin and end with zero balances. The 
closing process ensures that the ending balance in an income statement account is zero, by deb-
iting or crediting each account with exactly the amount necessary to ensure that debits equal 
credits, so that the ending account balance is zero. The offsetting credit or debit to each of 
these closing transactions is Retained Earnings. Thus, the closing process reflects the articula-
tion between the income statement and the balance sheet, as expressed in the retained earnings 
relation:
Retained Earnings (beginning) + Net Income − Dividends = Retained Earnings (ending)
In this equation, net income is a summary measure of the individual revenue and expense 
amounts.
The dual nature of transactions and the reporting consequences of that dual nature extend 
to items for which no event triggers a journal entry. Some items give rise to a journal entry and 
 6 We leave the discussion of these three sections, as well as more complex issues relating to this statement, to 
Chapter 6 and Chapter 16.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
recognition in the financial statements because of the passage of time, such as wages earned 
but not yet paid to employees, consumption of a portion of a prepaid asset (for example, pre-
paid rent and prepaid insurance), and interest accrued on loans but not yet paid. The com-
pany records these and similar items using adjusting entries at the end of the reporting period. 
Adjusting entries may increase or decrease balances in balance sheet accounts and income 
statement accounts.
OVERVIEW OF THE ACCOUNTING PROCESS
The record-keeping process generally involves the following steps:
 1. Recording each transaction in the form of a journal entry.
 2. Posting the amounts from the journal entries to individual balance sheet and income state-
ment accounts in a general ledger. T-accounts are useful devices for accumulating the 
effects of transactions on balance sheet and income statement accounts.
These first two steps occur daily (and perhaps many times during a day). The remaining steps 
typically occur at the end of the accounting period:
 3. Making adjusting journal entries to the accounts to correct errors and to reflect the finan-
cial statement impacts of items that occur because of usage or the passage of time.
 4. Preparing the income statement for the period from amounts in the income statement 
accounts.
 5. Closing the temporary income statement accounts to retained earnings.
 6. Preparing the balance sheet from amounts in the balance sheet accounts.
 7. Preparing the statement of cash flows from balance sheet amounts and from details of 
transactions affecting the cash account.
Figure 3.1 shows these operations, which the previous sections illustrated using the transac-
tions of Miller Corporation during February.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 3.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Harris Equipment Corporation; journalizing transactions during a period.)
(1) 
Jan. 2, Year 2 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
60,000
 
Mortgage Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
60,000
(2) 
Jan. 2, Year 2 
Prepaid Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,200
(continued)
Journalizing
Transactions
Results of
Transactions
Occur Continually During the Period
Occur at the End of the Period
Posting to
Accounts
Making
Adjusting
and
Correcting
Entries
Preparing
the
Income
Statement
Making
Closing
Entries
Preparing
the
Balance
Sheet
Preparing the
Statement of
Cash Flows
Record-Keeping Cycle
FIGURE 3.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

89
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
(3) 
During Year 2 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
320,000
 
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
320,000
During Year 2 
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
270,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
270,000
(4) 
During Year 2 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
430,000
 
Sales Revenue   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
510,000
Note: Harris Equipment Corporation recognizes all cost of goods sold at the 
end of the period; see next problem for self-study.
 
During Year 2 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
360,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
360,000
(5) 
During Year 2 
Salaries Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80,000
(6) 
During Year 2 
Utilities Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,300
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,300
(7) 
Nov. 1, Year 2 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
(8) 
Nov. 1, Year 2 
Notes Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
(9) 
Dec. 1, Year 2 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
900
 
Advances from Tenants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
900
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 3.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Harris Equipment Corporation; journalizing adjusting entries at the end of the period.)
(10) Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,000
($80,000 − $0)/20 = $4,000;
($40,000 −$5,000)/7 = $5,000.
(11) Insurance Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
 
Prepaid Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
(12) Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180,000
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
180,000
(13) Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
$60,000 × 0.10 = $6,000
(14) Salaries Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800
 
Salaries Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800
(15) Interest Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15
$1,000 × 0.09 × 60/360
(16) Advances from Tenants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Rent Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
(17) Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
(18) Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
93,046
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
93,046
0.40($510,000 + $900 − $600 + $15 − $80,000 − $1,300 –
$9,000 − $600 − $180,000 − $6,000 − $800) = $93,046.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 3.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Preparing adjusting entries.)
a. The Prepaid Rent account on the year-end balance sheet should represent four months of 
prepayments. The rent per month is $1,000 (= $12,000/12), so the balance required in the 
Prepaid Rent account is $4,000 (= 4 × $1,000). Rent Expense for Year 2 is $8,000 (= 8 × 
$1,000 = $12,000 – $4,000).
 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Rent Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
To increase the balance in the Prepaid Rent account, reducing the amount in 
the Rent Expense account.
b. The Prepaid Rent account on the balance sheet for the end of Year 3 should represent four 
months of prepayments. The rent per month is $3,000 (= $36,000/12), so the required bal-
ance in the Prepaid Rent account is $12,000 (= 4 × $3,000). The balance in that account 
is already $10,000, so the adjusting entry must increase it by $2,000 (= $12,000 – $10,000).
 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Rent Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
To increase the balance in the Prepaid Rent account, reducing the amount in 
the Rent Expense account.
 
The Rent Expense account will have a balance at the end of Year 3 before closing entries 
of $34,000 (= $36,000 – $2,000). This amount comprises $10,000 for rent from January 
through April and $24,000 (= $3,000 × 8) for rent from May through December.
c. The Prepaid Rent account on the balance sheet at the end of Year 4 should represent four 
months of prepayments. The rent per month is $4,000 (= $48,000/12), so the required bal-
ance in the Prepaid Rent account is $16,000 (= 4 × $4,000). The balance in that account 
is $20,000, so the adjusting entry must reduce it by $4,000 (= $20,000 – $16,000).
 
Rent Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
To reduce the balance in the Prepaid Rent account, increasing the amount in 
the Rent Expense account.
 
The Rent Expense account will have a balance at the end of Year 4 before closing entries 
of $52,000 (= $48,000 + $4,000). This amount comprises $20,000 for rent from January 
through April and $32,000 (= $4,000 × 8) for rent from May through December.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Account
Permanent accounts
Temporary accounts
Posting process
Adjusting entries
Contra accounts
Closing process
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

91
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. What is the purpose of temporary accounts?
 3. What does “articulation of the balance sheet with the income statement” refer to?
 4. What is the purpose of the income statement?
 5. What is the key difference between an adjusting entry and a correcting entry?
EXERCISES
 6. Analyzing changes in accounts receivable. BrasPetro S.A., a large Brazilian petrochemical 
company, reported a balance of R$1,594.9 million in Accounts Receivable at the begin-
ning of Year 7 and R$1,497.0 million at the end of Year 7. Its income statement reported 
total Sales Revenue of R$12,134.5 million for Year 7. Assuming that BrasPetro makes all 
sales on account, compute the amount of cash collected from customers during Year 7. 
BrasPetro applies Brazilian accounting standards, and reports its results in millions of reals 
(R$), the Brazilian currency. In answering this question, assume that BrasPetro uses either 
U.S. GAAP or IFRS; for purposes of this problem, this choice will not matter.
 7. Analyzing changes in inventory. BigWing Company, a U.S. airplane manufacturer, reported 
a balance of $8,105 million in Inventory at the beginning of Year 7 and $9,563 million at 
the end of Year 7. Its income statement reported Cost of Products Sold of $45,375 million 
for Year 7. Compute the cost of inventory either purchased or manufactured during Year 
7. BigWing Company applies U.S. GAAP, and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
 8. Analyzing changes in inventory and accounts payable. EkaPhone, a Swedish firm special-
izing in communication networks, reported a balance in Inventories of SEK21,470 million 
at the beginning of Year 7 and SEK22,475 million at the end of Year 7. It also reported a 
balance in Trade (Accounts) Payable of SEK18,183 million at the beginning of Year 7 and 
SEK17,427 million at the end of Year 7. During Year 7, EkaPhone reported SEK114,059 
million in Cost of Sales. Compute the amount of cash paid to suppliers of inventory dur-
ing Year 7 for purchases made on account. Assume that all of EkaPhone’s inventory pur-
chases are made on account. EkaPhone applies IFRS, and reports its results in millions of 
Swedish kronor (SEK).
 9. Analyzing changes in income taxes payable. Conima Corporation, a Japanese construction 
firm, reported a balance in Income Taxes Payable of ¥3,736 million at the beginning of 
Year 7 and ¥14,310 million at the end of Year 7. Net income before income taxes for Year 
7 totaled ¥73,051 million. Assume that the firm is subject to an income tax rate of 43%. 
Compute the amount of cash payments made for income taxes during Year 7. Conima 
Corporation applies Japanese accounting standards and reports its results in millions of 
yen (¥). In answering this question, assume that Conima Corporation uses either U.S. 
GAAP or IFRS; for purposes of this problem, this choice will not matter.
10. Analyzing changes in retained earnings. Ealing Corporation, a U.S. diversified power man-
agement company, reported a balance in Retained Earnings of $2,796 million at the begin-
ning of Year 7 and $3,257 million at the end of Year 7. Based on Ealing Corporation’s 
financial reports for fiscal Year 7, it reported dividends declared and paid of $251 million 
for Year 7. Compute the amount of net income for Year 7. Ealing Corporation applies U.S. 
GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
11. Relations between financial statements. The following selected information is based on the 
Year 7 financial statements of the German healthcare firm, adopted from the financial 
statements Bayer Group. Bayer Group applies IFRS, and reports its results in millions of 
euros. Compute the missing information in each of the following four independent cases. 
The letters in parentheses refer to the following:
BS—Balance sheet
IS—Income statement
SCF—Statement of cash flows
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

92
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
a. 
Accounts Receivable, January 1, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 5,868
 
Sales on Account for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
32,385
 
Collections from Customers on Account during Year 7 (SCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Accounts Receivable, December 31, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,830
b. Income Taxes Payable, January 1, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€   109
 
Income Tax Expense for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Payments to Governments during Year 7 (SCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
763
 
Income Taxes Payable, December 31, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
56
c. 
Noncurrent financial liabilities, January 1, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€14,723
 
Issuance of new debt during Year 7 (SCF)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,155
 
Principal payments of debt during Year 7 (SCF)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Noncurrent financial liabilities, December 31, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,911
d. Retained Earnings, January 1, Year 7 (BS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 6,782
 
Net Income for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,711
 
Dividends Declared and Paid during Year 7 (SCF)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Retained Earnings, December 31, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,749
12. Relations between financial statements. The following selected information is based on the 
Year 7 financial statements adapted from those of Beyond Petroleum (BP). BP applies 
IFRS and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars. Compute the missing information 
in each of the following four independent cases. The letters in parentheses refer to the 
following:
BS—Balance sheet
IS—Income statement
SCF—Statement of cash flows
a. 
Accounts Receivable, January 1, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$      ?
 
Sales on Account for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
288,951
 
Collections from Customers on Account during Year 7 (SCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
289,623
 
Accounts Receivable, December 31, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
38,020
b. Income Taxes Payable, January 1, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  2,635
 
Income Tax Expense for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,442
 
Payments to Governments during Year 7 (SCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Income Taxes Payable, December 31, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,282
c. 
Trade Payables, January 1, Year 7 (BS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 42,236
 
Purchases of Supplies during Year 7 (SCF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
15,162
 
Payments to Suppliers during Year 7 (SCF). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
 
Trade Payables, December 31, Year 7 (BS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
43,152
d. Retained Earnings, January 1, Year 7 (BS). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 88,453
 
Net Income for Year 7 (IS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
21,169
 
Dividends Declared and Paid during Year 7 (SCF)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,106
 
Retained Earnings, December 31, Year 7 (BS)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
13. Journal entries for inventories and accounts payable. On December 31, Year 6, the Merchan-
dise Inventories account of a Japanese electronics firm had a balance of ¥408,710 million, 
based on the firm’s financial reports for fiscal Year 7. Assume that during Year 7, the firm 
purchased merchandise inventories on account for ¥1,456,412 million. On December 31, 
Year 7, it finds that merchandise inventory on hand is ¥412,387 million. The Accounts 
Payable account had a balance of ¥757,006 million on December 31, Year 6, and ¥824,825 
million on December 31, Year 7. Present journal entries to account for all changes in the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

93
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Inventories and Accounts Payable accounts during Year 7. The firm reports its results in 
millions of yen (¥). In answering this question, assume that the firm uses either U.S. GAAP 
or IFRS; for purposes of this problem, this choice will not matter.
14. Journal entries for insurance. Bonana Company, a U.S. clothing designer, manufacturer, 
and retailer, reported a balance in prepaid insurance of $24.0 million, based on its financial 
reports dated March 31, Year 8, the end of its fiscal year. Assume that all of this balance 
relates to an insurance policy with two remaining months of coverage. Assume also that 
on June 1, Year 8, the firm paid $156 million for a one-year renewal of this policy. Give 
the journal entries that Bonana would make on April 30, Year 8; May 31,Year 8; June 30, 
Year 8; July 31, Year 8; and June 1, Year 8, assuming that the firm closes its books monthly. 
Bonana applies U.S. GAAP, and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
15. Journal entries for prepaid rent. EBB Group (EBB), headquartered in Switzerland, is one of 
the world’s largest engineering companies. EBB applies U.S. GAAP, and reports its results in 
millions of U.S. dollars. Based on EBB’s financial reports for Year 7, at January 1, Year 7, 
EBB reported a balance in its Prepaid Rent account of $247 million; assume that this amount 
reflects its prepayments of rent on factory and office space for the next month. Assume also 
that on January 31, Year 7, EBB paid $3,200 million as the annual rent for the period from 
February 1, Year 7, to January 31, Year 8. EBB has a calendar year reporting period.
a.  Provide the journal entries that EBB Group would make during January Year 7 that 
affect the Prepaid Rent account.
b. Provide the journal entry that EBB Group would make at the end of Year 7 that affects 
the Prepaid Rent account.
16. Journal entries for borrowing. A South African paper company, SAPC Limited (SAPC), 
reports noncurrent Interest-Bearing Borrowings of $1,634 million at September 30, Year 
6. SAPC applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars. At September 30, 
Year 7, this balance had increased to $1,828 million. Assume that on March 30, Year 7, 
SAPC borrowed $1,200 million from a local bank. The loan bears interest at an annual 
rate of 7.5% and is due on March 31, Year 9. Assume also that SAPC makes its interest 
payments once per year on the last day of March. SAPC’s fiscal year begins October 1 and 
ends on September 30. The firm closes its books on September 30 of each year.
a. What journal entry did SAPC record for the repayment of debt during the fiscal year 
ending September 30, Year 7?
b. Present the journal entries that SAPC Limited made in fiscal years ending September 
30, Year 7, Year 8, and Year 9, related to the bank loan obtained on March 30, Year 7.
17. Journal entries related to the income statement. A Japanese car manufacturer (JCM) 
reported Sales of Products of ¥22,670 billion for the year ended March 31, Year 7. The 
Cost of Products Sold was ¥18,356 billion. Assume that JCM made all sales on credit. By 
March 31, Year 7, JCM had collected cash for all the sales made on account during the 
fiscal year ended March 31, Year 7. Provide the journal entries that JCM made during the 
fiscal year ended March 31, Year 7, related to these transactions. JCM applies U.S. GAAP, 
and reports its results in billions of yen (¥).
18. Journal entries related to the income statement. An Israeli drug company (IDC) reported 
Net Sales of $9,408 million for the year ended December 31, Year 7. Based on IDC’s finan-
cial reports for fiscal Year 7, the cost of these sales was $6,531 million. Assume that IDC 
made all sales on credit, and that it collected $2,659 million cash during Year 7. Provide 
the journal entries that IDC made in Year 7 related to these transactions. IDC applies U.S. 
GAAP, and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
19. Journal entries to correct recording error. In the fiscal year ended December 31, Year 14, 
Bostick Enterprises paid $120,000 for equipment that it had purchased on January 1, Year 
14. The equipment has an expected useful life of 10 years and zero salvage value. The firm 
recorded the acquisition by debiting Equipment Expense and crediting Cash for $120,000. 
Give the journal entries that Bostick Enterprises would make to correct its initial recording 
error and any related effects (ignore income tax effects). Bostick Enterprises applies U.S. 
GAAP, and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
PROBLEMS
20. Preparing a balance sheet and an income statement. The accounting records of Callen 
Incorporated reveal the following for Year 7 and Year 8. Callen applies U.S. GAAP, and 
reports its results in thousands of euros.
December 31
Balance Sheet Items
Year 8
Year 7
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 16,402
€ 14,063
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30,536
2,559
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98,130
149,990
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72,325
72,325
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114,249
151,894
Notes Payable to Banks (due within one year). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15,241
43,598
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31,566
38,315
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109,992
134,916
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84,334
109,335
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56,459
88,955
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19,859
27,947
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169,639
222,731
Income Statement Items
For the Year Ended 
December 31, 
Year 8
Administrative Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€141,183
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
382,349
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24,324
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,744
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
695,623
Selling Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72,453
a. Prepare a comparative balance sheet for Callen Incorporated as of December 31, Year 
7, and December 31, Year 8. Classify each balance sheet item into one of the following 
categories: current assets, noncurrent assets, current liabilities, noncurrent liabilities, and 
shareholders’ equity.
b. Prepare an income statement for Callen Incorporated for the year ended December 31, 
Year 8. Separate income items into revenues and expenses.
c. Prepare a schedule explaining the change in Retained Earnings between December 31, 
Year 7, and December 31, Year 8. Callen declared dividends during Year 8. You will 
need to derive the amount in working this part of the problem.
21. Preparing a balance sheet and an income statement. The following information is based 
on accounting data for Year 7 and Year 8 for China Oil Company (COC), a large petro-
chemicals company in China. COC applies IFRS, and reports its results in millions of U.S. 
dollars.
December 31
Balance Sheet Items
Year 8
Year 7
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 88,589
$ 54,070
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18,419
8,488
Advances to Suppliers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,386
12,664
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
88,467
76,038
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,367
13,457
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
247,803
231,590
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

95
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Oil and Gas Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
326,328
270,496
Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,022
16,127
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
163,711
132,214
Accounts Payable to Suppliers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
104,460
77,936
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,433
11,590
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
84,761
90,939
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,305
30,401
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42,062
36,683
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
444,527
354,340
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
270,544
213,255
Income Statement Items
Year 8
Net Operating Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$835,037
Interest and Other Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,098
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
487,112
Selling Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
41,345
General and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
49,324
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
64,600
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,869
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
49,331
a. Prepare an income statement for COC for the year ending December 31, Year 8.
b. Prepare a comparative balance sheet for COC on December 31, Year 7, and Decem-
ber 31, Year 8. Show noncurrent assets before current assets and noncurrent liabilities 
before current liabilities, as is the customary presentation for IFRS, which COC uses.
c. Prepare an analysis of the change in Retained Earnings during the year ending Decem-
ber 31, Year 8.
22.  Analysis of transactions and preparation of income statement and balance sheet. Refer 
to the information for Moulton Corporation as of December 31, Year 12, in Chapter 2, 
Problem 2.13, Moulton Corporation opened for business on January 1, Year 13. It uses the 
accrual basis of accounting. Transactions and events during Year 13 were as follows:
 (1) During Year 13: Purchased inventory on account costing $1,100,000 from various 
suppliers.
 (2)  During Year 13: Sold merchandise to customers for $2,000,000 on account.
 (3)  During Year 13: The cost of merchandise sold to customers totaled $1,200,000.
 (4)  During Year 13: Collected $1,400,000 from customers for sales made previously on 
account.
 (5) During Year 13: Paid merchandise suppliers $950,000 for purchases made previously 
on account.
 (6) During Year 13: Paid various suppliers of selling and administrative services $625,000.
The firm consumed all of the benefits of these services during Year 13.
 (7)  June 30,Year 13: Repaid the note payable to a supplier with interest (see transaction 
(7) in Chapter 2, Problem 2.13).
 (8)  December 31, Year 13: Recognized interest on the long-term bank loan (see transac-
tion (6) in Chapter 2, Problem 2.13).
 (9)  December 31,Year 13: Recognized insurance expense for Year 13 (see transaction (5) 
in Chapter 2, Problem 2.13).
(10)  December 31, Year 13: Recognized depreciation expense for Year 13 (see transactions 
(2) and (7) of Chapter 2, Problem 2.13).
(11)  December 31, Year 13: Recognize income tax expense and income tax payable for 
Year 13. The income tax rate is 40%. Assume that income taxes for Year 13 are pay-
able by March 15, Year 14.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
a.  Using T-accounts, enter the balances in balance sheet accounts on January 1, Year 13 
(see Chapter 2, Problem 2.13 and the effects of the 11 transactions above).
b.  Prepare an income statement for Year 13.
c.  Prepare a comparative balance sheet as of December 31, Year 12, and December 31, 
Year 13.
23.  Analysis of transactions and preparation of income statement and balance sheet. Refer 
to the information for Patterson Corporation for January, Year 13, in Chapter 2, Problem 
2.14, above. The following transactions occur during February.
 (1)  February 1: The firm pays the two-year insurance premium of $2,400 for fire and 
liability coverage beginning February 1.
 (2)  February 5: Acquires merchandise costing $1,050,000. Of this amount, $1,455 is from 
suppliers to whom Patterson returned defective merchandise during January but for 
which the firm had not yet received a refund for amounts paid. Patterson Corpora-
tion acquired the remaining purchases on account.
 (3)  During February: Sells merchandise to customers totaling $1,500,000. Of this amount, 
$4,500 was to customers who had advanced Patterson Corporation cash during Janu-
ary. Patterson Corporation makes the remaining sales on account.
 (4)  During February: The cost of the goods sold in transaction (3) was $950,000.
 (5)  During February: Pays in cash selling and administrative expenses of $235,000.
 (6)  During February: Collects $1,206,000 from customer for sales previously made on 
account.
 (7)  During February: Pays $710,000 to suppliers of merchandise for purchases previously 
made on account.
 (8)  February 28: Recognizes rent expense for February.
 (9)  February 28: Recognizes depreciation expense of $2,500 for February. Patterson Cor-
poration uses an Accumulated Depreciation account.
(10)  February 28: Recognizes amortization expense of $450 on the patent. Patterson Cor-
poration does not use an Accumulated Amortization account for patents; instead, it 
records the amortized amounts directly to the patent account.
(11)  February 28: Recognizes an appropriate amount of insurance expense for February.
(12)  February 28: Recognizes interest expense on the mortgage payable (see transaction 
(12) in Chapter 2, Problem 2.14).
(13)  February 28: Recognizes income tax expense for February. The income tax rate is 
40%. Income taxes for February are payable by April 15.
a.  Using T-accounts, enter the balances in balance sheet accounts on February 1, Year 13 
(see Chapter 2, Problem 2.14), and the effects of the 13 transactions above.
b.  Prepare an income statement for the month of February, Year 13.
c.  Prepare a comparative balance sheet as January 31 and February 28, Year 13.
24. Miscellaneous transactions and adjusting entries. Assume that LBJ Group (LBJ), a Euro-
pean engineering firm, engaged in the following six transactions during the year ended 
December 31, Year 3. LBJ applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. 
dollars. Give the journal entries to record (1) each of the six transactions, and (2) any 
necessary adjusting entries on December 31, Year 3. You may omit explanations for the 
journal entries. Assume the six transactions are independent of each other.
a. On November 1, Year 3, LBJ gives a 90-day note to a supplier in exchange for inventory 
purchased costing $180,000. The note bears interest at 8% per year and is due on Janu-
ary 31, Year 4.
b. On December 5, Year 3, LBJ receives $842,000 in cash from a customer for products 
and services that LBJ will deliver in January Year 4.
c. LBJ acquires a machine on October 1, Year 3, for $1,400,000 cash. It expects the 
machine to have a $160,000 salvage value and a 10-year life.
d. On September 30, Year 3, LBJ sells merchandise to a customer, on credit, for $565,000. 
The merchandise has a cost to LBJ of $422,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

97
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
e. LBJ purchases insurance on its headquarters building on September 1, Year 3, for the 
next 12 months beginning on that date. It pays the $360,000 insurance premium in cash.
f. On November 16, Year 3, LBJ issues 40,000 shares of common stock with a par value 
of $1 for $26 per share. LBJ uses the cash proceeds to repay accounts payable.
25. Journal entries, adjusting entries, income statement and balance sheet preparation. The bal-
ance sheet of Rybowiak’s Building Supplies on June 30, Year 12, appears nearby.
RYBOWIAK’S BUILDING SUPPLIES
Balance Sheet
June 30, Year 12
Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 44,200
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27,250
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68,150
Prepaid Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     400
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$140,000
Equipment—At Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$210,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (84,000)
 
Equipment—Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$126,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$266,000
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 33,100
Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,000
Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   1,250
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 39,350
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$150,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  76,650
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$226,650
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$266,000
 
The following transactions occurred during the month of July.
 (1)  Sold merchandise on account for a total selling price of $85,000.
 (2)  Purchased merchandise inventory on account from various suppliers for $46,300.
 (3)  Paid rent for the month of July of $11,750.
 (4)  Paid salaries to employees during July of $20,600.
 (5)  Collected accounts receivable of $34,150.
 (6)  Paid accounts payable of $38,950.
Information affecting adjusting entries at the end of July is as follows:
 (7)  The firm paid the premium on a one-year insurance policy on March 1, Year 12, with 
coverage beginning on that date. This is the only insurance policy in force on June 30, 
Year 12.
 (8)  The firm depreciates its equipment over a 10-year life. Estimated salvage value of the 
equipment is negligible.
 (9)  Employees earned salaries of $1,600 during the last two days of July but were not 
paid. These are the only unpaid salaries at the end of July.
(10)  The note payable is a 90-day, 6% note issued on June 30, Year 12.
(11)  Merchandise inventory on hand on July 31, Year 12, totals $77,950. The cost of 
goods sold for July equals merchandise inventory on June 30, Year 12, plus purchases 
of merchandise during July minus merchandise inventory on July 31, Year 12.
a.  Prepare journal entries to reflect the transactions and other events during July. The 
firm classifies expenses by their nature (that is, insurance, depreciation). Revenues and 
expenses should appear in the Retained Earnings account but with an indication of the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
specific revenue or expense account debited or credited. Be sure to indicate whether each 
entry increases or decreases assets, liabilities, or shareholders’ equity.
b.  Enter the amounts from the June 30, Year 12, balance sheet and the effects of the 11 
items above in T-accounts.
c.  Prepare an income statement for the month of July. Ignore income taxes.
d.  Enter closing entries in the T-accounts from part b.
e.  Prepare a comparative balance sheet as of June 30, and July 31, Year 12.
26. Preparing the income statement and balance sheet using the accrual basis. Bob Hansen 
opens a retail store on January 1, 2013. Hansen invests $50,000 for all of the common 
stock of the firm. The store borrows $40,000 from a local bank. The store must repay the 
loan with interest for both 2013 and 2014 on December 31, 2014. The interest rate is 10% 
per year. The store purchases a building for $60,000 cash. The building has a 30-year life, 
zero estimated salvage value, and is to be depreciated using the straight-line method. The 
store purchases $125,000 of merchandise on account during 2013 and pays $97,400 of the 
amount by the end of 2013. A physical inventory taken on December 31, 2013, indicates 
$15,400 of merchandise is still on hand.
 
 
During 2013, the store makes cash sales to customers totaling $52,900 and sales on 
account totaling $116,100. Of the sales on account, the store collects $54,800 by Decem-
ber 31, 2013. The store incurs and pays other costs as follows: salaries, $34,200; utilities, 
$2,600. It has unpaid bills at the end of 2013 as follows: salaries, $2,400; utilities, $180. The 
firm is subject to an income tax rate of 40%. Income taxes for 2013 are payable on March 
15, 2014. Assume that Hansen applies U.S. GAAP, and reports in U.S. dollars.
a. Prepare an income statement for Hansen Retail Store for 2013, assuming the accrual 
basis of accounting and revenue recognition at the time of sale. Show supporting com-
putations for each revenue and expense.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Hansen Retail Store as of December 31, 2013. Show sup-
porting computations for each balance sheet item.
27. Analysis of transactions and preparation of the income statement and balance sheet. Refer 
to the information for Regaldo Department Stores as of January 31, Year 8, in Chapter 
2, Problem 2.15. Regaldo Department Stores opened for business on February 1, Year 8. 
Transactions and events during February Year 8 were as follows.
 (1) February 1: Purchased display counters and computer equipment for $90,000. The 
firm borrowed $90,000 from a local bank to finance the purchases. The bank loan 
bears interest at a rate of 12% each year and is repayable with interest on February 1, 
Year 9.
 (2) During February: Purchased merchandise on account totaling $217,900.
 (3) During February: Sold merchandise costing $162,400 to various customers for 
$62,900 cash and $194,600 on account.
 (4) During February: Paid to employees compensation totaling $32,400 for services ren-
dered during the month.
 (5) During February: Paid utility (electric, water, gas) bills totaling $2,700 for services 
received during February Year 8.
 (6) During February: Collected $84,600 from customers for sales on account (see transac-
tion (3) above).
 (7) During February: Paid invoices from suppliers of merchandise (see transaction (2) 
above) with an original purchase price of $210,000 in time to receive a 2% discount 
for prompt payment and $29,000 to other suppliers after the discount period had 
elapsed. The firm treats discounts taken as a reduction in the acquisition cost of 
merchandise.
 (8) February 28: Compensation that employees earned during the last several days in 
February and that the firm will pay early in March Year 8 totaled $6,700.
 (9) February 28: Utility services that the firm used during February and that the firm will 
not pay until March Year 8 totaled $800.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

99
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
(10) February 28: The display counters and computer equipment purchased in transac-
tion (1) have an expected useful life of five years and zero salvage value at the end of 
the five years. The firm depreciates such equipment on a straight-line basis over the 
expected life and uses an Accumulated Depreciation account.
(11) February 28: The firm recognizes an appropriate portion of the prepaid rent as of 
January 31, Year 8.
(12) February 28: The firm recognizes an appropriate portion of the prepaid insurance as 
of January 31, Year 8.
(13) February 28: The firm amortizes (that is, recognizes as an expense) the patent over 60 
months. The firm does not use a separate Accumulated Amortization account for the 
patent.
(14) February 28: The firm recognizes an appropriate amount of interest expense on the 
loan in transaction (1) above.
(15) February 28: The firm is subject to an income tax rate of 30% of net income before 
income taxes. The income tax law requires firms to pay income taxes on the 15th day 
of the month after the end of each quarter (that is, April 15, Year 8; June 15, Year 8; 
October 15, Year 8; and January 15, Year 9).
a. Using T-accounts, enter the balances in balance sheet accounts on February 1, Year 8, 
from Chapter 2, Problem 2.15 and the effects of the 15 transactions above.
b. Prepare an income statement for the month of February Year 8.
c. Prepare a comparative balance sheet as of January 31, Year 8, and February 28, Year 8.
28. Analysis of transactions and preparation of the income statement and balance sheet. Zealock 
Bookstore opened a bookstore near a college campus on July 1, Year 4. Transactions and 
events of Zealock Bookstore during Year 4 follow. The firm uses the calendar year as its 
reporting period.
 (1) July 1, Year 4: Receives $25,000 from Quinn Zealock for 25,000 shares of the book-
store’s $1 par value common stock.
 (2) July 1, Year 4: Obtains a $30,000 loan from a local bank for working capital needs. 
The loan bears interest at 6% per year. The loan is repayable with interest on June 30, 
Year 5.
 (3) July 1, Year 4: Signs a rental agreement for three years at an annual rental of $20,000. 
Pays the first year’s rent in advance.
 (4) July 1, Year 4: Acquires bookshelves for $4,000 cash. The bookshelves have an esti-
mated useful life of five years and zero salvage value.
 (5) July 1, Year 4: Acquires computers for $10,000 cash. The computers have an esti-
mated useful life of three years and $1,000 salvage value.
 (6) July 1, Year 4: Makes security deposits with various book distributors totaling $8,000. 
The deposits are refundable on June 30, Year 5, if the bookstore pays on time all 
amounts due for books purchased from the distributors between July 1, Year 4, and 
June 30, Year 5.
 (7) During Year 4: Purchases books on account from various distributors costing 
$160,000.
 (8) During Year 4: Sells books costing $140,000 for $172,800. Of the total sales, $24,600 
is for cash, and $148,200 is on account.
 (9) During Year 4: Returns unsold books and books ordered in error costing $14,600. 
The firm had not yet paid for these books.
(10) During Year 4: Collects $142,400 from sales on account.
(11) During Year 4: Pays employees compensation of $16,700.
(12) During Year 4: Pays book distributors $139,800 of the amounts due for purchases on 
account.
(13) December 28, Year 4: Receives advances from customers of $850 for special-order 
books that the bookstore will order and expects to receive during Year 5.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
(14) December 31, Year 4: Records an appropriate amount of interest expense on the loan 
in (2) for Year 4.
(15) December 31, Year 4: Records an appropriate amount of rent expense for Year 4.
(16) December 31, Year 4: Records an appropriate amount of depreciation expense on the 
bookshelves in (4).
(17) December 31, Year 4: Records an appropriate amount of depreciation expense on the 
computers in (5).
(18) December 31, Year 4: Records an appropriate amount of income tax expense for Year 
4. The income tax rate is 40%. The taxes are payable on March 15, Year 5.
a. Using T-accounts, enter the 18 transactions and events above.
b. Prepare an income statement for the six months ending December 31, Year 4.
c. Prepare a balance sheet on December 31, Year 4.
 
Note: Problem 29 extends this problem to income transactions for Year 5.
29. Analysis of transactions and preparation of comparative income statements and balance 
sheets. Refer to the information for Zealock Bookstore in Problem 28. The following trans-
actions relate to Year 5.
 (1) March 15, Year 5: Pays income taxes for Year 4.
 (2) June 30, Year 5: Repays the bank loan with interest.
 (3) July 1, Year 5: Obtains a new bank loan for $75,000. The loan is repayable on June 
30, 2010, with interest due at maturity of 8%.
 (4) July 1, Year 5: Receives the security deposit back from the book distributors.
 (5) July 1, Year 5: Pays the rent due for the period July 1, Year 5, to June 30, Year 6.
 (6) During Year 5: Purchases books on account costing $310,000.
 (7) During Year 5: Sells books costing $286,400 for $353,700. Of the total sales, $24,900 is 
for cash, $850 is from special orders received during December Year 4, and $327,950 
is on account.
 (8) During Year 5: Returns unsold books costing $22,700. The firm had not yet paid for 
these books.
 (9) During Year 5: Collects $320,600 from sales on account.
(10) During Year 5: Pays employees compensation of $29,400.
(11) During Year 5: Pays book distributors $281,100 for purchases of books on account.
(12) December 31, Year 5: Declares and pays a dividend of $4,000.
a. Using T-accounts, enter the amounts for the balance sheet on December 31, Year 4, 
from Problem 28, the effects of the 12 transactions above, and any required entries on 
December 31, Year 5, to properly measure net income for Year 5 and financial position 
on December 31, Year 5.
b. Prepare a comparative income statement for Year 4 and Year 5.
c. Prepare a comparative balance sheet for December 31, Year 4, and December 31, Year 5.
30. Reconstructing the income statement and balance sheet. (Adapted from a problem by Ste-
phen A. Zeff.) Portobello Co., a retailer, is in its 10th year of operation. On December 28, 
Year 18, three days before the close of its fiscal year, a flash flood devastated the compa-
ny’s administrative office and destroyed almost all of its accounting records. The company 
saved the balance sheet on December 31, Year 17 (see Exhibit 3.6), the checkbook, the 
bank statements, and some soggy remains of the specific accounts receivable and accounts 
payable balances. Based on a review of the surviving documents and a series of interviews 
with company employees, you obtain the following information.
 (1) The company’s insurance agency advises that a four-year insurance policy has six 
months to run as of December 31, Year 18. The policy cost $12,000 when the com-
pany paid the four-year premium during Year 15.
 (2) During Year 18, the company’s board of directors declared $6,000 of dividends, of 
which the firm paid $3,000 in cash to shareholders during Year 18 and will pay the 
remainder during Year 19. Early in Year 18, the company also paid dividends of 
$1,800 cash that the board of directors had declared during Year 17.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

101
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 (3) On April 1, Year 18, the company received from Appleton Co. $10,900 cash, which 
included principal of $10,000 and interest, in full settlement of Appleton’s nine-
month note dated July 1, Year 17. According to the terms of the note, Appleton paid 
all interest at maturity on April 1, Year 18.
 (4) The amount owed by the company to merchandise suppliers on December 31, Year 
18, was $20,000 less than the amount owed on December 31, Year 17. During Year 
18, the company paid $115,000 to merchandise suppliers. The cost of merchandise 
inventory on December 31, Year 18, based on a physical count, was $18,000 larger 
than the balance in the Merchandise Inventory account on the December 31, Year 
17, balance sheet. On December 8, Year 18, the company exchanged shares of its 
common stock for merchandise inventory costing $11,000. The company’s policy is 
to purchase all merchandise on account.
 (5) The company purchased delivery trucks on March 1, Year 18, for $60,000. To finance 
the acquisition, it gave the seller a $60,000 four-year note that bears interest at 10% 
per year. The company must pay interest on the note each six months, beginning 
September 1, Year 18. The company made the required payment on this date. The 
delivery trucks have an expected useful life of 10 years and an estimated salvage value 
of $6,000. The company uses the straight-line depreciation method.
 (6) The company’s computer system has a six-year total expected life and zero expected 
salvage value.
 (7) The company makes all sales on account and recognizes revenue at the time of ship-
ment to customers. During Year 18, the company received $210,000 cash from its cus-
tomers. The company’s accountant reconstructed the Accounts Receivable subsidiary 
Portobello Co.
Balance Sheet
December 31, Year 17
(Problem 30)
ASSETS
Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 18,600
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
33,000
Notes Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
Interest Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
600
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
22,000
Prepaid Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   4,500
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 88,700
Computer System:
At Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 78,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (26,000)
Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 52,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$140,700
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable for Merchandise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 36,000
Dividend Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,800
Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6,500
Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     600
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 54,900
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 40,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
45,800
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 85,800
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$140,700
EXHIBIT 3.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
ledger, the detailed record of the amount owed to the company by each customer. It 
showed that customers owed the company $51,000 on December 31, Year 18. A close 
examination revealed that $1,400 of the cash received from customers during Year 18 
applies to merchandise that the company will not ship until Year 19. Also, $600 of 
the cash received from customers during Year 17 applies to merchandise not shipped 
to customers until Year 18.
 (8) The company paid $85,000 in cash to employees during Year 18. Of this amount, 
$6,500 relates to services that employees performed during Year 17, and $4,000 relates 
to services that employees will perform during Year 19. Employees performed the 
remainder of the services during Year 18. On December 31, Year 18, the company 
owes employees $1,300 for services performed during the last several days of Year 18.
 (9) The company paid $27,000 in cash for property and income taxes during Year 18. Of 
this amount, $10,000 relates to income taxes applicable to Year 17, and $3,000 relates 
to property taxes applicable to Year 19. The company owes $4,000 in income taxes on 
December 31, Year 18.
(10) The company entered into a contract with a management consulting firm for consult-
ing services. The total contract price is $48,000. The contract requires the company 
to pay the first installment of $12,000 cash on January 1, Year 19, and the company 
intends to do so. The consulting firm had performed 10% of the estimated total con-
sulting services under the contract by December 31, Year 18.
Prepare an income statement for Year 18 and a balance sheet on December 31, Year 18.
31. Reconstructing the income statement and balance sheet. Computer Needs, Inc., operates a 
retail store that sells computer hardware and software. It began operations on January 2, 
Year 7, and operated successfully during its first year, generating net income of $8,712 and 
ending the year with $15,600 in its bank account. Exhibit 3.7 presents an income statement 
for Year 7, and Exhibit 3.8 presents a balance sheet as of the end of Year 7.
 
As Year 8 progressed, the owners and managers of Computer Needs, Inc., felt that 
they were doing even better. Sales seemed to be running ahead of Year 7, and customers 
were always in the store. Unfortunately, a freak lightning storm hit the store on December 
31, Year 8, and completely destroyed the computer on which Computer Needs, Inc., kept 
its records. It now faces the puzzle of calculating Year 8 income in order to assess its oper-
ating performance and to calculate income taxes for the year.
 
Prepare an income statement for Year 8 and a balance sheet at the end of Year 8. To 
assist in this effort, you obtain the following information.
(1) The bank at which Computer Needs, Inc., maintains its account provided a summary 
of the transactions during Year 8, as shown in Exhibit 3.9.
Computer Needs, Inc.
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, Year 7
(Problem 31)
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 152,700
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(116,400)
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(17,400)
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(2,800)
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(4,000)
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (3,388)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   8,712
EXHIBIT 3.7 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

103
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Computer Needs, Inc.
Balance Sheet
December 31, Year 7
(Problem 31)
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 15,600
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
32,100
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  46,700
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   1,500
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 95,900
Property, Plant, and Equipment:
At Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 59,700
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (2,800)
Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 56,900
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$152,800
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable—Merchandise Suppliers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 37,800
Income Tax Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,388
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   2,900
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 44,088
Mortgage Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  50,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 94,088
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 50,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   8,712
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 58,712
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$152,800
EXHIBIT 3.8 
Computer Needs, Inc.
Analysis of Changes in Bank Accounts
for the Year Ended December 31, Year 8
(Problem 31)
Balance, January 1, Year 8  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 15,600
Receipts:
 
Cash from Cash Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
37,500
 
Checks Received from Third-Party Credit Cards and Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
151,500
Disbursements:
To Merchandise Suppliers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(164,600)
 
To Employees and Other Providers of Selling and Administrative Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(21,000)
 
To U.S. Government for Income Taxes for Year 8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(3,388)
 
To Bank for Interest ($4,000) and Principal on Mortgage ($800)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(4,800)
 
To Supplier of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (6,000)
Balance, December 31, Year 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  4,812
EXHIBIT 3.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
(2) Cash received during January Year 9, from third-party credit card companies and from 
customers for sales made during Year 8 totaled $40,300. This is your best estimate of 
accounts receivable outstanding on December 31, Year 8.
(3) Clerks took a physical inventory of merchandise on January 1, Year 9. Using current 
catalogs from suppliers, you estimate that the merchandise has a total cost of $60,700.
(4) Computer Needs, Inc., had paid its annual insurance premium on October 1, Year 
8 (included in the amounts paid to “Other Providers” in Exhibit 3.9). You learn that 
$1,800 of the insurance premium applies to coverage during Year 9.
(5) Based on depreciation claimed during Year 7 and new equipment purchased during 
Year 8, you estimate Year 8 depreciation expense of $3,300.
(6) Bills received from merchandise suppliers during January Year 9 totaled $45,300. This 
is your best estimate of accounts payable outstanding to these suppliers on December 
31, Year 8.
(7) Other Current Liabilities represent amounts payable to employees and other providers 
of selling and administrative services. Other Current Liabilities as of December 31, 
Year 8, total $1,200.
 
Prepare an income statement for Computer Needs, Inc., for Year 8 and a balance sheet on 
December 31, Year 8. The income tax rate is 28%.
32. Effect of errors on financial statements. Consider the following hypothetical information 
pertaining to Embotelladora Andina S.A. (Embotelladora), the producer and distributor 
of Coca-Cola products in Chile. Embotelladora applies Chilean accounting standards, and 
reports its results in thousands of Chilean pesos ($). Using the notations O/S (overstated), 
U/S (understated), and NO (no effect), indicate the effects (direction and amount) on 
assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ equity as of December 31 of the following independent 
errors or omissions. Ignore income tax implications.
a. On December 1, Embotelladora paid $120,000 for rental of a building for Decem-
ber and the following January. The firm debited Rent Expense and credited Cash for 
$120,000 on December 1, and made no further entries with respect to this rental during 
December or January.
b. On December 15, Embotelladora received $82,000 from a customer as a deposit on mer-
chandise that Embotelladora expects to deliver to the customer during the next month, 
January. The firm debited Cash and credited Sales Revenue on December 15, and made 
no further entries with respect to this deposit during December or January.
c. On December 1, Embotelladora acquired a truck to be used to transport beverages 
from the central warehouse to retailers. The truck cost $98,000, has zero salvage value, 
and is expected to last four years. The firm recorded the transaction by debiting Truck 
Expense and crediting Cash for $98,000 and made no further entries during December 
with respect to the acquisition.
d. On December 15, Embotelladora purchased office supplies costing $86,800. It recorded 
the purchase by debiting Office Supplies Expense and crediting Cash. The Office Sup-
plies Inventory account on December 1 had a balance of $27,700. Based on a physical 
inventory on December 31, office supplies costing $24,600 were on hand. The firm made 
no entries in its accounts with respect to office supplies on December 31.
e. Embotelladora incurred interest expense of $34,500 for the month of December on a 
60-day loan obtained on December 1. The firm properly recorded the loan on its books 
on December 1, but made no entry to record interest on December 31. The loan is pay-
able with interest at the end of the following month, on January 31.
f. Embotelladora purchased merchandise on account costing $17,900 on December 23, 
debiting Merchandise Inventory and crediting Accounts Payable. The firm paid for this 
purchase on December 28, debiting Cost of Goods Sold and crediting Cash, but had 
not sold the merchandise by December 31.
33. Effect of recording errors on financial statements. Forgetful Corporation (Forgetful) 
neglected to make various adjusting entries on December 31, the end of its accounting 
period. Forgetful applies U.S. GAAP, and reports in U.S. dollars. Indicate the effects on 
assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ equity on December 31, of failing to adjust for the 
following independent items as appropriate, using the descriptions overstated, understated, 
and no effect. Also, give the amount of the effect. Ignore income tax implications.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

105
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. On December 15, Forgetful Corporation received a $1,400 advance from a customer 
for products to be manufactured and delivered the next month, in January. The firm 
recorded the advance by debiting Cash and crediting Sales Revenue and made no adjust-
ing entry as of December 31.
b. On July 1, Forgetful Corporation acquired a machine for $5,000 and recorded the acqui-
sition by debiting Cost of Goods Sold and crediting Cash. The machine has a five-year 
useful life and zero estimated salvage value.
c. On November 1, Forgetful Corporation received a $2,000 note receivable from a cus-
tomer in settlement of an account receivable. It debited Notes Receivable and credited 
Accounts Receivable on receipt of the note. The note is a six-month note due April 30 
of the following year and bears interest at an annual rate of 12%. Forgetful Corporation 
made no other entries related to this note.
d. Forgetful Corporation paid its annual insurance premium of $1,200 on October 1, the 
first day of the year of coverage. It debited Prepaid Insurance $900, debited Insurance 
Expense $300, and credited Cash for $1,200. It made no other entries related to this 
insurance.
e. The Board of Directors of Forgetful Corporation declared a dividend of $1,500 on 
December 31. The dividend will be paid 15 days later, on January 15. Forgetful Corpo-
ration neglected to record the dividend declaration.
f. On December 1, Forgetful Corporation purchased a machine on account for $50,000, 
debiting Machinery and crediting Accounts Payable for $50,000. Ten days later the com-
pany paid the account and took the allowed 2% discount. It credited Cash $49,000 and 
Miscellaneous Revenue $1,000. It debited Accounts Payable $50,000. Forgetful Corpo-
ration normally records cash discounts taken as a reduction in the cost of assets. On 
December 28, the firm paid $4,000 cash to employees to install the machine; it debited 
Maintenance Expense and credited Cash for $4,000. The machine started operation 
three days later, on January 1. Since the firm did not place the machine into operation 
until January 1 it correctly recorded no depreciation for the year of purchase.
34. Working backward to the balance sheet at the beginning of the period. (Problems 34 through 
36 derive from problems by George H. Sorter.) The following data relate to the Prima 
Company.
(1) Exhibit 3.10: Balance sheet at December 31, Year 8.
(2) Exhibit 3.11: Statement of net income and retained earnings for Year 8.
(3) Exhibit 3.12: Statement of cash receipts and disbursements for Year 8.
 
 
Purchases of merchandise during the period, all on account, were $127,000. All Other 
Operating Expenses were credited to Prepayments.
 
 
Prepare a balance sheet for December 31, Year 7. (Hint: Using T-accounts, enter 
the December 31, Year 8, amounts from the balance sheet. Using the information in the 
income statement and statement of cash receipts and disbursements, reconstruct the trans-
actions that took place during the year and enter the amounts in the appropriate places in 
the T-accounts or transactions template. Finally, compute the amounts on the December 
31, Year 7, balance sheet.)
35. Working backward to cash receipts and disbursements. Exhibit 3.13 presents the compara-
tive balance sheet of The Secunda Company as of the beginning and end of Year 8. Exhibit 
3.14 presents the income statement for Year 8. The company makes all sales on account 
and purchases all goods and services on account. The Other Operating Expenses account 
includes depreciation charges and expirations of prepayments. The company debits Divi-
dends Declared during the year to Retained Earnings.
 
 
Prepare a schedule showing all cash transactions for Year 8. (Hint: Using T-accounts, 
enter the amounts shown as of December 31, Year 7, and December 31, Year 8. Starting 
with the revenue and expense accounts, reconstruct the transactions that took place during 
the year, and enter the amounts in the appropriate places in the T-accounts. Note that the 
Retained Earnings account in the balance sheet on December 31, Year 8, reflects the effects 
of earnings activities and dividends during Year 8.)
36. Working backward to the income statement. Tertia Company presents balance sheets at 
the beginning and end of Year 8 (Exhibit 3.15), as well as a statement of cash receipts 
and disbursements (Exhibit 3.16). Prepare a combined statement of income and retained 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
Prima Company
Statement of Net Income and Retained Earnings
For Year Ended December 31, Year 8
(Problem 34)
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$200,000
Less Expenses:
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$130,000
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,000
Taxes Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,000
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
47,700
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   1,200
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$190,900
 
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  9,100
 
 
Less Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   5,000
Increase in Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  4,100 
EXHIBIT 3.11
Prima Company
Balance Sheet
December 31, Year 8
(Problem 34)
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 10,000
Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
25,000
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
30,000
Prepayments for Miscellaneous Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   3,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 88,000
Land, Buildings, and Equipment (at cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 40,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (16,000)
Land, Buildings, and Equipment (net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 24,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$112,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable (for merchandise). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 25,000
Interest Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
300
Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   4,000
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 29,300
Note Payable (6%, long-term). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  20,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 49,300
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 50,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  12,700
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 62,700
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$112,000
EXHIBIT 3.10 
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

107
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Prima Company
Statement of Cash Receipts and Disbursements
For Year Ended December 31, Year 8
(Problem 34)
Cash Receipts
Cash Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 47,000
Collection from Credit Customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 150,000
 
Total Receipts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$197,000
Cash Disbursements
Payment to Suppliers of Merchandise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$128,000
Payment to Suppliers of Miscellaneous Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
49,000
Payment of Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
7,500
Payment of Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,200
Payment of Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
Purchase of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   8,000
 
Total Disbursements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$198,700
Excess of Disbursements over Receipts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  1,700
EXHIBIT 3.12
The Secunda Company
Balance Sheet
December 31, Year 8, and December 31, Year 7
(Problem 35)
December 31
Year 8
Year 7
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  9,000
$ 20,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51,000
36,000
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60,000
45,000
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   1,000
   2,000
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$121,000
$103,000
Land, Buildings, and Equipment (at cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (18,000)
  (16,000)
Land, Buildings, and Equipment (net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 22,000
$ 24,000
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$143,000
$127,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Interest Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  2,000
$  1,000
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  40,000
  30,000
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 42,000
$ 31,000
Mortgage Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  17,000
  20,000
 
Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 59,000
$ 51,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 50,000
$ 50,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  34,000
  26,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 84,000
$ 76,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$143,000
$127,000
EXHIBIT 3.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
earnings for Year 8. (Hint: Using T-accounts, enter the amounts shown as of December 
31, Year 7, and December 31, Year 8. Starting with the cash receipts and disbursements for 
the year, reconstruct the transactions that took place during the year, and enter them in the 
appropriate places in the T-accounts. The Retained Earnings account reflects the effect of 
earnings activities and dividends for Year 8.)
37. Preparing adjusting entries. Assume that a firm closes its books once per year, on Decem-
ber 31. The firm employs a full-time bookkeeper and a part-time professional accountant 
who makes all necessary adjusting entries to prepare the financial statements on December 
31. During the year, the firm uses the following simplified bookkeeping and transactions 
recording convention: When it receives cash, the firm debits cash and credits a revenue 
account; when it pays cash, the firm debits an expense account and credits cash. The pur-
poses of using this simplified transaction recording convention are (1) to achieve efficient 
recording of cash receipts and disbursements so that the firm always has an up-to-date 
balance in its cash account and (2) to avoid involving the professional accountant until the 
end of the year. On December 31, the professional accountant makes the adjusting entries 
necessary to properly record revenues and expenses of the period and calculate the correct 
balances in balance sheet accounts. Construct the adjusting entry required for each of the 
following scenarios.
a. On September 1, Year 6, a tenant paid $24,000 rent for the one-year period starting at 
that time. The tenant debited the entire amount to Rent Expense and credited Cash. The 
tenant made no adjusting entries for rent between September 1 and December 31. Con-
struct the adjusting entry to be made on December 31, Year 6, to recognize the proper 
balances in the Prepaid Rent and Rent Expense accounts. What is the amount of Rent 
Expense for Year 6?
b. Refer to part a. The tenant’s books for December 31, Year 6, after adjusting entries, 
show a balance in the Prepaid Rent account of $16,000. This amount represents rent 
for the period January 1 through August 31, Year 7. On September 1, Year 7, the tenant 
paid $30,000 for rent for the one-year period starting September 1, Year 7. The tenant 
debited this amount to Rent Expense and credited Cash but made no adjusting entries 
for rent during Year 7. Construct the adjusting entry required on December 31, Year 7. 
What is Rent Expense for Year 7?
c. Refer to part b. The tenant’s books for December 31, Year 7, after adjusting entries, 
show a balance in the Prepaid Rent account of $20,000. This amount represents rent 
for the period January 1 through August 31, Year 8. On September 1, Year 8, the tenant 
paid $18,000 for rent for the six-month period starting September 1, Year 8. The tenant 
debited this amount to Rent Expense and credited Cash but made no adjusting entries 
during Year 8. Construct the adjusting entry required on December 31, Year 8. What is 
Rent Expense for Year 8?
d. Whenever the firm makes payments for wages, it debits Wage Expense and credits Cash. 
At the start of April, the Wages Payable account had a balance of $5,000, representing 
The Secunda Company
Income Statement
For Year Ended December 31, Year 8
(Problem 35)
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000
Less Expenses:
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 50,000
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,000
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  29,000
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 82,000
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 18,000
EXHIBIT 3.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

109
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Tertia Company
Balance Sheets
December 31, Year 8, and December 31, Year 7
(Problem 36)
Tertia Company
Statement of Cash Receipts and Disbursements
For Year Ended December 31, Year 8
(Problem 36)
December 31
Year 8
Year 7
ASSETS
Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 67,800
$ 40,000
Accounts and Notes Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41,000
36,000
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49,500
55,000
Interest Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
700
1,000
Prepaid Miscellaneous Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,200
4,000
Building, Machinery, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47,000
47,000
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (12,000)
  (10,000)
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 99,200
$173,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable (miscellaneous services)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  2,500
$  2,000
Accounts Payable (merchandise purchases) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41,000
34,000
Property Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,500
1,000
Mortgage Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  30,000
  35,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 75,000
$ 72,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 25,000
$ 25,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  99,200
  76,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$124,200
$101,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$199,200
$173,000
Year 8
CASH RECEIPTS
1. Collection from Credit Customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$144,000
2. Cash Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
63,000
3. Collection of Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   1,000
 
Total Cash Receipts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$208,000
LESS CASH DISBURSEMENTS
4. Payment to Suppliers of Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$114,000
5. Repayment on Mortgage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
6. Payment of Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500
7. Prepayment to Suppliers of Miscellaneous Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
57,500
8. Payment of Property Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,200
9. Payment of Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   2,000
 
Total Cash Disbursements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$180,200
Increase in Cash Balance for Year 8  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 27,800
EXHIBIT 3.15
EXHIBIT 3.16
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110
Chapter 3 
Basics of Record Keeping and Financial Statement Preparation: Income Statement
wages earned but not paid during the last few days of March. During April, the firm 
paid $30,000 in wages, debiting the entire amount to Wage Expense. At the end of April, 
analysis of amounts earned since the last payday indicates that employees have earned 
wages of $4,000 that they have not received. These are the only unpaid wages at the end 
of April. Construct the required adjusting entry. What is Wage Expense for April?
e. The firm purchased an insurance policy providing one year’s coverage from May 1, Year 
5, and debited the entire amount to Insurance Expense. After the firm made adjusting 
entries, the balance sheet on December 31, Year 5, correctly showed Prepaid Insurance 
of $3,000. Construct the adjusting entry that the firm must make on January 31, Year 6, 
if the firm closes its books monthly and prepares a balance sheet for January 31, Year 6.
f. For receipts a landlord collects related to an apartment building, the bookkeeper always 
credits Rent Revenue for cash received from tenants. At the beginning of Year 7, the 
liability account Advances from Tenants had a credit balance of $25,000, representing 
collections from tenants for rental services the landlord will render during Year 7. Dur-
ing Year 7, the firm collected $250,000 from tenants; it debited Cash and credited Rent 
Revenue. It made no adjusting entries during Year 7. At the end of Year 7, analysis of 
the individual accounts indicates that of the amounts already collected, $30,000 repre-
sents collections for rental services the landlord will provide to tenants during Year 8. 
Present the required adjusting entry. What is Rent Revenue for Year 7?
g.  When the firm acquired new equipment costing $10,000 on January 1, Year 5, the book-
keeper debited Depreciation Expense and credited Cash for $10,000 but made no fur-
ther entries for this equipment during Year 5. The equipment has an expected service 
life of five years and an estimated salvage value of zero. Construct the adjusting entry 
required before the accountant can prepare a balance sheet for December 31, Year 5.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C h a p t e r
4
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Balance Sheet: Presenting 
and Analyzing Resources 
and Financing
A
user of financial statements might raise questions such as the following with respect to a 
firm’s balance sheet:
1. Does the balance sheet show all of the firm’s economic resources as assets and all of the claims 
on those resources as liabilities and shareholders’ equity? If not, what kinds of resources and 
claims are not recognized on the balance sheet and why?
2. How do the amounts reported on the balance sheet relate to prices observed in the market-
place? For example, how does the amount reported for a given asset relate to the amount 
the firm would receive if it sold that asset? Is the amount reported for a liability equal to the 
amount that the firm would have to pay to settle the obligation? How does the amount shown 
for shareholders’ equity relate to the market value of the firm’s equity?
3. What does the balance sheet reveal about how the firm has financed its assets? Why do financ-
ing arrangements differ across firms?
Understanding the balance sheet permits the user to answer these and other questions about 
a firm’s financial position. This chapter discusses the following concepts underlying the balance 
sheet, emphasizing asset and liability:
■ 
Definition.
■ 
Recognition.
■ 
Measurement.
Mastery of these concepts requires understanding also the procedures used to prepare the balance 
sheet, described in Chapter 2.
UNDERLYING CONCEPTS
BALANCE SHEET EQUALITY
Chapter 1 introduced the balance sheet, one of the three principal financial statements. Some refer 
to the balance sheet as the statement of financial position. The balance sheet displays resources 
1. Understand the concepts of assets, 
liabilities, and shareholders’ equity, 
including the criteria for recognizing 
(recording) these items on the bal-
ance sheet, measuring their amounts 
(measurement), and identifying where 
they appear on the balance sheet 
(classification).
2. Understand why and how the recogni-
tion and measurement guidance in U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS affect the information 
reported on balance sheets.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
(assets) and the financing of those resources (liabilities and shareholders’ equity) as of a point 
in time.1 The balance sheet reflects the following equality, called the balance sheet equation:
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
This equation requires that assets equal the financing provided by creditors and owners of the 
firm. Stated differently, management uses the funds provided by creditors (in the form of liabili-
ties) and owners (in the form of shareholders’ equity) to acquire resources (in the form of assets). 
The nature and mix of liabilities and shareholders’ equity comprise the financing structure, a topic 
we return to later in this chapter.
BALANCE SHEET CLASSIFICATIONS
Balance sheets present lists of items, grouped by category. Two categories used to group assets 
and liabilities result from the timing of cash receipts (for assets) and the timing of cash pay-
ments (for liabilities). Assets that management expects to convert to cash, or to sell, or to con-
sume during the normal operating cycle of the business are current assets. All other assets are 
noncurrent assets. Similarly, obligations that management expects to discharge with a cash pay-
ment or otherwise settle during the operating cycle are current liabilities, whereas all other obli-
gations are noncurrent liabilities.
The operating cycle is the period of time required to convert cash into salable goods and 
services, sell those goods and services to customers, and receive cash from customers in pay-
ment. A firm’s business model determines its operating cycle. The operating cycle can be as 
short as one to three months. Some industries, such as building construction or wine mak-
ing, have operating cycles that span several years. Unless the operating cycle exceeds one year, 
accounting convention uses one year to distinguish current items from noncurrent items. Thus, 
the phrase current assets (current liabilities) is typically understood to imply assets (liabilities) 
that will convert to (be paid for with) cash within one year.
Current assets include cash; marketable securities held for the short term; accounts and 
notes receivable; inventories of merchandise, raw materials, supplies, work in process, and fin-
ished goods; and certain prepayments, such as insurance and rent paid for in advance of receiv-
ing the insurance or rental services. Noncurrent assets include property, plant, and equipment; 
long-term investments in securities; and intangible assets (such as patents, trademarks, and 
goodwill).
Current liabilities include amounts owed to suppliers (accounts payable), to employees 
(accrued salaries and wages), and to governmental units (income taxes payable). They also 
include the current portion of long-term debt—that is, the portion of notes and bonds payable 
that must be paid within the next year. Noncurrent liabilities include interest-bearing obliga-
tions with maturities beyond one year (such as bonds, mortgages, and similar debts), some obli-
gations under long-term leases, some retirement obligations, and certain noninterest-bearing 
obligations such as deferred income taxes.
BALANCE SHEET FORMAT: U.S. GAAP
The typical balance sheet lists assets first, followed by liabilities and shareholders’ equity. In 
U.S. GAAP, the balance sheet lists assets from most liquid to least liquid, where liquid refers to 
the ease of converting the asset into cash. A balance sheet prepared according to U.S. GAAP 
begins with the most liquid of the current assets—cash and cash equivalents—and then moves 
to other current assets, followed by noncurrent assets. Similarly, the balance sheet lists liabilities 
starting with those that the firm will discharge soonest (the most current or closest to maturity 
liabilities) and ending with those that it will pay latest (the most noncurrent or distant to matu-
rity liabilities).
 1 The financial reporting requirements of the jurisdiction in which the firm is domiciled determine how often it 
must prepare a balance sheet, file it with the appropriate regulatory body, and make it publicly available. For 
example, in the United States, all firms with publicly traded debt or equity securities must prepare and file 
financial reports quarterly. Elsewhere, semiannual reporting is more common. Nothing precludes more frequent 
financial statement preparation, for example, to support internal decision making or negotiations with a lender, 
such as bank.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

113
Underlying Concepts
Exhibit 1.1 (in Chapter 1) shows Great Deal’s balance sheet, prepared under U.S. GAAP as 
of February 27, 2013. The balance sheet begins with cash and cash equivalents of $1,826 mil-
lion. The balance sheet then lists, in order, the remaining current assets in decreasing order of 
liquidity, with merchandise inventories (of $5,486 million) and other assets (of $1,144 million) 
the least liquid of the current assets. The list of noncurrent assets follows:
■ 
Property, plant, and equipment, net  . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,070 million
■ 
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,452 million
■ 
Trade names . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
159 million
■ 
Customer relationships  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
279 million
■ 
Equity and other investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
324 million
■ 
Other assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
452 million
In the liability section, Great Deal shows that the liability it must discharge soonest is 
accounts payable (amounts owed to suppliers and vendors) of $5,276 million. Next is Great 
Deal’s obligation for unredeemed gift cards.2 Next in line for payment are amounts earned by 
employees but not yet paid (accrued compensation and related expenses) of $544 million. Mov-
ing down the balance sheet, Great Deal reports long-term debt of $1,104 million. This amount 
excludes payments of long-term debt due in the coming year. The current portion of long-term 
debt ($35 million) appears among the current liabilities. Within the shareholders’ equity sec-
tion, Great Deal reports $5,797 million of retained earnings, the source for net assets that Great 
Deal has generated through its earnings process over time (its cumulative earnings) and has not 
distributed to shareholders.
Using Great Deal’s balance sheet, we can verify the balance sheet equation: assets ($18,302 
million) equal liabilities (the sum of $8,978, $1,256 and $1,104, or $11,338 million) plus share-
holders’ equity ($6,964 million).
BALANCE SHEET FORMAT: IFRS
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) permit but do not require the reverse 
ordering of balance sheets, with both assets and liabilities listed from least liquid to most liq-
uid. This reporting format appears in Exhibit 1.5 (in Chapter 1), which contains the balance 
sheet for Thames Limited. Thames’s balance sheet dated December 31, 2013, begins with 
its least liquid asset—goodwill—of €2,986.9 million. Thames’s tangible noncurrent assets 
(€1,338.3 million) consist of land, buildings, plant, and equipment. Moving down the list, 
Thames’s most liquid assets are its cash at bank and equivalents, €1,960.1 million at the end of 
2013. We can use Thames’s balance sheet and the balance sheet equation to verify that assets 
(€18,007.6 million) equal the sum of liabilities (the sum of €2,766.9 and €11,486.9, or €14,253.8 
million) plus shareholders’ equity (€3,753.8 million).
Although Great Deal uses U.S. GAAP and Thames uses IFRS, their balance sheets present 
similar information, albeit in differing orders. Many questions remain unanswered, however, 
including the following:
1. Which resources does a firm recognize as assets, and which obligations does it recognize 
as liabilities? That is, what conditions must an item meet to be an asset or a liability on a 
balance sheet? Do these conditions differ between U.S. GAAP and IFRS?
2. How do firms measure assets and liabilities? That is, what number appears next to the item 
on the balance sheet? Do measurements differ between U.S. GAAP and IFRS?
3. How do firms measure shareholders’ equity? What are the components of shareholders’ 
equity, and how do they appear on the balance sheet? Are those components, their mea-
surement, and their display the same under U.S. GAAP and IFRS?
The rest of this chapter addresses these questions. We distinguish, where necessary, between 
the requirements of U.S. GAAP and IFRS. We refer to pronouncements from either the FASB 
or the IASB as authoritative guidance.
 2 Accounting for gift cards is discussed in Chapter 5.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
ASSET RECOGNITION AND MEASUREMENT
ASSET DEFINITION AND RECOGNITION
Asset recognition means that the item is an asset on the balance sheet. For an item to be an 
asset, it must meet both (1) the definition of an asset and (2) the asset recognition criteria.3
■ 
Asset Definition An asset is a probable4 future economic benefit that a firm controls 
because of a past event or transaction. The definition of an asset is similar in U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS.
■ 
Asset Recognition The three criteria for asset recognition are the following:
1. The firm owns or controls the right to use the item.
2. The right to use the item arises as a result of a past transaction or exchange.
3. The future benefit has a relevant measurement attribute that can be quantified with suf-
ficient reliability.
Although all assets provide future benefits, not all future benefits are assets. This is because 
a future benefit that qualifies as an asset must meet the three recognition criteria, the first two 
of which are part of the definition of an asset. The third criterion pertains to recognition: an 
item that meets the definition of an asset must be measurable with sufficient reliability. Reliabil-
ity of a reported amount means that the amount corresponds to what it purports to represent 
and is reasonably free from error and bias, in the sense that multiple independent measurers 
would agree on the amount.5 For example, if a reported amount on a balance sheet purports 
to represent the acquisition cost of inventory, a reliable measure would be the price paid. That 
price can be confirmed by independent measurers as the amount quoted in the invoice for the 
inventories. Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS specifies what amount of reliability is sufficient, sug-
gesting that this judgment is context-specific and subjective.
To understand how these conditions influence asset recognition, we consider several exam-
ples of transactions that result in future economic benefits but may not result in the recognition 
of an asset. Except where noted, both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the same accounting treat-
ment for these examples.
Example 1 Great Deal sold a television for $1,000 to a customer who purchased the televi-
sion using a Great Deal credit card. Although Great Deal has not received any cash, it has 
received a future economic benefit in the form of a promise of cash payment. Great Deal would 
recognize this benefit as an asset (an account receivable) because it has a right to receive a defi-
nite amount of cash ($1,000) as a result of the sale of the television.
Example 2 Thames purchased new equipment it will use in producing communications sys-
tems. The new equipment substitutes a robotically controlled machining process for a labor-
intensive process. Thames agreed to give the equipment vendor 200,000 shares of its common 
stock in payment for the equipment. At the time of the transaction, Thames’s stock price was 
€32 per share. Thames will recognize the new equipment as an asset because it controls the 
equipment and it expects to receive future benefits in the form of reduced labor costs.6
 3 The U.S. GAAP asset definition is in FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6, “Elements 
of Financial Statements,” 1985, par. 26; and its asset recognition criteria are in FASB, Statement of Financial 
Accounting Concepts No. 5, “Recognition and Measurement in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” 
1984, par. 63–65. The IFRS asset definition is in the IASB Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of 
Financial Statements, “Chapter 4, the remaining text,” 2010, par. 4.4–4.14.
 4 The word probable is used to capture the idea that commercial arrangements are often uncertain as to outcome. 
It refers to items or events that can be reasonably expected to occur or believed to have occurred based on avail-
able evidence.
 5 The FASB and IASB issued conceptual guidance in September 2010 that uses the term “representational 
faithfulness” to capture the ideas associated with reliability in the asset recognition criteria. The U.S. GAAP 
conceptual guidance on representational faithfulness is in FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts 
No. 8, “Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, Chapter 3, Qualitative Characteristics of Useful 
Financial Information,” 2010, par. QC12–QC16. The IFRS conceptual guidance is in IASB, Framework for the 
Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements, Chapter 3, 2010, par. QC12–QC16.
 6 We discuss the amount Thames will report on its balance sheet for this equipment in a later section. This is the 
asset measurement question.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

115
Asset Recognition and Measurement
Example 3 Thames sold 16 defense systems for a total of €80 million. The customer agreed 
to pay Thames €20 million at the time Thames delivered the systems and the rest in four equal 
installments at the end of each of the next four years. At the time of the final payment, Thames 
will transfer the legal title of the systems to the customer. Although Thames has legal title to 
the systems during the next four years, it has no rights to use them. Provided the customer 
makes the required payments, the future benefits of the systems reside with, and will stay with, 
the customer. Thus, the systems are the customer’s assets, not Thames’s. Thames will recognize 
as assets the €20 million cash received at the time of delivery and a receivable for the remaining 
payments.
Example 4 Some customers regularly purchase electronic items from Great Deal because of 
Great Deal’s separate service, the Nerd Squad, which assists customers in installing these items. 
Great Deal hires talented staff and invests in training to ensure high-quality service. Manage-
ment believes that the service leads to more loyal customers who are more willing to purchase 
at Great Deal in the future. Thus, satisfied Nerd Squad customers provide future benefits in 
the form of increased sales of Great Deal products. Neither the expected future sales nor the 
satisfied customers are assets on Great Deal’s balance sheet because Great Deal cannot control 
customers’ future purchasing decisions.
Example 5 Continuing with Example 4, the Nerd Squad itself provides a future benefit. It is 
not, however, an asset on Great Deal’s balance sheet because it is typically not possible to own 
or control a human being. (In the case of sporting teams, it is the contracts with players and 
not the players themselves that are the assets.)
Example 6 Like many companies, Great Deal has developed and maintains a list of its cus-
tomers and their characteristics, which it uses for mailing catalogs and other promotions. Creat-
ing and maintaining a customer list takes time and resources, so a decision to have one entails 
certain investments and continuing expenditures. The expected benefits of a customer list are the 
future cash inflows associated with purchases made by listed customers after they receive their 
promotional materials. The larger and more detailed the customer list, and the more high-pur-
chasing customers it includes, the greater are the expected future benefits of the customer list. 
An internally developed customer list is not an asset, however. Although the item meets the defi-
nition of an asset, it does not meet the third recognition criterion, because the firm cannot mea-
sure the future economic benefits of the list with sufficient reliability. The firm would, however, 
recognize an externally purchased customer list as an asset and measure (record) it at the pur-
chase price. Great Deal includes the purchase price of these acquired customer lists in the asset 
called Customer Relationships on its balance sheet.7
Example 7 Thames plans to open a manufacturing facility in Poland next year. It has identi-
fied an existing facility that could be purchased for €500 million and modified for its use at an 
additional cost of €200 million. Thames plans to use a combination of cash on hand and cash 
recently raised from issuing common shares to finance the transaction. Although Thames has 
firm plans to buy and modify the facility, it is not an asset until Thames has obtained control 
of it as a result of a transaction with the current owner.
Example 8 Continuing with the transaction proposed in Example 7, suppose both the owner 
of the facility and Thames sign a contract in which they promise to transact—to sell and pur-
chase the facility—one year later. Such an exchange of promises is an executory contract, an 
exchange of promises for mutual performance in the future that neither party has yet begun to 
perform. Thames has acquired the rights to the future benefits arising from the facility, but the 
contract is unexecuted by both the facility owner (who must relinquish control of the facility) 
and Thames (who must pay the agreed purchase price). Executory contracts are typically not 
assets or liabilities until one or both of the contracting parties begin to complete their contrac-
tual obligations.
Example 9 Continuing with the transaction described in Examples 7 and 8, suppose that 
Thames pays the owner of the facility €100 million toward the purchase of the facility. Thames 
 7 Chapter 10 discusses the distinction between internally developed and acquired intangible assets in more detail 
and introduces certain differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
has partially performed under the contract and will recognize an asset to the extent of its par-
tial performance. In this example, Thames would recognize an asset called Deposit Paid on 
Factory for €100 million.
ASSET MEASUREMENT
Each asset on a balance sheet has an associated monetary amount (the measurement of that 
asset). Authoritative guidance specifies bases for measuring those monetary amounts. In this 
section, we describe several measurement bases that U.S. GAAP and IFRS use.
Acquisition Cost or Historical Cost Acquisition (historical) cost is the amount of cash 
paid (or the cash equivalent value of other forms of payment) to acquire an asset. Most assets 
are initially measured using acquisition cost, which the firm can generally document by ref-
erence to contracts, invoices, and canceled checks. The reason for initially measuring an asset 
at its acquisition cost is that the buyer believes the asset will generate future benefits (that is, 
increased cash inflows or reduced cash outflows) that are at least as large as the purchase price. 
Otherwise, the buyer would have an immediate economic loss and would have no incentive 
to acquire the asset. This reasoning implies that acquisition cost sets the lower bound on the 
asset’s expected future benefits.
In the case of a nonfinancial asset, the acquisition cost includes the invoice price and all 
expenditures made or obligations incurred to prepare that asset for use. For example, trans-
portation costs, installation costs, handling charges, and brokerage fees are among the costs 
incurred to place the asset into service. The acquisition cost of some equipment is shown in the 
following illustration:
Invoice Price of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€400,000
Less: 2% Discount for Prompt Cash Payment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (8,000)
Net Invoice Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€392,000
Transportation Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
13,800
Installation Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  27,000
 
Total Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€432,800
The firm may acquire assets by paying cash or exchanging other items of value. For exam-
ple, a firm may exchange its own shares to acquire an asset. If the consideration exchanged for 
an asset is not cash, the acquisition cost is the fair value of the consideration given or the fair 
value of the asset received, whichever the firm can more reliably measure.
Example 10 Return to Example 2, where Thames purchased new equipment in exchange 
for 200,000 shares of its common stock. At the time of the transaction, Thames’s stock price 
was €32 per share. Thames would record the equipment on its balance sheet at €6.4 million (= 
200,000 shares × €32 per share), the fair value of the shares exchanged, plus any additional 
costs incurred to prepare the equipment for its intended use.
Current Replacement Cost The current replacement cost of an asset is the amount a 
firm would have to pay to obtain another asset with identical service potential; it is therefore an 
entry value that reflects economic conditions at the measurement date. This measurement base 
is often used in U.S. GAAP to measure inventories whose usefulness (typically, in terms of sal-
ability) to the firm has declined below the acquisition cost of the inventories. Because invento-
ries are purchased or produced frequently, measuring their current replacement cost may be as 
simple as consulting suppliers’ catalogs or price lists.8
Net Realizable Value Net realizable value is the net cash (selling price less selling costs) 
that the firm would receive if it sold the asset today in an arm’s-length transaction. Net 
 8 Chapter 9 discusses inventory in more detail.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

117
Asset Recognition and Measurement
realizable value is an example of an exit value, because it reflects a price that the firm would 
receive when an asset leaves the firm. Net realizable value is similar, but not identical, to fair 
value.
Fair Value U.S. GAAP and IFRS define fair value as “the price that would be received to 
sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants 
at the measurement date.”9 Unlike net realizable value, fair value does not reduce the price for 
selling costs or other transaction costs in the measurement.10 The notion of fair value as an exit 
value applies to both assets and liabilities.
The fair value of an asset is an opportunity cost in the sense that fair value reflects an 
amount that the firm could receive if it sold the asset today. Fair value is the amount the firm 
forgoes by not selling the asset. Fair value reflects a market participant perspective. This means 
that the firm measures fair value based on how market participants would use the asset, not 
how management intends to use the asset. In addition, fair value reflects current economic 
conditions, as opposed to acquisition cost, which reflects the economic conditions that existed 
when the firm acquired the asset. As a result, fair value can (and does) change, with the fre-
quency, direction, and magnitude of changes determined by economic conditions.
Fair value is also a hypothetical amount (that is, the price at which the firm could sell the 
asset), so it does not require data from actual transactions for the asset’s measurement. In con-
trast, acquisition costs of assets are typically readily observable from records of actual transac-
tions, such as invoices. While fair value measurements need not be based on actual transactions, 
some fair values are more observable than others. For example, some assets, such as commod-
ities and securities, trade on well-organized and active markets, so the firm can observe fair 
values. In contrast, for assets that do not trade in active markets, the firm must estimate fair 
values. In estimating these fair values, authoritative guidance requires that the firm use mea-
surement techniques, inputs, and assumptions that market participants would use if they were 
arriving at a transaction price. We discuss next an example of a technique that firms can use to 
arrive at a fair value measurement when active markets for the asset do not exist.
Present Value of Future Net Cash Flows Present value is the amount that results 
from using an appropriate interest rate to discount one or more future cash flows to the pres-
ent.11 The present value of future cash flows is the sum of the present values of the individual 
future cash inflows and outflows associated with an asset. Present value is not a measure-
ment attribute. Rather, it is a means of arriving at a measurement attribute. In particular, if 
the inputs to a present value calculation—the discount rate and the future cash inflows and 
outflows—are amounts that market participants would use, the firm can use this technique 
to arrive at a fair value estimate. The present value of an asset is always less than the sum of 
the undiscounted future cash inflows and outflows associated with that asset, because some 
amount of implied interest cost is always associated with the use of cash and other resources. 
The following example presents the general approach.
Example 11 Great Deal lends $1 million to Worldwide Retailers Inc. The terms of the loan 
call for Worldwide to pay Great Deal $130,000 at the end of each of the next five years and 
an additional $655,000 at the end of the fifth year. The total amount of cash that Worldwide 
will pay Great Deal is $1.305 million (= [$130,000 × 5] + $655,000). The present value of the 
future cash inflows associated with this loan differs as the discount rate changes. If the discount 
rate is the rate that a market participant would demand in an arm’s-length lending arrange-
ment, the present value is an estimate of the fair value of the loan. For example, if that rate is 
7%, the present value, which is also the fair value, is calculated as follows (assuming each cash 
flow occurs at the end of the year indicated, in millions):
 9 The U.S. GAAP definition is in ASC 820-10, par. 35-2. The application of fair value measurement to assets is 
in ASC 820-10, par. 35-10 to 35-15. The IFRS definition is in IASB, IFRS 13, Fair Value Measurement, 2011, 
Appendix A.
10 The reason for excluding transaction costs is that they are not an attribute of an asset or liability but rather 
costs incurred to sell an asset or transfer a liability. They are thus specific to the transaction and not to the asset 
or liability that is the subject of the transaction.
11 The Appendix discusses the technique.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
First Year:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$130 ÷ (1.07)1 = $  121.50
Second Year:  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 130 ÷ (1.07)2 =
113.55
Third Year:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 130 ÷ (1.07)3 =
106.12
Fourth Year:. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 130 ÷ (1.07)4 =
99.18
Fifth Year: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 130 ÷ (1.07)5 =
92.69
Fifth Year: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 655 ÷ (1.07)5 =    467.01
Total:  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
= $1,000.05
The sum of these discounted future cash flows is $1 million (after rounding). From a busi-
ness perspective, Great Deal is lending $1 million with the expectation that it will receive both 
the principal of $1 million and an annual return of 7%. Great Deal expects to receive a total 
undiscounted cash inflow from Worldwide of $1.305 (= [$130 × 5] + $655) million. These 
undiscounted cash inflows include both principal and interest at 7%.12
We can use the discounted cash flow technique to illustrate estimating a fair value in the 
absence of an observable market price. First, the firm must identify the amounts of future cash 
flows. In the loan example, the cash flows are specified in the loan contract. As a practical matter, 
however, the future cash flows associated with an asset may depend on numerous factors, includ-
ing technological innovation, product introductions by competitors, and inflation rates. Even 
in the example of the loan with contractually specified cash flows, there is some possibility that 
Worldwide will default (that is, not make the promised payments). In a fair value measurement, 
Great Deal would use a market participant perspective to estimate the probability of default.
Second, the firm selects the appropriate rate to discount the future cash flows to the pres-
ent. To provide an estimate of the asset’s fair value, the discount rate should be the rate that 
market participants would use, reflecting current economic conditions that include expectations 
of inflation and any uncertainty about the cash flows of the asset.
MEASUREMENT APPROACHES FOR SPECIFIC ASSETS
The same asset can have different measurements for tax purposes, for financial reporting pur-
poses, and for internal managerial decision-making purposes. In addition, certain specialized 
business situations call for specific measurements; for example, an insurance policy on a ware-
house might specify that the insured amount of the warehouse is the cost to replace the ware-
house. In this textbook we focus on measurement for financial reporting.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS specify the asset measurement basis for financial reporting. As 
noted earlier in this chapter, acquisition cost is the initial measurement basis for most assets. 
Subsequent measurement depends on the type of asset. We discuss several broad categories of 
assets and their measurements next.
Financial assets include cash and claims to cash, such as accounts receivable. The most 
liquid financial asset, cash, appears as the amount of cash on hand or in the bank. Accounts 
receivable from customers appears as the amount of cash the firm expects to collect. If the time 
until collection extends beyond one year, by convention the firm discounts the expected future 
cash inflow to a present value; otherwise, the measurement of receivables ignores implied inter-
est. Because the firm collects most accounts receivable within one to three months, the conven-
tion to ignore discounting for these assets rests on a lack of materiality.13
In addition to cash and receivables, many firms also have financial assets in the form of 
investments in marketable securities, typically bonds and stocks issued by other firms. The firm 
initially measures these assets at acquisition cost, but the subsequent measurement depends on 
the nature of the investment.14
Nonfinancial assets are tangible and intangible resources that firms use in operations to 
generate future cash flows. Common examples include inventory, land, buildings, machin-
ery, licenses, and patents. Firms initially measure nonfinancial assets at acquisition cost; they 
12 We discuss fair value measurement more fully in Chapter 11. Other techniques for estimating the fair value of 
assets go beyond the scope of this textbook.
13 Chapter 1 discusses the concept of materiality.
14 Chapter 13 discusses marketable security investments.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

119
Three Conventions Underlying Asset Measurement
subsequently reduce this amount to reflect the consumption over time of the asset’s economic 
benefits as well as to recognize declines in the fair value of the asset.
The first adjustment results from the depreciation process, which allocates the asset’s acqui-
sition cost less estimated salvage value to the periods during which the asset provides future 
benefits (also called the asset’s useful life). Depreciation allocates the asset’s cost to the periods 
of benefit. The depreciation process always results in reducing the asset’s carrying value,15 from 
initial acquisition cost to salvage value. The purpose of depreciation is to allocate costs to peri-
ods of benefit, not to track changes in fair value.
The second adjustment results from impairment, which occurs when an asset’s fair value 
falls below its carrying value. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms test assets for 
impairment and have specific rules for measuring the amount of an impairment loss.16
THREE CONVENTIONS UNDERLYING 
ASSET MEASUREMENT
Three conventions underlie the measurement of asset values: going concern, relevance and reli-
ability, and conservatism.
GOING CONCERN
Accounting presumes that a firm will remain in operation long enough to carry out its current 
plans. A firm that is a going concern will realize changes in the fair values of its assets by using 
those assets or by selling them. Realized means converted to cash. An item is recognized, for 
accounting purposes, when it is displayed in the financial statements.17 For most assets, U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require the following recognition rules:
■ 
Value decreases. The firm recognizes value decreases as impairment losses when the 
decreases occur before it realizes the collection of the reduced cash flows. Thus, firms gen-
erally recognize unrealized losses.
■ 
Value increases. U.S. GAAP forbids the recognition of unrealized gains from increases in 
the fair value of most nonfinancial assets. The firm can realize the fair value increase by 
selling the appreciated asset. IFRS permits, but does not require, firms to recognize unreal-
ized increases in the fair values of some nonfinancial assets on their balance sheets. That is, 
IFRS permits firms to revalue certain nonfinancial assets to fair values that exceed carrying 
values.18
RELEVANCE AND RELIABILITY
Recall the third criterion for asset recognition: the future benefit has a relevant measurement 
basis that the firm can quantify with sufficient reliability.19 Relevance means that the informa-
tion could affect the decisions of users of financial reports. Relevant financial accounting infor-
mation helps users form predictions or correct their expectations. Standard setters must choose 
which of an asset’s several attributes, such as historical cost, fair value, and market value, pro-
vides the most relevant measurement, subject to reliability considerations.
Reliability means that the information presented is reasonably free from error and bias 
and faithfully represents what it purports to represent. Standard setters view acquisition cost 
measurements as providing reliable information that faithfully represents the economic value 
15 An asset’s carrying value is its value reported on the balance sheet.
16 Chapter 10 discusses these requirements more fully.
17 The distinction between recognition and realization is essential to accrual accounting, hence the importance 
accorded to recognition criteria. Firms recognize items that qualify for inclusion in the financial statements 
when they enter the financial statements, regardless of when those items are realized by conversion to cash.
18 Chapter 10 discusses these cases.
19 Relevance and representational faithfulness are discussed in FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts 
No. 8, “Chapter 3, Qualitative Characteristics of Accounting Information,” 2010, par. QC6–QC10 and par. 
QC12–QC16, respectively.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
sacrificed to acquire an asset. Reliability encompasses also the ability to verify the measured 
amount. Acquisition cost is reliable in that different accountants will likely agree on the same 
amount because each of them can verify the acquisition cost by reference to contracts and 
invoices. Fair value measurements can be reliable, for example, if the asset being measured 
trades in an active market. Because many assets do not trade in active markets, some accoun-
tants view acquisition costs as more reliable than fair values.
CONSERVATISM
Historically, conservatism has described a preference for financial reporting such “that possible 
errors in measurement be in the direction of understatement rather than overstatement of net 
income and net assets.”20 Conservatism is the basis for the practice of reporting certain assets at 
the lower of acquisition cost or fair value.21 The requirement to test assets for impairment and 
to record impairment charges rests on the notion that a balance sheet carrying value should not 
exceed the amount of cash that the firm expects to receive by using or selling the asset. Acquisi-
tion cost measurement combined with impairment testing thus provides conservative (that is, 
lower) asset balance sheet values.
The general acceptance of these three conventions does not justify them. Some manag-
ers appear to prefer acquisition cost measures to fair value measures because the latter usu-
ally cause more volatility in reported income. The increased volatility results from fair values 
reflecting changes in economic conditions as they occur. For the most part, U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS specify the measurement basis. We will note the cases in which management has a choice 
of measurement basis.
 PROBLEM  4.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Asset recognition and measurement. The following transactions relate to Polo Ralph 
Lauren (“Polo”). For each, indicate whether the transaction immediately gives rise to an 
asset for Polo and, if so, state the account title and amount Polo will record.
a. Polo spends $16 million to advertise a new line of perfume in the expectation that the 
advertisements will attract new customers.
b. Polo signs a contract with Nordstrom for the distribution of its fall line of clothes. 
Polo promises to distribute certain jeans exclusively through Nordstrom, and Nor-
dstrom promises to display and market the jeans in a manner designed to increase 
sales. Polo estimates the fair value of the contract to be $4 million.
c. Polo invests $24 million in research and development related to its paint line of 
business.
d. Polo spends $800,000 on tuition assistance programs for its middle-level managers to 
obtain MBAs. Historically, 80% of the managers who seek MBAs receive them and 
remain with the company five years or more.
e. Polo acquires and occupies a warehouse outside Seattle by signing a mortgage pay-
able for $75 million. Legal title for the warehouse remains with the bank (the holder 
of the mortgage) because Polo has yet not made all the required mortgage payments.
20 Accounting Principles Board, Statement 4, par. 171, as discussed in FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting 
Concepts No. 2, “Qualitative Characteristics of Accounting Information,” 1980. The latter was superseded in 
2010 by Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 8. Later, you will learn that no accounting method can 
report smaller income in all periods. The more conservative method reports lower income in earlier periods and 
higher income in later periods.
21 As previously discussed, IFRS but not U.S. GAAP permits, but does not require, certain assets to be measured 
at fair value even when fair value exceeds acquisition cost. In this sense, IFRS is less conservative than U.S. 
GAAP.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

121
Liability Recognition and Measurement
LIABILITY RECOGNITION AND MEASUREMENT
LIABILITY DEFINITION AND RECOGNITION
A liability arises when a firm receives goods or services and, in exchange, promises to pay the 
provider of those goods or services a reasonably definite amount at a reasonably definite future 
time.22 All accounting liabilities are obligations, but not all obligations are liabilities. To be a 
liability, an item must meet both (1) the definition of a liability and (2) recognition criteria:
■ 
Liability Definition Liabilities are probable23 future sacrifices of economic benefits arising 
from present obligations to transfer assets or provide services to other entities in the future 
as a result of a past event or transaction.
■ 
Liability Recognition The criteria for liability recognition are as follows:
1. The item represents a present obligation, not a potential future commitment or intent.
2. The obligation must exist as a result of a past transaction or exchange, called the obli-
gating event.
3. The obligation must require a probable future economic resource that the firm has little 
or no discretion to avoid.
4. The obligation must have a relevant measurement base that the firm can quantify with 
sufficient reliability.
To help you better understand liability recognition, we consider several examples of trans-
actions that result in obligations, and some that do not result in obligations.
Example 12 Great Deal purchased merchandise inventory from Sony and agreed to pay Sony 
$180,000 within 30 days. This obligation is a liability on Great Deal’s balance sheet because 
Great Deal received the goods and must pay a definite amount, $180,000, at a reasonably defi-
nite future time, within 30 days. Because Great Deal has promised to pay the amount within 
one year, it is a current liability (accounts payable).
Example 13 Great Deal borrowed $50 million by issuing long-term bonds whose terms 
require that on February 27 of each year, Great Deal pays 10% of the amount borrowed. In 
addition, Great Deal must repay the $50 million amount borrowed in 20 years. The $50 million 
obligation is a liability because Great Deal received the cash and must repay the debt. Great 
Deal reports the borrowed amount as a noncurrent liability on its balance sheet (included in 
Long-Term Debt) until the end of the 19th year, at which time Great Deal will reclassify the 
$50 million as a current liability (included in Current Portion of Long-Term Debt). In contrast, 
the annual 10% interest becomes a liability as time passes. By the end of each year, Great Deal 
will record (accrue) $5 million (= 0.10 × $50 million) as Interest Payable, a current liability. 
The obligating event is the passage of time.
Example 14 Thames received an advance of €60 million from a customer for navigation air 
systems that Thames will deliver next year. The cash advance creates a liability for Thames 
of €60 million. The obligating event is Thames’s receipt of the cash. Thames has incurred an 
obligation to deliver the air systems next year, or it must return the cash advance.24 Because it 
expects to discharge this obligation within 12 months by delivering the systems, Thames clas-
sifies the €60 million as a current liability on its balance sheet, included in Advance Payments 
from Customers.25
22 The U.S. GAAP liability definition is in FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6, “Elements of 
Financial Statements,” 1985, par. 35, and its recognition criteria are in Statement of Financial Accounting Con-
cepts No. 5, “Recognition and Measurement in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” 1984, par. 63–65. 
The IFRS liability definition is in International Accounting Standards Board, Framework for the Preparation 
and Presentation of Financial Statements, 1989, par. 60–64. The Glossary discusses the U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
definitions of a liability.
23 As was the case with the asset definition, the word probable as used in the liability definition refers to something 
that can be reasonably expected or believed based on available evidence.
24 In some transactions of this sort, the manufacturer does not have the option to return the cash. If the manu-
facturer does not provide the goods as promised, it may be liable for court-awarded damages based on the 
economic harm the customer suffered from not getting the promised items.
25 We discuss this account more fully in Chapter 8.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
Example 15 Thames signs an agreement with its employees’ labor union, promising to 
increase wages by 6% and to increase medical benefits. Although this agreement creates an 
obligation, it does not immediately create a liability because the obligating event has not yet 
occurred. That event occurs when employees provide labor services that require Thames to pay 
wages and provide medical benefits. As employees work, Thames recognizes a liability on its 
balance sheet.
The agreement in Example 15 is a mutually unexecuted contract (also called an executory 
contract) because neither Thames nor its employees have performed under the contract. Firms 
usually do not recognize the obligations created by mutually unexecuted contracts as account-
ing liabilities, nor do they recognize the benefits of such contracts as assets, as illustrated previ-
ously in Example 8.26
Example 16 Thames provides a five-year warranty on the communication systems it builds 
and sells. The promise to provide repair services under the warranty agreement creates an obli-
gation, resulting from the sale of the communication systems. The selling price for a Thames 
system includes payment for future warranty services even if the invoice does not explicitly 
show the portion of the total purchase price associated with the warranty. At the time of sale, 
Thames receives a benefit (the cash collected from the customer), but it has not fulfilled its obli-
gations with respect to the warranty period. It will fulfill those obligations over the five-year 
warranty period. Based on past experience, Thames estimates both the proportion of custom-
ers who will seek services under the warranty agreement and the expected cost of providing the 
warranty services. These estimates form the basis for measuring the warranty liability.27
Example 17 A customer files a suit claiming damages of €10 million from faulty defense sys-
tems that Thames manufactured. The case has not yet gone to trial, so no court has yet ren-
dered a decision or verdict. Firms do not recognize unsettled lawsuits as liabilities unless the 
firm judges that it will probably lose, and the loss estimate satisfies some other conditions. If 
the firm judges the eventual loss to be less than probable or if it judges the loss to be probable 
but it cannot estimate the amount of payment, it will not recognize a liability. That is, unless it 
is probable that Thames will have to pay and Thames can estimate the amount of payment, then 
it will not record a liability for the lawsuit. Thames will disclose in notes to its financial state-
ments the existence of the lawsuit (if it is material) and the potential for future payments.
The warranty in Example 16 illustrates a liability that is of uncertain timing or amount or 
both. Probable as a recognition criterion for liabilities with uncertain amount, uncertain tim-
ing, or both has a different meaning from the meaning in the asset and liability definition. 
The IFRS guidance for recognizing these liabilities defines probable as more likely than not, 
which implies more than 50%. Applying this criterion to Example 16, Thames would deter-
mine whether the likelihood that customers will require warranty services exceeds 50% and, if 
yes, Thames will recognize a warranty liability. U.S. GAAP does not set a precise threshold to 
probable; in practice the rule of thumb is approximately 80%. That is, a liability with uncertain 
amount or timing or both must be at least 80% likely in order to recognize it. U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS require similar (but not identical) measurements for these liabilities. Both specify that the 
firm will recognize the liability (that is, measure the liability) at the most likely amount.28
The lawsuit (Example 17) illustrates an obligation that a firm would not recognize under 
either U.S. GAAP or IFRS, although the firm would disclose the lawsuit in the notes if it 
judged it to be material. In this example, the firm does not judge the obligation arising from the 
lawsuit as probable and it cannot reasonably estimate the amount.
Arrangements of the sort illustrated in Examples 16 and 17 are common. For example, 
most firms that sell products include some kind of warranty (Example 16). Arrangements like 
the lawsuit in Example 17 are often disclosed, but not recognized, because they do not meet the 
criteria specified for the accounting recognition of liabilities. For example, Great Deal displays 
a commitment and contingencies line on the balance sheet; information about this item is in 
Note 13. Thames’s balance sheet (Exhibit 1.5) displays an account called Reserves for Contin-
gencies; additional information is in Note 22.29
26 Chapter 12 discusses the accounting treatment of some of these arrangements.
27 Chapter 9 discusses warranty liabilities.
28 In U.S. GAAP, if there is a range of possible outcomes and no amount in this range is more likely than 
any other amount, the firm will recognize the minimum of the range. Under IFRS, if the firm’s arrangement 
involves a large number of items, such as a warranty, the firm will recognize the expected value.
29 The Glossary contains a discussion of reserve, as that word is used in accounting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

123
Liability Recognition and Measurement
SUMMARY OF LIABILITY RECOGNITION
Examples 12–17 illustrate obligations with varying amounts of uncertainty with respect to 
amount and timing, as well as measurement. Figure 4.1 classifies obligations into six catego-
ries based on these characteristics. As the examples and the figure illustrate, obligations vary 
considerably in the extent to which they contain uncertainties. In some cases, authoritative 
guidance precludes the recognition of uncertain obligations that do not meet a probability 
threshold.
LIABILITY MEASUREMENT
Many liabilities are financial, requiring settlement with cash or other assets. The firm reports 
those due within one year or less at the amount required to discharge the obligation. If the pay-
ment dates extend more than one year into the future (for example, the case of the Great Deal 
bonds in Example 13), the firm records the liability on the balance sheet as a noncurrent liabil-
ity, measured at the present value of the future cash outflows.30
A liability that requires delivering goods or rendering services, rather than paying cash, is 
nonfinancial. The warranty liability in Example 16 is nonfinancial because Thames has agreed 
to provide services—system repairs. The cash advance in Example 14 is also nonfinancial, 
because Thames will settle the liability by delivering systems. Other examples of nonfinancial 
liabilities arising from cash payments from customers include amounts received by retailers for 
(as yet) unused gift cards, by magazine publishers for future magazine deliveries, by theatrical 
and sports teams for future performances or games, by landlords for future rental services, and 
by airlines for tickets purchased in advance. Account titles used for liabilities of this type include 
Advances from Customers, Deferred Revenues, Unearned Revenues, and Deferred Income.31
 PROBLEM  4.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Liability recognition and measurement. The following transactions relate to Polo Ralph 
Lauren (“Polo”). For each, indicate whether the transaction immediately gives rise to a 
liability and, if so, state the account title and amount that Polo would recognize.
a. Polo’s boutique stores sell gift cards for $100 per card. Assume that gift cards expire 
three years from the date of issuance.
(continued)
30 Chapter 11 describes the measurement of debt obligations.
31 Although these account titles are common in practice, we do not use all of them in this book. The word revenue
in the account titles may lead the reader to infer that the firm has recognized items in income, when, in fact, this 
is not the case.
Most
Certain
aThe firm recognizes these obligations as accounting liabilities if the amounts are probable and can be reasonably estimated.
Least
Certain
Obligations with 
Fixed Payment 
Amounts but 
Estimated 
Payment Dates
Obligations 
Arising from 
Advances from 
Customers
Obligations 
with Uncertain 
Timing and 
Amount of 
Paymenta
Obligations 
Under Mutually 
Unexecuted 
Contracts
Obligations That Are 
Not Probable, Cannot 
Be Reasonably 
Estimated, or Both
Obligations 
with Fixed 
Payment Dates 
and Amounts
Recognized as
Accounting Liabilities
Not Generally Recognized
as Accounting Liabilities
Classification of Obligations by Degree of Certainty
FIGURE 4.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
b. Refer to Problem 4.1 for Self-Study, part a. Polo receives an invoice for $16 mil-
lion in advertising services from the supplier, an agency that specializes in television 
advertisements.
c. Attorneys have notified Polo that the firm is a defendant in a lawsuit claiming $12 mil-
lion in lost profits and damages, based on allegations that Polo unlawfully used fashion 
designs belonging to the plaintiff. Polo’s lawyers predict that the court will probably 
find Polo liable in the lawsuit, and Polo’s management estimates that the range of dam-
ages is $2 million to $10 million, with all amounts in this range equally likely.
d. A two-week strike by employees closed down one of Polo’s clothing manufacturing 
facilities. As a result, Polo could not deliver merchandise totaling $20 million, for 
which it has already received payment.
SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY MEASUREMENT 
AND DISCLOSURE
Shareholders’ equity is a residual interest or claim. That is, the owners (shareholders) of a firm 
have a claim on assets not required to meet the claims of creditors.32 The measurement of the 
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet therefore determines the measurement of total share-
holders’ equity. The accounting process also provides an independent derivation of the amount 
of shareholders’ equity.
Corporate laws within many jurisdictions require that, within shareholders’ equity, 
firms distinguish between amounts received from owners and amounts generated by opera-
tions that the firm has not distributed to owners. The amounts that firms report as received 
from owners equal the amounts the firm received when it originally issued those shares. 
Many firms further disaggregate the initial amounts they received from shareholders for 
common shares into the par or nominal or stated value of the shares and the amounts 
received in excess of this value, called additional paid-in capital (APIC), share premium, or 
capital  contributed in excess of par value.33 We use additional paid-in capital, or APIC, to refer 
to this account. The firm assigns the par value of a share of stock at an amount it chooses. 
Par values are typically small, often $1 or less per share, and rarely equal the amounts the firm 
receives when it issues the shares. The sum of the par value amount and the additional paid-in 
capital amount is the total amount received from shareholders when the firm first issued the 
shares. This total amount is also called contributed capital or paid-in capital.
For example, Great Deal reports that the par value of its common shares is $42 million. 
Great Deal also reports additional paid-in capital of $441 million. Total paid-in capital for 
Great Deal is, therefore, the sum of $42 million and $441 million, or $483 million.
Any subsequent sale of common shares from one investor to another (such as occurs on 
stock exchanges) has no effect on the recorded amounts of shareholders’ equity. The issuing 
firm does not take part in those transactions. As a result, in a rising stock market, the total 
paid-in capital amount reported on a balance sheet will usually be less than the current market 
value of the common shares. The balance sheet amount of shareholders’ equity does not, and is 
not intended to, provide a measure of the market value of common equity. The user can, how-
ever, learn the market value of a publicly traded firm by looking up the most recent share price 
(as reported in various online services) and then multiplying this share price times the number 
of common shares outstanding, as reported on the balance sheet.
Retained earnings measures the net assets generated by a firm from operations exceeding 
dividends declared. The Retained Earnings account accumulates the amounts of these undis-
tributed earnings over time. When the firm has accumulated losses, rather than profits, the 
account is typically called Accumulated Deficit rather than Retained Earnings.
32 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 6, “Elements of Financial Statements,” 1985, par. 49.
33 The distinction between par value and additional paid-in capital has legal significance but not economic signifi-
cance. For this reason, some firms report a single account, often called common stock, equal to the sum of par 
value and additional paid-in capital.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

125
Shareholders’ Equity Measurement and Disclosure 
Retained earnings are a source of financing for assets. Retained earnings are not cash or 
other assets. In contrast to liabilities and contributed capital, which common practice refers to 
as external financing, common practice refers to retained earnings as internal financing.
Example 18 Hoskins Limited legally incorporated on January 1, 2011. In its initial public 
offering (IPO), the firm issued 15,000 shares of €0.10 par value common stock for €10 cash per 
share. During 2011, Hoskins generated net income of €30,000 and paid dividends of €10,000. 
The shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet of Hoskins on December 31, 2011, is as 
follows:
Common Stock (at par value of €0.10 per share, 15,000 shares issued and outstanding) . . . . . .  
€  1,500
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
148,500
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  20,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€170,000
The €1,500 amount reported as the total par value of the shares is the par value per share 
times the total number of shares issued, or €0.10 per share × 15,000 shares. The €148,500 
amount reported as additional paid-in capital (APIC) is the difference between the proceeds 
from the sale of stock of €150,000 (= 15,000 × €10) and the par value of €1,500. The €20,000 
amount of retained earnings reported by Hoskins for its first year of operations is the amount 
of undistributed earnings, €30,000 of income minus €10,000 dividends.
Example 19 Continuing Example 18, assume it is now December 31, 2012. During 2012, 
Hoskins issued another 5,000 shares of stock at €12 per share, earned net income of €5,000, 
and paid dividends of €10,000. The shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet of 
Hoskins on December 31, 2012, is as follows:
Common Stock (at par value of €0.10 per share, 20,000 shares issued and outstanding) . . . . . .  
€  2,000
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
208,000
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  15,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€225,000
The €2,000 amount reported as total par value is the par value per share times the total 
number of shares issued, or €0.10 per share × 20,000 shares. This €2,000 amount is the sum of 
the par value of 1,500 shares issued in 2011 plus the par value of 5,000 shares issued in 2012. 
The €208,000 amount reported as additional paid-in capital (APIC) is the sum of the €148,500 
of APIC from 2011 plus the €59,500 of APIC from the issuance of 5,000 shares in 2012 (€12 
per share × 5,000 shares minus €500 par value, or €60,000 − €500). The increase in Hoskins’s 
share price, from €10 per share in 2011 to €12 per share in 2012, does not change the amount 
reported on the balance sheet for the 15,000 shares issued in 2011. The firm does not change 
the amounts reported for total paid-in capital (par value and APIC) to reflect changes in share 
price. Rather, those amounts reflect the share price at the time the firm originally issued the 
shares.34
Hoskins’s retained earnings at the end of 2012 of €15,000 is the cumulative undistributed 
earnings through its second year of operations, equal to the beginning-of-2012 retained earn-
ings of €20,000, plus 2012 earnings of €5,000, minus 2012 dividends of €10,000. Because divi-
dends reduce retained earnings, not current earnings, a firm can declare and pay a dividend that 
exceeds its net income for the year. A firm could even pay dividends in a year that it generated 
a loss.
34 Chapter 15 describes more complex transactions that affect additional paid-in capital.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
SUMMARY
The balance sheet displays three classes of items: assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ equity. 
These items depict a firm’s financial position at a point in time. Broadly speaking, assets repre-
sent future economic benefits in the form of resources available to carry out operations. Liabili-
ties and shareholders’ equity show the sources of funds the firm used to acquire the resources 
and show the claims on them. The following are two key factors in preparing a balance sheet:
 1. Deciding whether items meet the definitions and recognition criteria for assets and liabili-
ties and, if so,
 2. Deciding how to measure the items.
For a firm to recognize an asset, a resource must represent a future economic benefit that 
the firm controls as a result of a past transaction or exchange, and the firm must be able to 
measure the resource with sufficient reliability. For a firm to recognize an obligation as a liabil-
ity, the obligation must impose a future economic sacrifice because of a past event or transac-
tion that the firm has little or no discretion to avoid, and the firm must be able to measure 
the obligation with sufficient reliability. Shareholders’ equity reports the amounts of funding 
attributable to owners’ contributions and resulting from the retention of net assets generated by 
earnings. Shareholders’ equity equals the difference between total assets and total liabilities and 
typically comprises contributed (paid-in) capital and retained earnings.
Most asset and liability definitions and recognition criteria—particularly for items that we 
focus on in this book—are similar under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Once an item has met the 
appropriate recognition criteria, the firm must measure the amount it will report on the balance 
sheet. Measurement depends on the item being considered. U.S. GAAP and IFRS specify how 
a firm should measure each asset and liability. Firms generally measure financial assets at their 
cash equivalent amounts, while they generally report nonfinancial assets at acquisition cost, 
reduced for use and impairment.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 4.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
 (Polo Ralph Lauren; asset recognition and measurement)
 a. Polo does not recognize an asset. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not allow firms to capitalize 
most advertising expenditures as assets (the exception is certain direct-response marketing 
costs35) because of the uncertainty of future benefits and measurement uncertainty.
 b. Polo does not recognize an asset. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not allow firms to record 
exchanges of promises as assets.
 c. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not permit the recognition of research expenditures as assets 
because of the uncertainty of future benefits and measurement uncertainty. This account-
ing issue is discussed more fully in Chapter 10.
 d. Polo does not recognize an asset because of the uncertainty of future benefits and mea-
surement uncertainty, as given in part a.
 e. Polo will recognize an asset, Land and Building, and measure it at $75 million. Polo must 
allocate the purchase price between the land and the building because the building is depre-
ciable and the land is not. Polo will likely base the allocation on appraisals for the land 
and building evaluated separately. Legal passage of title is not necessary to justify asset 
35 Direct-response marketing costs consist primarily of advertisements, including coupons for a firm’s products 
or services. U.S. GAAP concluded that firms can measure the probable future economic benefits of these costs 
with a sufficient degree of reliability, so the firm should recognize the costs as assets on the balance sheet. The 
firm then amortizes the asset over its expected period of future benefits; in the case of coupons, this service life 
is three months. (American Institute of Certified Public Accounting, Accounting Standards Executive Commit-
tee, Statement of Position 937, Reporting on Advertising Costs, 1994.)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

127
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
recognition. Polo has acquired the rights to use the land and building and can sustain those 
rights as long as it makes the required payments on the mortgage obligation.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 4.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Polo Ralph Lauren; liability recognition and measurement)
 a. Polo would record a liability, Advances from Customers, measured as the amount received 
on the sale of the gift cards.
 b. Polo would record a liability, Accounts Payable, measured as $16 million.
 c. Polo will recognize a liability, measured at the minimum point of the range, applying U.S. 
GAAP.
 d. At the time it received the payment, Polo recorded a liability for $20 million, Advances 
from Customers. Because the firm has already recognized a liability, and assuming the cus-
tomers are willing to wait for the delayed delivery, the firm need recognize no additional 
liability.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Balance sheet equation
Financing structure
Operating cycle
Current assets
Noncurrent assets
Current liabilities
Noncurrent liabilities
Asset definition
Asset recognition
Executory contract
Acquisition (historical) cost
Current replacement cost
Entry value
Net realizable value
Exit value
Fair value
Opportunity cost
Present value of future cash flows
Financial assets
Nonfinancial assets
Going concern
Realized
Recognized
Relevance
Reliability
Conservatism
Liability definition
Liability recognition
Mutually unexecuted contract, executory 
contract
Shareholders’ equity
Par, nominal, or stated value
Additional paid-in capital (APIC), share 
premium, capital contributed in excess 
of par value
Contributed capital, paid-in capital
Retained earnings
Accumulated deficit
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. Who might the accounting convention of conservatism hurt?
 3. One of the criteria for the recognition of an asset or a liability is that there be an exchange. 
What justification can you see for this requirement?
 4. Identify the underlying accounting principle that guides the items to include in the acquisi-
tion cost of inventories, equipment, buildings, and other similar assets. What is the ratio-
nale for this accounting principle?
 5. Accounting typically does not recognize either assets or liabilities for mutually unexecuted 
contracts. What justification can you see for this treatment?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
 6. Accounting treats cash discounts taken on the purchase of merchandise or equipment as 
a reduction in the amount recorded for the assets acquired. What justification can you see 
for this treatment?
 7. A group of investors owns an office building that it rents unfurnished to tenants. It pur-
chased the building five years previously from a construction company. At that time, it 
expected the building to have a useful life of 40 years. Indicate the procedures you might 
follow to ascertain the measurement amount for this building under each of the following 
measurement approaches:
a. Acquisition cost.
b. Adjusted acquisition cost (reduced for services already consumed).
c. Current replacement cost.
d. Net realizable value.
e. Fair value.
 8. Some of the assets of one firm correspond to the liabilities of another firm. For example, 
an account receivable on the seller’s balance sheet is an account payable on the buyer’s 
balance sheet. For each of the following items, indicate whether it is an asset or a liability 
and give the corresponding account title on the balance sheet of the other party to the 
transaction:
a. Advances from Customers.
b. Bonds Payable.
c. Interest Receivable.
d. Prepaid Insurance.
e. Rental Fees Received in Advance.
 9. For each of the following items, indicate whether the item meets all of the criteria in the 
definition of a liability. If so, how does the firm value it?
a. Interest accrued but not paid on a note.
b. Advances from customers for goods and services to be delivered later.
c. Confirmed orders from customers for goods and services to be delivered later.
d. Product warranties.
e. Damages the company must pay if it loses a pending lawsuit.
f. Contractual promises to purchase specific quantities of natural gas for each of the next 
10 years.
g. Promises by an airline to provide flights in the future in exchange for miles flown, if 
customers accumulate a certain number of miles at regular fares.
10. What is the amount of the liability that the company recognizes in each of the following 
independent cases?
a. A plaintiff files a lawsuit against the company. The probability is 90% that the company 
will lose. If it loses, the amount of the loss will most likely be $100,000.
b. A cereal company issues coupons that can be exchanged for boxes of cereal. It issues 1 
million coupons that promise the retailer who redeems the coupons $1 per coupon. The 
probability of redemption of any one coupon is 9%.
11. The word probable appears in the definitions of assets and liabilities and in the recognition 
criteria for liabilities with uncertain amount and/or timing.
a. What is the meaning of probable as used in the definitions of assets and liabilities?
b. How does the meaning of probable as used in the recognition criteria for liabilities with 
uncertain amount and/or timing differ between U.S. GAAP and IFRS?
EXERCISES
12. Balance sheet formats. The following information is based on the balance sheet of Aracel, 
a Brazilian manufacturer of paper pulp, for Year 6. Aracel applies U.S. GAAP and reports 
its results in thousands of U.S. dollars. (Adapted from the financial statements of Aracruz 
Celulose.)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

129
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $  202,704
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
132,782
Other Long-Term Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
350,761
Property, Plant, and Equipment, net  . . . . . . . . . . . .  2,151,212
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1,293,301
Cash and Short-Term Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
579,643
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
192,035
Common Stock (no par). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
295,501
Preferred Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
614,496
Other Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
451,757
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
286,819
Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1,155,050
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
285,795
a. Prepare a balance sheet for Aracel for Year 6 assuming the firm follows U.S. GAAP.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Aracel for Year 6 assuming the firm follows IFRS.
13. Balance sheet formats. The following information is based on the fiscal Year 7 balance 
sheet of Delicious Foods Group, a Belgian food distributor. Delicious Foods applies IFRS 
and reports its results in millions of euros. Prepare a balance sheet for Delicious Foods that 
uses a format common to firms reporting under U.S. GAAP. (Adapted from the financial 
statements of Delhaize Group.)
Assets
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€2,445.7
Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
552.1
Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,383.1
Other Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   244.0
 
 
 
€6,624.9
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€1,262.0
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
564.6
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
121.5
Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   248.9
 
 
 
€2,197.0
 
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€8,821.9
Liabilities and Equity
Share Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€   50.1
Share Premium  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,698.9
Retained Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,355.3
Other Reserves and Adjustments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (1,428.3)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€3,676.0
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€1,911.7
Obligations Under Finance Leases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
595.9
Provisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
207.2
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   210.4
 
Total Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€2,925.2
Short-Term Borrowings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€   41.5
Long-Term Debt, Current Portion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
108.9
Obligations Under Finance Lease, Current Portion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
39.0
Provisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
41.8
Income Tax Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
58.7
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,435.8
Accrued Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
375.7
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   119.3
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€2,220.7
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€5,145.9
 
Total Liabilities and Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€8,821.9
14. Classifying financial statement accounts. The balance sheet or income statement classifies 
various items in one of the following ways:
CA—Current assets
NA—Noncurrent assets
CL—Current liabilities
NL—Noncurrent liabilities
CC—Contributed capital
RE—Retained earnings
NI—Income statement item (revenue or expense)
X—Item generally does not appear on a balance sheet or an income statement
 
Using the abbreviations in the previous list, indicate the classification of each of the fol-
lowing items under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. If the classifications differ between U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS, indicate what that difference would be.
a. Factory.
b. Interest revenue.
c. Treasury shares repurchased by a corporation.
d. Research and development expenditures.
e. Automobiles used by sales staff.
f. Cash on hand.
g. Promise to a vendor to buy inventory from it next period.
h. Commissions earned by sales staff.
i. Supplies inventory.
j. Note payable, due in three months.
k. Increase in fair value of land held.
l. Dividends declared.
m. Income taxes owed to state or city government.
n. Note payable, due in six years.
o. The portion of the note payable in part n that is due next year.
15. Balance sheet relations. Jennings Group, a Malaysian investment management company, 
reported the following data for four recent years. Jennings applies Malaysian accounting 
standards and reports its results in millions of ringgit (RM). Compute the missing balance 
sheet amounts for each of the four years. In answering this question, assume that Jennings 
uses U.S. GAAP. (Adapted from the financial statements of Genting Group.)
Year 7
Year 6
Year 5
Year 4
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
?
RM18,717.4
RM11,289.1
RM9,713.9
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . .
RM21,537.3
16,666.9
9,002.0 
?
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
?
28,224.7 
? 
?
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
?
4,351.3
1,494.2
1,755.2
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,999.2 
? 
?
6,882.6
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . .
5,721.7 
? 
?
3,540.7
Total Liabilities and 
 
Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . .
30,178.9 
?
18,491.3 
?
16. Balance sheet relations. Selected balance sheet amounts for Kyoto Corporation, a Japanese 
construction firm, are shown in the following table for four recent years. Kyoto applies 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

131
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Japanese accounting standards and reports its results in billions of yen (¥). Compute 
the missing balance sheet amounts for each of the four years. In answering this ques-
tion, assume that Kyoto uses IFRS. (Adapted from the financial statements of Kajima 
Corporation.)
Year 10
Year 9
Year 8
Year 7
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥2,107
?
?
¥1,870
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . .
437
?
¥  411
467
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
¥  773
703
?
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
1,583
?
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,318
1,148
?
1,172
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
298
220
?
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,323
1,133
?
1,110
Total Liabilities and 
 
Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
?
?
17. Balance sheet relations. Selected data based on the balance sheet amounts for Finmest 
Corporation, a Finnish paper company, for four recent years appear in the following table. 
Finmest applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of euros (€). Compute the missing 
balance sheet amounts for each of the four years. (Adapted from the financial statements 
of Metso Corporation.)
Year 11
Year 10
Year 9
Year 8
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€3,357
€2,995
?a
€2,097
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
1,973
?
?
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
?
?
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
€3,904
?
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?c
2,610
1,802
1,466
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . .
957
?
?
1,109
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . .
?
?
1,292
?
Contributed Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
711
?
634
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
910
?b
553
361
Total Liabilities and 
 
Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . .
5,254
?
?
?
aCurrent Assets − Current Liabilities = €675.
bNet income for 2006 is €252 and dividends are €66.
cCurrent Assets − Current Liabilities = €651.
18. Asset and liability recognition and measurement. After winning America’s Next Top Model, 
Danielle Evans signed a contract with Ford Models, was named a spokesmodel for Cover-
Girl, and signed a contract for a photo spread in Elle magazine. Although Ford did not 
disclose the details of the contract, typical terms would provide for payments of $500,000 
for each of the next three years. Assume that the present value of these payments is $1.2 
million. At the time that Danielle signs the contract, Ford Models also provides her with 
a BMW M3 convertible sports car, valued at $70,000. How should Ford Models treat this 
contract at the time of signing?
19. Asset recognition and measurement. Duke University, a U.S. university, provides tuition 
support for up to eight semesters of undergraduate education for up to two children of 
faculty and staff of the university. To qualify for this tuition benefit, the faculty or staff 
member must have at least seven contiguous years of full-time service and be a full-time 
employee when the benefits are received. Duke estimates that this tuition benefit helps 
retain and attract employees. How should Duke treat its expenditures on tuition benefits 
each year?
20. Asset measurement. Assume that Jennifer’s Juice (JJ), an organic food retailer in the United 
States, recently purchased a new refrigeration system for its Chapel Hill, North Carolina, 
store. JJ paid $1.3 million for the refrigeration unit and paid an additional $120,000 to 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
modify the unit to meet its specific needs. JJ paid $55,000 for the transportation and instal-
lation of the unit, plus $48,000 for an annual insurance premium for the first year, which 
begins next month. Finally, assume that JJ hired a refrigeration technician, who is charged 
with the maintenance of the unit; that technician’s annual salary is $80,000. How much 
should JJ record as the acquisition cost of the refrigeration unit? Describe the treatment 
of any of the above amounts that you did not include in the acquisition cost of the unit.
21. Recognition of a loss contingency. Consider the following hypothetical series of events. 
While shopping in a Nordstrom store on July 5, 2013, a customer slips on the escalator 
and falls, sustaining back and neck injuries. On January 15, 2014, the customer sues Nord-
strom for $1 million. The case comes to trial on April 30, 2014. The jury renders its verdict 
on June 15, 2014, and finds Nordstrom liable for negligence. The jury grants a damage 
award of $400,000 to the customer. Nordstrom, on June 25, 2014, appeals the decision to 
a higher court, which rules on November 1, 2014, that the trial court should retry the case. 
The trial court retries the case beginning March 21, 2015. Another jury, on April 20, 2015, 
again finds Nordstrom liable for negligence and awards $500,000. On May 15, 2015, the 
store pays the $500,000 judgment. Nordstrom applies U.S. GAAP.
a. When, if at all, should Nordstrom recognize a liability from these events? If Nordstrom 
recognizes a liability, what is the amount? Explain your reasoning.
b. How would your response change if Nordstrom were applying IFRS?
22. Asset recognition and measurement. The following hypothetical transactions relate to Nestlé 
S.A., the Swiss chocolate manufacturer. Indicate whether each transaction immediately 
gives rise to an asset of the company under U.S. GAAP and separately, under IFRS. If 
Nestlé recognizes an asset, state the account title, the amount, and the classification of the 
asset on the balance sheet as either a current asset or a noncurrent asset. Nestlé reports its 
results in millions of Swiss francs (CHF).
a. Nestlé invests CHF800 million in a government bond. The bond has a maturity value 
of CHF1,000 million in five years, and Nestlé intends to hold the bond to maturity.
b. Two months prior to its year-end, Nestlé pays its insurer CHF240 million to cover 
annual premiums on its European plants.
c. Nestlé pays a developer in the Czech Republic CHF6 million for an option to purchase 
a tract of land on which it intends to build a warehouse to serve the eastern European 
markets. The price of the land is CHF450 million.
d. Nestlé signs a four-year employment agreement with its chief executive officer for a 
package valued at CHF17.4 million per year. Of this amount, CHF3.1 million is base 
salary; the rest is expected bonus and deferred compensation arrangements. The con-
tract period begins next month.
e. Nestlé spends CHF80 million on research and development (R&D) related to a new, 
low-calorie chocolate; 60% of the total amount was spent on pure research, the rest on 
development. The R&D is successful, and the firm is able to acquire a patent on the new 
formula. The cost of filing the paperwork and other procedures to obtain the patent is 
CHF0.5 million.
f. Nestlé received notice that a cocoa supplier had shipped by freight cocoa beans invoiced 
at CHF700 million with payment due in 30 days. The supplier retains title to the cocoa 
beans until received by Nestlé.
23. Asset recognition and measurement. The following hypothetical transactions relate to 
Ryanair Holdings, Plc. (Ryanair), an Irish airline. Indicate whether each transaction imme-
diately gives rise to an asset under U.S. GAAP and, separately, IFRS. If Ryanair recog-
nizes an asset, state the account title, the amount, and the classification of the asset on the 
balance sheet as either a current asset or a noncurrent asset. Ryanair reports its results in 
thousands of euros.
a. Ryanair’s board of directors decides to purchase 10 Boeing 777 airplanes, costing €640 
million each.
b. Ryanair places an order with Boeing for 10 Boeing 777 airplanes, costing €640 million 
each.
c. Ryanair pays Boeing €60 million as a deposit on the aircraft it ordered in part b.
d. Ryanair spends €50 million to obtain landing rights for the next five years at Beijing 
Capital International Airport.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

133
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
e. Ryanair writes a check for €12 million and assumes a mortgage from its bank for 
another €65 million to purchase new ground equipment costing €77 million.
f. Ryanair issues common stock with a market value of €160 million to acquire used air-
craft from a bankrupt regional airline. The carrying value of the equipment on the 
bankrupt airline’s books is €75 million.
24. Liability recognition and measurement. The following transactions relate to Hana Micro-
electronic Public Company Limited (Hana Microelectronic), an electronics and semicon-
ductor firm headquartered in Thailand. Indicate whether each transaction immediately 
gives rise to a liability under U.S. GAAP and, separately, IFRS. If accounting recognizes 
a liability, state the account title, the amount, and the classification of the liability on the 
balance sheet as either a current liability or a noncurrent liability. Hana Microelectronic 
reports its results in millions of baht (Bt).
a. Hana Microelectronic agrees to purchase land and a manufacturing plant from Fujitsu 
Limited for Bt3,000 million.
b. Hana Microelectronic receives a check for Bt168 million from a customer for the deliv-
ery of merchandise that Hana Microelectronic will produce next month.
c. Refer to the event in part b, except now assume that Hana Microelectronic will deliver 
half of the merchandise next month and the remainder three years from now.
d. During the year, Hana Microelectronic issues 6 million shares of Bt1 par value common 
stock, for Bt62 million.
e. Hana Microelectronic borrows Bt24 million from a local bank, payable in equal install-
ments over the next three years and bearing interest at the annual rate of 9%.
f. Hana Microelectronic signs a contract to purchase at least Bt45 million of merchandise 
from a particular supplier over the next two years.
g. Refer to part f, and assume Hana Microelectronic places an order for Bt15 million of 
this merchandise.
25. Liability recognition and measurement. The following hypothetical events relate to the Ber-
lin Philharmonic. Indicate whether each transaction immediately gives rise to a liability 
under U.S. GAAP and, separately, IFRS. If the Berlin Philharmonic recognizes a liability, 
state the account title, the amount, and the classification of the liability on the balance 
sheet as either a current liability or a noncurrent liability. The Berlin Philharmonic reports 
its results in euros.
a. The Berlin Philharmonic receives €3,040,000 for season tickets sold for next season.
b. The Berlin Philharmonic places an order with a printing company totaling €185,000 for 
symphony performance programs for next season.
c. The Berlin Philharmonic receives the programs ordered in part b, along with an invoice 
for €185,000.
d. The Berlin Philharmonic receives notice from its attorneys that a loyal customer attend-
ing a concert last season and sitting in the first row of the symphony hall has sued the 
Berlin Philharmonic for €10 million, claiming hearing loss. The customer normally sits 
farther back, but staff asked her to move forward for this particular concert because of 
damage to the regular seat.
e. The Berlin Philharmonic signs a three-year contract with its first violinist at a salary of 
€140,000 per year.
f. The Berlin Philharmonic signs a five-year contract with Sir Simon Rattle, present con-
ductor of the Philharmonic, to be the spokesman for the symphony at the end of his 
current contract, in 2012. Under the terms of the deal, the Berlin Philharmonic will pay 
compensation of €2 million a year to Sir Simon, beginning in 2012. Sir Simon will earn 
this compensation regardless of whether the Berlin Philharmonic asks him to perform 
any speaking engagements each year.
26. Recognition and measurement of a loss contingency. Consider the following hypothetical 
scenario for Royal Dutch Shell (Shell), a Netherlands-based oil and gas firm. One of Shell’s 
oil rig platforms collapsed, creating damage to the seafloor as well as environmental dam-
age to surrounding ocean water. Given the following additional information, what amount, 
if any should Shell recognize as a liability were it applying U.S. GAAP and, separately, 
IFRS? Shell reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
a. Engineers who have examined the damaged site believe that much of the damage will 
naturally resolve itself, leading them to conclude that there is a 90% chance that damages 
are zero. They further estimate there is a 10% chance that the forces of nature will not 
resolve the damages, which will require additional intervention at a cost of $10 million.
b. Upon further analysis, the engineers in part a have revised their assessments. They now 
believe there is a 51% chance that damages will be $5 million, and a 49% chance that 
damages will be zero.
c. Environmentalists who have examined the damaged site believe that the damage is exten-
sive and requires immediate cleanup, with the following range of damage estimates: $25 
million (probability 20%); $300 million (probability 35%); and $4,000 million (probabil-
ity 45%).
d. Upon further analysis, the environmentalists in part c have revised their assessments. 
They now believe there is an 85% chance that damages will be $5,000 million and a 15% 
chance that they will be zero.
PROBLEMS
27. Effect of recording errors on the balance sheet equation. Magyar Telekom is a Hungarian 
telecommunications company. The company applies IFRS and reports its results in mil-
lions of Hungarian forints (HUF). For each of the following hypothetical transactions or 
events facing Magyar Telekom, indicate the effects on assets, liabilities, and shareholders’ 
equity of failing to record or recording incorrectly the transaction or event. Use the nota-
tion O/S (overstated), U/S (understated), or No (no effect). For example, Magyar Telekom’s 
failure to record the issuance of common stock for HUF10,000 cash would be shown as 
follows:
■ 
Assets—U/S HUF10,000.
■ 
Liabilities—No.
■ 
Shareholders’ equity—U/S HUF10,000.
(1) Magyar Telekom ordered HUF5,600 million of inventory from a supplier but did not 
record anything in its accounts.
(2) Magyar Telekom received the merchandise in transaction (1) and recorded it by debit-
ing Inventory and crediting Accounts Payable for HUF6,500 million.
(3) Magyar Telekom acquired new equipment costing HUF17,000 million by paying 
HUF2,500 million in cash and signing a note payable for the remainder of the pur-
chase price. It recorded the acquisition by debiting Equipment for HUF2,500 million 
and crediting Cash for HUF2,500 million.
(4) The firm paid the HUF36,000 million annual insurance premium on its headquarters 
building by debiting Property and crediting Cash for HUF36,000 million. The insur-
ance period begins next month.
(5) Magyar Telekom won a contract to supply telecommunications services to a customer 
next year. The value of the contract is HUF25,000 million. The customer delivered 
a check to Magyar Telekom in the amount of HUF6,000 million. The firm made no 
journal entries for these events.
(6) The firm issued 2 million shares of its HUF100 par value common stock when the 
shares traded in the stock market at HUF700 per share. It issued the shares to acquire 
land. It recorded the transaction by debiting Land and crediting Common Stock for 
HUF200 million.
(7) The firm signed a three-year employment agreement with its chairperson for an annual 
salary of HUF6.6 million. The employment period begins next month. The firm did 
not record anything in its accounts related to this agreement.
28. Effect of recording errors on the balance sheet equation. Siderúrgica Venezolana “Sivensa,” 
S.A., is a Venezuelan steel and metalworking company. Assume that during a recent year, 
Sivensa recorded various transactions with the following journal entries. The company 
applies IFRS and reports its results in thousands of U.S. dollars. Using the notation O/S 
(overstated), U/S (understated), or No (no effect), indicate the effects on assets, liabilities, 
and shareholders’ equity of any errors in Sivensa’s recording of each of these transactions. 
For example, if Sivensa recorded the issue of $10,000 of common stock by debiting Cash 
and crediting Bonds Payable, the effects of the error are as follows:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

135
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
■ 
Assets—No.
■ 
Liabilities—O/S $10,000.
■ 
Shareholders’ equity—U/S $10,000.
(1) 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+10,000
–2,000
–8,000
Sivensa acquired equipment costing $10,000 by paying $2,000 cash and 
signing a note payable for $8,000. It debited Equipment, credited Cash for 
$2,000, and credited Accounts Receivable for $8,000.
(2) 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+4,000
+4,000
Sivensa placed an order for equipment valued at $4,000 that it will receive 
next month. Sivensa made a $1,000 deposit when it made the order and 
promised to pay the rest on delivery of the equipment. Sivensa debited 
Equipment for $4,000 and credited Notes Payable for $4,000.
(3) 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+800
–800
Sivensa received $800 as a deposit from a customer and debited Cash and 
credited Accounts Receivable for $800. The customer did not owe Sivensa 
any amounts at the time of this transaction.
(4) 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Rent Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
Sivensa signed a rental agreement for warehouse space for a one-year period 
beginning next month. The monthly rental fee of $1,000 is due on the first 
day of each month. Sivensa debited Prepaid Rent and credited Rent Payable 
for $1,000.
(5) 
 Sivensa exchanged common stock with a market value of $2,500 for a patent and made no journal entry to 
record the exchange.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
(6) 
Merchandise Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,900
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,900
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+4,900
–4,900
Sivensa acquired $4,900 of office equipment for cash. It debited Inventory 
for $4,900 and credited Cash for $4,900.
29. Balance sheet format, terminology, and accounting methods. Exhibit 4.1 presents the bal-
ance sheet of Hathway Atlantic Airways Limited (Hathway), a Hong Kong airline, for the 
Hathway Atlantic Airways Limited
Balance Sheets
(amounts in millions of Hong Kong dollars [HKD])
(Problem 29)
Year ended December 31,
Year 11
Year 10
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
Fixed Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
HKD 62,388
HKD 57,602
Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,782
 
7,749
Investments in Associates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,054
 
8,826
Other Long-Term Receivables and Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,519
 
3,406
 
83,743
 
77,583
Long-Term Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(40,323)
 
(33,956)
Related Pledged Security Deposits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,833
 
8,164
Net Long-Term Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(32,490)
 
(25,792)
Retirement Benefit Obligations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(268)
 
(170)
Deferred Taxation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(6,771)
 
(6,508)
 
(39,529)
 
(32,470)
Net Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
44,214
 
45,113
Current Assets and Liabilities
Stock   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
882
 
789
Trade and Other Receivables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11,376
 
8,735
Liquid Funds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
21,649
 
15,624
 
33,907
 
25,148
Current Portion of Long-Term Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(4,788)
 
(7,503)
Related Pledged Security Deposits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
910
 
1,352
Net Current Portion of Long-Term Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(3,878)
 
(6,151)
Trade and Other Payables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(14,787)
 
(10,999)
Unearned Transportation Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(6,254)
 
(4,671)
Taxation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
(2,475)
 
(2,902)
 
(27,394)
 
(24,723)
Net Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,513
 
425
Net Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
HKD 50,727
HKD 45,538
CAPITAL AND RESERVES
Share Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
HKD 
788
HKD 
787
Reserves  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
49,761
 
44,599
Funds Attributable to Hathway Atlantic Shareholders  . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,549
 
45,386
Minority Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
178
 
152
Total Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
HKD 50,727
HKD 45,538
EXHIBIT 4.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

137
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
fiscal years ended December 31, Years 11 and 10. This balance sheet uses the terminology, 
format, and accounting methods of Hong Kong Financial Reporting Standards (HKFRS). 
Hathway reports results in millions of Hong Kong dollars (HKD). (Adapted from the 
financial statements of Cathay Pacific Airways Limited.)
a. Prepare a balance sheet for Hathway for each year, following the format and terminol-
ogy commonly used by firms that apply U.S. GAAP.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Hathway for each year, following the format and terminol-
ogy commonly used by firms that apply IFRS.
30. Balance sheet format, terminology, and accounting methods. Exhibit 4.2 presents the balance 
sheet prepared by Infotech Limited, an Indian information technology firm, for Years 12 
and 11. Infotech applies accounting standards issued by the Institute of Chartered Accoun-
tants of India and reports its results in millions of rupees (Rs. Crore). (Adapted from the 
financial statements of Infosys Limited.)
a. Prepare a balance sheet for Infotech for both years, following the format and terminol-
ogy commonly used by firms that apply U.S. GAAP.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Infotech for both years, following the format and terminol-
ogy commonly used by firms that apply IFRS.
31. Balance sheet format, terminology, and accounting methods. Exhibit 4.3 presents the balance 
sheet prepared by Svenson, a Swedish telecommunications firm, for Years 7 and 6. Svenson 
applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of Swedish kronor (SEK). In addition to 
the items reported in Svenson’s balance sheet, assume the following hypothetical informa-
tion is available to you. (Adapted from the financial statements of Ericsson.)
■ 
In Year 7 Svenson revalued land with an acquisition cost of SEK300 million upward, 
to its current fair value of SEK1,200 million.
Infotech Limited
Balance Sheet
For Years 12 and 11
(amounts in millions of Rs. Crore) (Problem 30)
Year 12
Year 11
SOURCES OF FUNDS
Shareholders’ Funds
 
Share capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rs 
286
Rs 
286
 
Reserves and surplus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 13,204
 10,876
Rs 13,490
Rs 11,162
APPLICATION OF FUNDS
Fixed Assets
 
Original cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rs 4,508
Rs 3,889
 
Less: Accumulated depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,837
 
1,739
 
 
Net book value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,671
 
2,150
 
Add: Capital work-in-progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,260
 
957
 
3,931
 
3,107
Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
964
839
Deferred Tax Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
99
79
Current Assets, Loans and Advances
 
Sundry debtors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,093
 
2,292
 
Cash and bank balances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,429
5,470
 
Loans and advances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,705
 
1,199
 12,227
 
8,961
Less: Current Liabilities and Provisions
 
Current liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,483
 
1,162
 
Provisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,248
 
662
Net Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,496
 
7,137
Rs 13,490
Rs 11,162
EXHIBIT 4.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
■ 
In Year 7 Svenson wrote down the value of equipment, with a net carrying value of 
SEK2,400 million, to its fair value of SEK1,600 million.
■ 
Included in current provisions for Year 7 is the estimated loss on a lawsuit that a com-
petitor filed, alleging patent infringement. Svenson estimates the following range of 
Svenson
Balance Sheet
For Years 7 and 6
(amounts in millions of Swedish kronor [SEK]) (Problem 31)
December 31,
Year 7
Year 6
ASSETS
Noncurrent assets
Intangible assets
 
Capitalized development costs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SEK  3,661
SEK  4,995
 
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22,826
6,824
 
Intellectual property rights, brands, and other intangible assets. . . . . .
23,958
15,649
Property, plant, and equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9,304
7,881
Financial assets
 
Equity in joint ventures and associated companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,903
9,409
 
Other investments in shares and participations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
738
721
 
Customer financing, noncurrent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,012
1,921
 
Other financial assets, noncurrent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,918
2,409
 
Deferred tax assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
11,690
 
13,564
87,010
63,373
Current assets
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22,475
21,470
Trade receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60,492
51,070
Customer financing, current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,362
1,735
Other current receivables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15,062
15,012
Short-term investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29,406
32,311
Cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
28,310
 
29,969
 
158,107
 
151,567
Total assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SEK245,117
SEK214,940
EQUITY AND LIABILITIES
Equity
Stockholders’ equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SEK134,112
SEK120,113
Minority interest in equity of subsidiaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
940
 
782
135,052
120,895
Noncurrent liabilities
Post-employment benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,188
6,968
Provisions, noncurrent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
368
602
Deferred tax liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,799
382
Borrowings, noncurrent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21,320
12,904
Other noncurrent liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
1,714
 
2,868
32,389
23,724
Current liabilities
Provisions, current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9,358
13,280
Borrowings, current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,896
1,680
Trade payables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17,427
18,183
Other current liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
44,995
 
37,178
 
77,676
 
70,321
Total equity and liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SEK245,117
SEK214,940
EXHIBIT 4.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

139
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
outcomes for this lawsuit: 10% chance of damages of SEK6,000 million, 10% chance 
of damages of SEK2,400 million, 30% chance of damages of SEK500 million, 10% 
chance of damages of SEK40 million, and 40% chance of zero damages.
Prepare a balance sheet for Svenson for Year 7, following the format, terminology, and 
accounting methods required by U.S. GAAP. Ignore any income tax effects of any revi-
sions to reported amounts.
32. Balance sheet format, terminology, and accounting methods. Exhibit 4.4 presents the balance 
sheet of Paul Loren Company for Years 10 and 9. This balance sheet uses the terminology, 
Paul Loren Company
Balance Sheets
For Years 10 and 9
(amounts in millions of US$) (Problem 32)
Year 10
Year 9
ASSETS
Current Assets
 
Cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 $   563.1
 $  481.2
 
Short-term investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
584.1
 
338.7
 
Accounts receivable, net of allowances of $206.1 and $190.9 million  . . .
 
381.9
 
474.9
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
504.0
 
525.1
 
Deferred tax assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
103.0
 
101.8
 
Prepaid expenses and other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
139.7
 
135.0
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2,275.8
 2,056.7
Noncurrent investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
75.5
 
29.7
Property and equipment, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
697.2
 
651.6
Deferred tax assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
101.9
 
102.8
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
986.6
 
966.4
Intangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
363.2
 
348.9
Other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
148.7
 
200.4
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 $ 4,648.9
 $4,356.5
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
 
Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 $   149.8
 $  165.9
 
Income tax payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
37.8
 
35.9
 
Accrued expenses and other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
559.7
 
472.3
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
747.3
 
674.1
Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
747.3
 
674.1
Deferred Tax Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
282.1
 
406.4
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
126.0
 
154.8
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,902.7
 1,909.4
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY:
 
 Class A common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 75.7 million and 
 
72.3 million shares issued; 56.1 million and 55.9 million shares 
 
outstanding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
0.8
 
0.7
 
 Class B common stock, par value $0.01 per share; 42.1 million and 
 
43.3 million shares issued and outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
0.4
 
0.4
Additional paid-in capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,243.8
 1,108.4
Retained earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2,544.9
 2,177.5
Treasury stock, Class A, at cost (19.6 million and 16.4 million shares)  . . . .
(1,197.7)
(966.7)
Accumulated other comprehensive income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
154.0
 
126.8
Total Stockholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2,746.2
 2,447.1
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 $ 4,648.9
 $4,356.5
EXHIBIT 4.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140
Chapter 4 
Balance Sheet: Presenting and Analyzing Resources and Financing
format, and accounting methods of U.S. GAAP, and Paul Loren reports results in millions 
of U.S. dollars. (Adapted from the financial statements of Polo Ralph Lauren.)
 
 
In addition to the items reported in Paul Loren’s balance sheet, assume the following 
hypothetical information is available to you:
■ 
In Year 10 Paul Loren revalued a building with an acquisition cost of $200 million 
downward, to its current fair value of $182 million.
■ 
In Year 10 Paul Loren wrote up the value of inventory, with a carrying value of $135 
million, to its fair value of $165 million.
■ 
Included in commitments and contingencies for Year 10 is a lawsuit filed against Paul 
Loren for breach of contract. Paul Loren estimates the following range of outcomes 
for this lawsuit: 70% chance of damages of $100 million, 20% chance of damages of 
$500 million, and 10% chance of damages of $1 billion.
a. Prepare a balance sheet for Paul Loren for Year 10, following the format, terminology, 
and accounting methods required by U.S. GAAP. Ignore any income tax effects of any 
revisions to reported amounts.
b. How, if at all, would your answer to part a differ if Paul Loren used IFRS?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

T
he income statement reports net income (or net loss) for a time period, such as a quarter or 
a year. Net income (also called earnings or profit) equals revenues minus expenses plus 
gains minus losses.1 This chapter focuses on revenues and expenses. Revenues reflect the increase 
in shareholders’ equity resulting from the increase in net assets (assets less liabilities) that a firm 
receives from its customers when it sells goods or renders services. Expenses reflect the decrease in 
shareholders’ equity resulting from the decrease in the net assets consumed in generating revenues. 
As a measure of performance, revenues reflect the value of goods sold and services rendered by 
a firm, and expenses reflect the efforts required to create and deliver those goods and services. 
Users of financial statements analyze net income because it summarizes how well a firm trans-
forms efforts (expenses) into salable output (revenues), with larger net income indicating better 
performance.
This chapter considers the measurement principles and accounting procedures that underlie 
the recognition of revenues and expenses. Our discussion focuses on simple revenue recognition.2 
We also discuss typical ways income statements classify and display items. We conclude by con-
trasting comprehensive income with net income.
UNDERLYING CONCEPTS AND TERMINOLOGY
Chapter 3 introduces the income statement, one of the principal financial statements. The income 
statement is also called the statement of operations, the statement of operating activity, or the state-
ment of profit and loss. Unlike the balance sheet, which displays assets, liabilities, and sharehold-
ers’ equity at a point in time, the income statement reflects the results of operations during an 
accounting period. The accounting period is the time period between the beginning balance sheet 
and the ending balance sheet. For example, Exhibit 1.2 shows Great Deal’s income statement for 
 1 The FASB uses the term earnings in Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 5, “Recognition and Measure-
ment in Financial Statements of Business Enterprises,” 1984, for example, in par. 33–44. The IASB uses the term 
profit in International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” revised 2003, for example, in 
par. 82–88. Many preparers of financial statements use net income to refer to this concept, and we will follow this 
convention with the understanding that net income, profit, and earnings all refer to the same item.
 2 Chapter 8 contains a more detailed discussion of the criteria firms use to decide when to recognize revenue (timing) 
and how much revenue to recognize (measurement).
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Income Statement: 
Reporting the Results 
of Operating Activities
C h a p t e r
5
1. Understand the classifications of rev-
enues and expenses on the income 
statement.
2. Understand the timing of revenue 
and expense recognition and their 
measurement.
3. Understand the concept of comprehen-
sive income and the relation between 
net income and comprehensive income.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

142
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
the years ending February 27, 2013, February 28, 2012, and February 27, 2011. The income 
statement reflects changes in net assets during the one-year accounting period between the 
two balance sheet dates. Stated differently, the income statement presents a summary measure 
of the increments from revenues and the decrements from expenses that occurred during the 
accounting period. In contrast, the balance sheet displays the levels of assets, liabilities, and 
shareholders’ equity as of the date of the report. The equation linking the balance sheet and 
income statement (discussed in Chapter 3) captures this distinction:
Retained Earnings 
(beginning)
+ Net Income −Dividends = Retained Earnings 
(ending)
or
Retained Earnings 
(ending) 
−
Retained Earnings
(beginning)
= Net Income −Dividends
or
Change in Retained Earnings
= Net Income −Dividends
This equation shows that the change in Retained Earnings equals the change in net assets, 
which is equal to net income adjusted for dividends. For the year ended February 27, 2013, 
Great Deal reports net income of $1,317 million and dividends of $234 million. Using the above 
equation, Great Deal’s net income minus dividends for fiscal 2012 was $1,083 million (= $1,317 
million – $234 million), exactly the change in retained earnings between fiscal 2012 and fiscal 
2011 calculated from its balance sheets ($1,083 million = $5,797 million – $4,714 million).
INCOME STATEMENT DISPLAY
Income statements items are grouped by broad categories of revenues and expenses. The 
income statement begins with revenues followed by expenses. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require-
ments for the presentation of income statements are similar, except that:
■ 
Other than separating revenues from expenses, U.S. GAAP provides little guidance about 
which items the firm must separately display or their order. IFRS requires separate display 
of revenues, financing costs (for example, interest expense), income tax expense, profit or 
loss for the period, and certain other items.
■ 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the separate display of items whose size, nature, or 
frequency of occurrence is necessary for accurately portraying performance.
■ 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require separate display of items related to discontinued 
operations,3 as well as the portion of profit or loss attributable to the minority interest.4
■ 
IFRS permits firms to present expenses by either nature or function. U.S. GAAP is silent 
on this issue, but the Securities and Exchange Commission requires registrants to classify 
expenses by function.5
To illustrate differences in income statement formats, we examine the income statements of 
Great Deal (Exhibit 1.2 in Chapter 1) and Thames (Exhibit 1.6 in Chapter 1).
REPORTING REVENUES
Income statements begin with revenues. For this reason, analysts often refer to revenue growth 
as “top-line” growth. In Chapter 3 we define revenues (or sales, sales revenues) as the inflow 
 3 Chapter 17 discusses discontinued operations.
 4 Chapter 14 discusses minority interest in more detail. Authoritative guidance uses the term “noncontrolling 
interest,” but in practice many firms use the term “minority interest.”
 5 All of the income statements presented in this textbook display expenses by function, such as administrative 
expense or cost of goods sold. Classification by nature groups expenses by their purpose—for example, com-
pensation expense or insurance expense.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

143
Income Statement Display
of net assets (for example, cash or receivables) received in exchange for providing goods and 
services. U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow significant latitude with respect to whether and how to 
aggregate revenues from multiple business lines (often referred to as segments) on the income 
statement. There is no requirement that a firm with multiple segments separately disclose on the 
income statement the revenues of each segment.6 Great Deal’s income statement for the fiscal 
year ended February 27, 2013, reports revenues of $49,694 million. Thames’s income statement 
for the year ended December 31, 2013, reports revenues of €12,881.5 million.
REPORTING EXPENSES
Immediately below revenues, Great Deal and Thames report information about the cost of 
sales. Cost of goods sold (cost of services rendered) is the cost of products sold and services pro-
vided during the period. Great Deal reports cost of sales of $37,534 million; Thames reports 
cost of goods sold of €10,633.4 million.
Common terminology refers to the difference between sales and cost of sales as 
gross  margin or gross profit. Great Deal reports gross profit of $12,160 million. Thames does 
not report this number, but we can calculate it to be €2,248.1 million (= €12,881.5 million – 
€10,633.4 million). Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS defines gross margin or requires its display 
on the income statement. However, because both sets of accounting standards require separate 
display of sales and cost of sales, you can always calculate the gross margin.
After cost of sales, the income statement typically shows deductions for other 
operating  expenses. In addition to cost of sales, two common types of operating expenses are 
selling, general, and administrative expenses (SG&A) and research and development expenses 
(R&D). Great Deal reports SG&A expenses of $9,873 million, whereas Thames reports SG&A 
expenses of €1,445.3 (the sum of marketing and selling expenses of €901.9 and general and 
administrative expenses of €543.4 million), as well as R&D expenses of €550.5 million.
Subtracting total operating expenses from sales yields operating profit or operating income. 
Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS requires separate display of operating profit. In addition, nei-
ther U.S. GAAP nor IFRS defines operating in the context of the income statement, so there 
is no list of items considered operating expenses.7 Items classified as operating expenses reflect 
management’s judgment. Great Deal and Thames report operating income of $2,235 million 
and €51.8 million, respectively.
Other (non-operating) items follow the reporting of operating expenses or operat-
ing profit. Most firms reporting under U.S. GAAP separately report financing costs, such as 
interest expense. IFRS requires the separate display of financing costs. Both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS require the separate display of significant items that do not arise from the firm’s core 
businesses. For example, selling the headquarters building might generate a gain that increases 
income. Selling the headquarters building is not part of the core business, so it would not be 
included in revenues. Instead, it would be included with other noncore items and reported 
below operating income, probably as Other Income.
Great Deal’s list of non-operating items includes interest expense of $94 million (which 
reduces income) and investment and other income of $54 million (which increases income). 
Thames’s non-operating items include interest income and interest expense, other financial 
income and expenses, and one-time gains and losses. The net effect of all non-operating items 
reduces Thames’s profit by €476.1 million.
Subtracting non-operating expenses from operating income yields profit (or income) before 
income taxes. Multiplying this amount by the tax rate yields the amount of income tax expense. 
Subtracting income tax expense from income before taxes yields net income after tax.8
Sometimes a firm will sell a portion of its operations, such as a line of business. Account-
ing refers to these sold units as discontinued operations,9 and distinguishes them from the con-
tinuing operations of the firm. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require separate income statement 
display of income from continuing operations and income from discontinued operations.  Separate 
 6 Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the disclosure, in the notes to the financial statements, of selected informa-
tion about business segments. The distinction we make here is that the income statement typically does not 
provide information about the operating results of business segments. Chapter 17 discusses segment reporting.
 7 Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, however, define the term operating for purposes of the statement of cash flows.
 8 We discuss how financial reporting presents information about income taxes in Chapter 12.
 9 Authoritative guidance reserves the label discontinued operations for the sale of entire lines of business, not 
individual assets. The IFRS definition and the U.S. GAAP definitions of discontinued operations differ and are 
discussed in Chapter 17.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
display aids users of the income statement in predicting future earnings. The firm expects 
income from continuing operations to recur, whereas income from discontinued operations will 
not recur. For similar reasons, the balance sheet separately displays the assets and liabilities of 
discontinued operations.
To illustrate, Exhibit 5.1 shows Wheaton Corporation’s income statement for the year 
ended January 31, 2013 (fiscal 2012), and Exhibit 5.2 shows its balance sheet for the same fiscal 
period. Wheaton’s income statement shows a loss of $79 million in fiscal 2012 from discontin-
ued operations. Its fiscal 2012 balance sheet shows current assets and current liabilities of dis-
continued operations of $140 million and $92 million, respectively. Wheaton classifies these as 
current items because it expects to dispose of them within one year.
This chapter discusses income statements prepared by Great Deal and Wheaton using 
U.S. GAAP and by Thames using IFRS. These descriptions illustrate the diverse formats and 
account names used on income statements. Our discussions so far have focused on the display
of income statement items and have left several questions unanswered:
1. What conditions must be met for a firm to record (recognize) revenue and expense?
2. How do firms measure revenues and expenses?
The next section discusses these questions.
Wheaton Corporation
Consolidated Income Statements 
(Amounts in Millions of Dollars)
EXHIBIT 5.1
 
Fiscal Years Ended January 31,
2013 
2012 
2011 
Revenues:
 
Net sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$405,046 
$401,087 
$373,821 
 
Membership and other income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   3,168
   3,287
   3,202
408,214 
404,374 
377,023 
Costs and expenses:
 
Cost of sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
304,657 
304,056 
284,137 
 
Operating, selling, general and administrative expenses. . . . 
  79,607
  77,520
  70,934
Operating income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23,950 
22,798 
21,952 
Interest:
 
Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,787 
1,896 
1,863 
 
Capital leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
278 
288 
240 
 
Interest income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(181)
(284)
(309)
 
Interest, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   1,884
   1,900
   1,794
Income from continuing operations before income taxes. . . . 
22,066 
20,898 
20,158 
Provision for income taxes:
 
Current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,643 
6,564 
6,897 
 
Deferred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(504)
581 
(8)
   7,139
   7,145
   6,889
Income from continuing operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,927 
13,753 
13,269 
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax  . . . . . 
     (79)
     146
    (132)
Consolidated net income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,848 
13,899 
13,137 
Less consolidated net income attributable to 
 
noncontrolling interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (513)
    (499)
    (406)
Consolidated net income attributable to Wheaton. . . . . . . . . 
$ 14,335
$ 13,400
$ 12,731
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

145
Income Statement Display
Wheaton Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
(Amounts in Millions of Dollars)
EXHIBIT 5.2
 
January 31,
2013 
2012 
ASSETS
Current assets:
 
Cash and cash equivalents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  7,907 
$  7,275 
 
Receivables, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,144 
3,905 
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,160 
34,511 
 
Prepaid expenses and other . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,980 
3,063 
 
Current assets of discontinued operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     140
     195
 
 
Total current assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48,331 
48,949 
Property and equipment:
 
Land. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22,591 
19,852 
 
Buildings and improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77,452 
73,810 
 
Fixtures and equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35,450 
29,851 
 
Transportation equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   2,355
   2,307
 
Property and equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
137,848 
125,820 
 
Less accumulated depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (38,304)
 (32,964)
 
 
Property and equipment, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99,544 
92,856 
Property under capital leases:
 
Property under capital leases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,669 
5,341 
 
Less accumulated amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (2,906)
  (2,544)
 
 
Property under capital leases, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,763 
2,797 
 
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,126 
15,260 
 
Other assets and deferred charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   3,942
   3,567
 
 
Total assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$170,706
$163,429
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
Current liabilities:
 
Short-term borrowings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    523 
$  1,506 
 
Accounts payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30,451 
28,849 
 
Accrued liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18,734 
18,112 
 
Accrued income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,365 
677 
 
Long-term debt due within one year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,050 
5,848 
 
Obligations under capital leases due within one year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
346 
315 
 
Current liabilities of discontinued operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      92
      83
 
 
Total current liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55,561 
55,390 
 
Long-term debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,231 
31,349 
 
Long-term obligations under capital leases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,170 
3,200 
 
Deferred income taxes and other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,508 
6,014 
 
Redeemable noncontrolling interest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307 
397 
Commitments and contingencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
Equity:
 
Preferred stock ($0.10 par value). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
— 
—
 
Common stock ($0.10 par value) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
378 
393 
 
Capital in excess of par value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,803 
3,920 
 
Retained earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66,638 
63,660 
 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (70)
  (2,688)
 
 
Total Wheaton shareholders  equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70,749 
65,285
 
Noncontrolling interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   2,180
   1,794
 
 
Total equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  72,929
  67,079
 
 
Total liabilities and equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$170,706
$163,429
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
REVENUE RECOGNITION AND MEASUREMENT
REVENUE RECOGNITION
Revenue recognition refers to the timing and measurement of revenues. Management applies the 
revenue recognition criteria to decide whether a given transaction results in recording revenues 
and the related expenses. Revenue recognition is among the most complex issues in financial 
reporting. This complexity results from two sources:
■ 
First, misreporting of revenues is a common form of accounting fraud. 
■ 
Second, firms often bundle products and services and sell them in multiple-element arrange-
ments. An example of a multiple-element arrangement is the sale of machinery with a five-
year warranty, installation services, training for employees, and software upgrades.10
We distinguish revenues, which increase net assets, from other transactions that increase net 
assets but do not involve transactions with customers. For example, issuing common shares of 
stock for cash increases net assets, but it does not generate revenue. Exchanges of goods and 
services for assets that occur as part of core operations constitute revenues.
We also distinguish revenues from gains, and we distinguish expenses from losses. Earlier in 
this chapter we discussed the sale of a headquarters building at a gain. A gain means that the 
cash or other assets received exceed the building’s carrying value at the time of sale. The gain 
increases net assets and increases income, but it is not a transaction with a customer that is part 
of core operations. Therefore, the gain is not revenue. Similarly, a loss decreases net assets and 
decreases net income, but is not part of the firm’s core business and is not part of operating 
expenses. For example, Thames reports as a non-operating item a €1.0 million loss on the dis-
posal of assets.
Revenue recognition involves decisions of both timing (when to recognize revenue) and 
measurement (the amount of revenue to recognize). With regard to timing, a firm could recog-
nize revenue at the time it produced items to sell, or at the time it delivered items to customers, 
or at the time it collected cash from customers, or at some other time. U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
contain revenue recognition criteria that govern the timing of recording revenues.11 For now, we 
introduce a simple analysis of revenue recognition criteria, to explain an important feature of 
accrual accounting and to illustrate the journal entries for recording revenues and expenses. As 
a general principle of accrual accounting, the firm recognizes revenue when a transaction meets 
two conditions:
 I. The seller has delivered all (or nearly all) of the goods and services it has agreed to provide.
II. The seller has received cash or some other asset that it can convert to cash, for example, an 
account receivable.
Criterion I focuses on the seller’s performance. Firms recognize revenues from many sales 
of goods and services at the time of sale because that is often when the seller has delivered all 
goods and services. Even if some items remain unperformed (for example, promises to provide 
warranty services and promises to accept customer returns), the seller can recognize revenues as 
long as it has substantially performed its obligations to the customer, and the seller can reason-
ably measure the cost of the unperformed items.
Criterion II focuses on measuring the amount of cash the seller will ultimately receive. The 
exchange price between the customer and seller represents the assets exchanged by the customer 
for goods and services and provides the measure of revenue.
APPLICATION OF REVENUE RECOGNITION
To understand the revenue recognition criteria and their importance for financial reporting, we 
consider several examples of transactions that involve the sale of products and services. These 
transactions may, or may not, result in recognizing revenues.
Example 1 Great Deal sold a television for $1,000 to a customer who pays with cash. The 
television is marked down, and the customer cannot return or exchange it. Great Deal received 
10 We discuss the revenue recognition and measurements issues for multiple element arrangements in Chapter 8.
11 Chapter 8 discusses these criteria.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

147
Revenue Recognition and Measurement
cash, so the transaction meets criterion II. The transaction also meets criterion I because Great 
Deal has no additional obligations after the customer has taken the television. Great Deal 
would recognize revenue on this transaction and make the following journal entry: 12
Example 2 Great Deal sold a television for $1,000 to a customer who paid with a Great Deal 
credit card. The television is marked down and the customer cannot return or exchange it. 
Great Deal has received a promise of cash payment (an account receivable), so the transaction 
meets criterion II.13 The transaction also meets criterion I because Great Deal has no additional 
obligations. Great Deal would recognize revenue on this transaction and make the following 
journal entry:
Example 3 Great Deal sells gift cards. Great Deal has a liability because it has promised to 
provide merchandise to the holder of the gift card up to the amount stated on the card. Assume 
that gift cards expire five years after the issue date so that Great Deal has no obligation to pro-
vide merchandise after the expiration date. If Great Deal sells a gift card for $1,000 on the first 
day of its fiscal year, Great Deal expects to deliver on its promise of providing merchandise 
during the next 60 months. Great Deal has received $1,000 cash, so the transaction meets cri-
terion II. However, Great Deal has not met criterion I. It has incurred an obligation of $1,000 
to perform in the future.14 At the time of the gift card purchase, Great Deal would record the 
following journal entry:
 
 
   
              15
12 Great Deal would also recognize cost of sales when it recognizes revenues. We discuss the cost of sales journal 
entries later in this chapter.
13 We revisit the measurement of accounts receivable in Chapter 8 when we take up the issue of customers who 
might not pay.
14 This is an example of a deferred performance obligation. Deferred performance obligations are discussed 
further in Chapter 8.
15 Great Deal calls this account “Unredeemed gift card liabilities” on its balance sheet.
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
IncSt → RE
Sale of merchandise for $1,000 cash.
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
IncSt → RE
Sale of merchandise on account for $1,000.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
  
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
At the time of the gift card purchase, to record the sale of the gift card for 
cash.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
Great Deal does not recognize revenue at the time it sold the gift card. It recognizes revenue 
as it delivers merchandise to the cardholder. If the cardholder used the card to purchase a $700 
computer monitor, Great Deal would make the following journal entry to recognize revenues:
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
700
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
700
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−700
+700
IncSt → RE
At the time of the computer monitor sale, to recognize the revenue on the 
sale of the monitor. 
At the gift card’s expiration date, Great Deal would recognize the remaining amount on the 
card as revenue with the following journal entry: 16
Example 4 Another buyer of a gift card paid for the gift card with a Great Deal credit card. 
The only difference is that the asset Great Deal received is an account receivable, not cash. 
Therefore, the revenue-related journal entries are identical to those shown for Example 3 except 
that the first journal entry shows a debit to Accounts Receivable instead of a debit to Cash:
In both Example 1 and Example 3, Great Deal receives cash from a customer, so both 
transactions meet criterion II. The transaction in Example 1 also meets criterion I because the 
customer has possession of the television, whereas the transaction in Example 3 does not sat-
isfy criterion I until the customer uses the gift card. Therefore, Great Deal recognizes revenue 
in Example 1 but not in Example 3. In Example 2 and Example 4, Great Deal did not receive 
cash from a customer. Even so, in both examples the transactions meet criterion II because 
Great Deal expects to collect the account receivable in cash. The transaction in Example 2 also 
meets criterion I because the customer takes possession of the television. The transaction in 
Example 4, however, does not meet criterion I. Therefore, Great Deal recognizes revenue in 
Example 2 but not in Example 4. Examples 1 to 4 illustrate an important concept in accrual 
16 If the cardholder fails to use the entire $1,000 amount by the expiration date, Great Deal will recognize as 
revenue any remaining amount on the card. This treatment is one of several possible treatments for unused gift 
card balances. In this example, there is a clear expiration date. Some gift cards have no expiration dates, and 
some states in the United States have laws that specify a minimum duration for gift cards or forbid expiration 
altogether. After some period, which varies by state laws, the value of an unused gift card becomes unclaimed 
property. Unclaimed property may revert to the firm or to the government, depending on state law. As a practi-
cal matter, many U.S. retailers establish their gift card operations in states whose laws will allow the retailer to 
keep unused gift card balances.
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−300
+300
IncSt → RE
To recognize revenue on the unused portion of the gift card at the end of 60 
months when the card has expired.
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
At the time of the gift card sale, to record the sale of the gift card on 
account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

149
Expense Recognition and Measurement
accounting—the timing of the receipt of cash from a customer does not affect the timing of 
revenue recognition. What matters is whether the seller has received assets that it can convert to 
cash and whether it has performed its obligations to deliver goods and services.
REVENUE MEASUREMENT
The seller measures revenue as the amount of cash, or the cash-equivalent value of non-cash 
assets, that it receives from customers. This amount is typically the exchange price between 
buyer and seller at the time of sale. If the firm has not performed all of its obligations, however, 
it will need to adjust the exchange price to reflect those unperformed obligations.
EXPENSE RECOGNITION AND MEASUREMENT
TIMING OF EXPENSE RECOGNITION
Assets provide future benefits, and expenses measure the consumption of those benefits. Tim-
ing of expense recognition focuses on when the firm consumes the benefits. The critical question 
is, “When does the firm consume the benefits of an asset?” That is, when does the asset leave 
the balance sheet and become an expense on the income statement?
 
Balance Sheet 
Income Statement
 
Assets 
 Expenses (which reduce net income and retained earnings on the balance sheet)
CRITERIA FOR EXPENSE RECOGNITION
The firm recognizes an expense when either of the following conditions holds:
1. The consumption of the asset results from a transaction that leads to the recognition of rev-
enue. For example, the recognition of revenue from the sale of merchandise consumes 
the benefits of the inventory asset and results in an increase in the expense called Cost of 
Goods Sold. The amount of this expense is determined by the product costs associated with 
the inventory. This matching of the cost of the item sold with the revenue from the sale 
(termed the matching convention) links the timing of some expenses to revenue recognition.
2. The consumption of the asset results from the passage of time. For example, the firm con-
sumes benefits of this month’s rent on a warehouse during the current month. Therefore, 
the firm reports the cost as part of this month’s period expenses. Most administrative 
expenditures are period expenses.
RECOGNITION OF PRODUCT COSTS
A seller of goods can easily match the consumption of the benefits of the asset sold with rev-
enues from its sale. Specifically, at the time of sale and revenue recognition, inventory leaves the 
seller’s balance sheet. The seller recognizes revenue along with a reduction in inventory, and 
records cost of goods sold expense equal to the amount by which inventory decreases.17
RECOGNITION OF PERIOD EXPENSES
Many expenditures benefit accounting periods and are not linked to specific revenue transac-
tions. Common examples include the cost to manage the firm, including the president’s salary, 
accounting and information systems costs, and support activity costs such as legal services, 
employee training, and corporate planning. These administrative costs do not relate directly to 
products produced or sold. The firm recognizes them as expenses when it consumes their ben-
efits in the period. The firm treats them, therefore, as period expenses.
17 We discuss the accounting for inventory in Chapter 9.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
Another example of a period expense is the cost of marketing or selling products, for exam-
ple, salaries and commissions of the sales staff and costs to produce catalogs. The firm recog-
nizes those costs as expenses in the period when it consumes them.
EXPENSE MEASUREMENT
Expenses measure the consumption of assets during an accounting period, so the basis for 
expense measurement is the same as the measurement of the consumed asset. If the firm mea-
sures an asset at acquisition cost on the balance sheet, it also measures expenses based on the 
acquisition cost of the asset consumed. Examples 5 and 6 illustrate the concepts of product 
costs, period expenses, and expense measurement.
Example 5 In Example 1, Great Deal sold a television for $1,000 cash. From Example 1, 
Great Deal recognizes revenue on this transaction, resulting in the following journal entry:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,000
+1,000
IncSt → RE
Sale of merchandise for $1,000.
Great Deal must also show the expense associated with the television sold. If Great Deal 
originally purchased the television for $650, Great Deal would record the following journal 
entry to recognize the expense associated with the sale of the television:
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
650
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
650
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−650
−650
IncSt → RE
To record the reduction of inventory associated with the sale of 
merchandise.
This transaction affects Great Deal’s income statement. It also affects Great Deal’s balance 
sheet when revenue and expense accounts are closed to the Retained Earnings account. The 
revenue part of the transaction increases Retained Earnings by $1,000, and the expense part of 
the transaction decreases Retained Earnings by $650. The net effect increases Retained Earn-
ings by $350 (before taxes). Net assets also increase by $350, the result of an increase in cash of 
$1,000 and a decrease in inventory of $650.
Example 6 Great Deal prints and mails advertisements to its preferred customers prior to 
annual sales events. Assume that these expenditures cost $2 million per year. Although Great 
Deal management believes that spending $2 million to promote the sales events will increase 
gross margin by at least $2 million, it cannot establish a causal link between any specific pro-
motional expenditure and the sale of a specific item. As a result, Great Deal treats the promo-
tion costs as period expenses in the period incurred:
 
Advertising and Promotion Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−2,000,000
−2,000,000
IncSt → RE
To record $2 million of advertising and promotion costs.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

151
Comprehensive Income
 PROBLEM  5.1 FOR SELF-STUDY 
Revenue and expense recognition. Crandall SA uses the accrual basis of accounting and 
recognizes revenues at the time it sells goods or renders services. For each transaction, 
indicate the amount of revenue or expense that Crandall recognizes during April, and 
show the journal entry or entries that Crandall would make in April.
a. Collects €15,000 cash from customers during April for merchandise sold and deliv-
ered in March. The cost of the merchandise to the firm was €8,000.
b. Sells merchandise to customers during April for €24,500 cash. The merchandise cost 
the firm €6,500.
c. Sells to customers, on account, merchandise with a selling price of €105,000. The firm 
expects to collect the cash during May. The merchandise cost the firm €82,000 when 
it purchased the items from its supplier last month. The firm has not yet paid the sup-
plier for the merchandise.
d. Pays suppliers €45,500 during April for merchandise received by the firm from its sup-
pliers and sold to customers during March for €109,000.
e. Pays suppliers €50,000 during April for merchandise received from its suppliers and 
sold to customers during April. Crandall sold the merchandise for €90,400.
f. Receives from suppliers and sells to customers during April merchandise that cost 
€20,000. The selling price of the merchandise to the customer was €38,000, all on 
account. The firm expects to pay the supplier during May.
g. Receives from suppliers during April merchandise that cost €101,000 and that the 
firm expects to pay for during May. The firm also expects to sell the merchandise in 
May for €124,000.
h. Receives €26,500 from customers for merchandise that the firm will deliver in May. 
The firm does not yet have the merchandise and expects to acquire it in May for 
€23,000.
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Previous sections of this chapter have discussed the recognition and measurement of revenues 
and expenses that result in net income. The selling of goods and the rendering of services to 
customers increases (decreases) both net assets and retained earnings in the amount of net 
income (net loss).
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms in some instances to change the carrying value of cer-
tain assets and liabilities. Both sets of accounting standards preclude the recognition of these 
changes in net income, and therefore in retained earnings. Instead, firms must include these 
changes in other comprehensive income (OCI). Later chapters discuss the items that require 
this accounting treatment. For now, we introduce the concept of OCI and Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income (AOCI).
Example 7 Assume that U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to remeasure the amount of a 
particular asset from $10 million to $8 million because of economic events. Accounting rules 
further specify that the firm must include the $2 million decrease in net assets (= $10 mil-
lion – $8 million), in OCI, but not in net income. The firm would make the following journal 
entry:
 
Other Comprehensive Income (Decrease in Measurement of Asset) . . . . . . . . 
2,000,000
 
Asset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
The sum of Net Income and Other Comprehensive Income is comprehensive income, which 
includes all changes in net assets for a period except for changes arising from transactions with 
owners.18
Net Income + Other Comprehensive Income = Comprehensive Income
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to report the cumulative effect of other comprehen-
sive income in a balance sheet account called accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income sums Other Comprehensive Income over time 
just as Retained Earnings sums Net Income less dividends over time. AOCI is a component of 
shareholders equity.
Retained Earnings (beginning) + Net Income −Dividends = Retained Earnings (ending)
Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income 
(beginning)
+
Other Comprehensive 
Income
=
Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income 
(ending)
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to present the items that are included in Other 
Comprehensive Income. Firms have a choice of two formats.19
1. A single statement of comprehensive income that shows all the changes in net assets. This 
statement includes both Net Income and Other Comprehensive Income.
2. A two-statement presentation that includes an income statement and a separate statement 
of comprehensive income.
SUMMARY
Net income or profit for a period is the difference between revenues from selling goods and 
services and the expenses incurred to generate those revenues, plus certain gains and losses of 
the period. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the accrual basis of accounting, which separates the 
recognition of revenue from the receipt of cash. A seller recognizes revenues when it has per-
formed its obligations to the customer and when it has received cash or an asset that is con-
vertible to cash. The firm matches the revenues recognized with the costs of the products sold 
(product costs). The resulting expense is cost of goods sold. The firm recognizes other expenses 
in the period when it consumes the benefits of the assets (period expenses).
SOLUTION TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEM
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 5.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Revenue and expense recognition.)
a. Crandall recognizes neither revenue nor expense in April. The firm makes a journal entry 
in April to recognize the cash collected from customers for sales made in March:
18 Typical transactions with owners include dividends, share issuances, and share repurchases.
19 In 2011, the FASB issued ASU No. 2011-05, Presentation of Comprehensive Income, updating ASC 220. ASU 
No. 2011-05 provides for this choice of two formats. The guidance is effective for fiscal periods beginning after 
December 31, 2011. Prior to this guidance, firms applying U.S. GAAP also had the option to display Other 
Comprehensive Income items as part of the statement of changes in shareholders equity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

153
Solution to Self-Study Problem
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
b. In April Crandall recognizes revenue of €24,500 and expenses of €6,500:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
24,500
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
24,500
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,500
 
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,500
c. In April Crandall recognizes revenue of €105,000 and expenses of €82,000.
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
105,000
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
82,000
 
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
82,000
d. Crandall recognizes neither revenue nor expense in April. The firm makes the following 
journal entry made to recognize the cash payment made to suppliers:
 
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,500
 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
45,500
e. In April Crandall recognizes revenues of €90,400 and expenses of €50,000.
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,400
 
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,400
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
f. In April Crandall recognizes revenue of €38,000 and expenses of €20,000.
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
38,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
38,000
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
g. Crandall recognizes neither revenue nor expense in April. The firm makes the following 
journal entry in April to recognize the receipt of merchandise and the obligation to pay for 
that merchandise:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
101,000
 
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
101,000
h. Crandall recognizes neither revenue nor expense in April. The firm makes the following 
journal entry in April to recognize the receipt of cash from customers and the obligation it 
incurs for future delivery of merchandise:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
26,500
 
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
26,500
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Net income or net loss
Earnings
Profit
Revenues
Expenses
Cost of goods sold, cost of services 
rendered
Gross margin, gross profit
Operating expenses
Operating income, operating profit
Income from continuing operations
Income from discontinued operations
Revenue recognition
Gain
Loss
Expense recognition
Product costs
Matching convention
Period expense
Other comprehensive income (OCI)
Comprehensive income
Accumulated other comprehensive 
income (AOCI)
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. “The measurement of assets and liabilities relates closely to the measurement of revenues 
and expenses.” Explain.
 3. Distinguish between a cost and an expense.
 4. Both interest expense on borrowing and dividends on common stock reduce net assets 
and reduce shareholders’ equity. Accountants treat interest as an expense in measuring net 
income but do not treat dividends on common stock as an expense. Explain the rationale 
for this apparent inconsistency.
 5. Why is it important to separate the income from discontinued operations from the income 
from continuing operations on the income statement?
 6. In an accrual accounting system, firms recognize revenues even if they have not received 
cash. What criteria must sales transactions meet in order for the seller to recognize revenues 
before collecting cash?
 7. A customer has paid the firm, in advance, for merchandise the firm will deliver next month. 
Why is the firm not permitted to recognize revenue when it receives the cash?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

155
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 8. Why is it important to separate gains from revenues?
 9. Why might it be difficult to compare two otherwise similar firms in terms of their operat-
ing profits?
10. A student says, “It is inconceivable to me that a firm could report increasing net income 
yet run out of cash.” Clarify this seeming contradiction.
EXERCISES
11. Revenue recognition. Neiman Marcus, a U.S. retailer, uses the accrual basis of accounting 
and follows U.S. GAAP. It recognizes revenue at the time it sells merchandise. Indicate the 
amount of revenue (if any) the firm recognizes during the months of February, March, and 
April in each of the following hypothetical transactions, in which Neiman Marcus does the 
following:
a. Collects $800 cash from a customer during March for a custom-made suit that the firm 
will make and deliver to the customer in April.
b. Collects $2,160 cash from customers for meals served in the firm’s restaurant during 
March.
c. Collects $39,200 cash from customers during March for merchandise sold and delivered 
in February.
d. Sells merchandise to customers during March on account, for which the firm will collect 
$59,400 cash from customers during April.
e. Rents space in its store to a travel agency for $9,000 a month, effective March 1. Receives 
$18,000 cash on March 1 for two months’ rent.
f. Same as part e, except that it receives the check for the March and April rent on 
April 1.
12. Revenue recognition. Fonterra Cooperative Group Limited (Fonterra), a New Zealand 
dairy cooperative, uses the accrual basis of accounting and recognizes revenue at the time 
it sells products or renders services. Fonterra applies New Zealand accounting standards 
and reports its results in millions of New Zealand dollars (NZ$). In answering this prob-
lem, assume Fonterra uses IFRS. Indicate which of the following transactions or events 
immediately give rise to Fonterra’s recognition of revenue.
a. Fonterra has completed the pasteurization of an order of 13,000 liters of milk it will 
deliver to a grocery store chain next week. Fonterra has not yet delivered the milk or 
invoiced the grocery store. The selling price of the milk is NZ$26,000.
b. Refer to part a, and assume that the grocery store paid Fonterra a deposit of NZ$5,000 
on the order of the milk.
c. Fonterra delivered the milk and billed the grocery store. The grocery store has not yet 
paid the invoice.
d. One day after delivery, the grocery store called Fonterra and reported that it has to 
destroy 3,000 liters of milk because it had spoiled sometime prior to its delivery. The 
grocer refuses to pay for these 3,000 liters.
e. Fonterra spent NZ$10 million to develop a technique to transform a by-product of 
casein (a protein found in milk and cheese) into ethanol. Fonterra expects to use this 
technique to generate sales of at least NZ$2 million over the next year.
f. Refer to part e, and assume that Fonterra signed contracts worth NZ$400 million for 
ethanol sales.
13. Expense recognition. Sun Microsystems uses the accrual basis of accounting and recognizes 
revenue at the time it sells goods or renders services. It applies U.S. GAAP and reports 
in U.S. dollars. Indicate the amount of expenses (if any) the firm recognizes during the 
months of June, July, and August in each of the following hypothetical transactions. The 
firm does the following:
a. Pays $180,000 on July 1 for one year’s rent on a warehouse beginning on that date.
b. Receives a utility bill on July 2 totaling $4,560 for services received during June. It pays 
the utility bill during July.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
c. Purchases office supplies on account costing $12,600 during July. It pays $5,500 for 
these purchases during July and the remainder during August. Office supplies on hand 
on July 1 cost $2,400, on July 31 cost $9,200, and on August 31 cost $2,900.
d. Pays $7,200 on July 15 for property taxes on office facilities for the current calendar 
year.
e. Pays $2,000 on July 15 as a deposit on a custom-made delivery van that the manufac-
turer will deliver on September 30.
f. Pays $4,500 on July 25 as an advance on the August salary of an employee.
g. Pays $6,600 on July 25 for advertisements that appeared in computer journals during 
June.
14. Expense recognition. Tesco Plc. is a British-based grocer and retailer chain. It uses the 
accrual basis of accounting and recognizes revenue at the time it sells goods or renders 
services. It applies IFRS and reports in pounds sterling (£). Indicate the amount of expense 
recognized during October (if any) from each of the following hypothetical transactions or 
events. The firm does the following:
a. Pays £440,000 on October 5 for commercials that appeared on British television during 
September.
b. Pays £1,200,000 on October 6 for refrigeration units delivered to its stores on September 
30. The firm expects the refrigerators to last for five years and have no salvage value.
c. Pays £300,000 on October 10 for property taxes for the period from October 1 of this 
year to September 30 of next year.
d. Pays £15,500 on October 15 for cleaning supplies purchased on October 10. Cleaning 
supplies on hand on October 1 cost £3,500 and on October 31 cost £5,400.
e. Pays £4,000 on October 20 for repairs to a forklift truck on October 1. The truck had a 
remaining useful life of five years on October 1.
f. Pays £100,000 on October 25 as a deposit on land Tesco plans to purchase for a new 
store.
g. Pays £200,000 on October 31 as rent on a warehouse for October and November.
15. Relating net income to balance sheet changes. Comparative balance sheet data for Bondier 
Corporation (Bondier), a Canadian airplane manufacturer, as of January 31, Year 8, and 
January 31, Year 7, appear in the following display, based on Bondier’s financial reports as 
of January 31, Year 8. Bondier applies Canadian accounting standards and reports in mil-
lions of U.S. dollars. In answering these questions, assume Bondier uses either U.S. GAAP 
or IFRS; for the purposes of this problem, this choice will not matter.
Bondier Corporation
Balance Sheet Data
January 31, Year 7 and Year 8
January 31
Year 8
Year 7
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$20,562
$18,577
Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,444
15,844
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,078
1,968
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,040
765
 
Bondier declared and paid dividends of $30 million during the year ended January 31, Year 
8. During the same year, the firm also reported a positive adjustment to Retained Earnings 
of $12 million.
a. Compute net income for the year ended January 31, Year 8, by analyzing the change in 
retained earnings.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

157
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
b. Demonstrate that the following relation holds:
 
Net Income = Increase in Assets − Increase in Liabilities
 
 
− Increase in Contributed Capital + Dividends + or − Adjustments
16. Relating net income to balance sheet changes. Magtelkom, a Hungarian telecommunica-
tions company, reported the following balance sheet information for Year 11 and Year 12. 
Magtelkom applies IFRS and reports in millions of Hungarian forints (HUF).
Magtelkom
Balance Sheet Data
Year 11 and Year 12
Year 12
Year 11
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
HUF1,135,578
HUF1,131,595
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
553,885
538,428
Contributed Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129,954
128,728
Minority Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66,695
67,128
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
385,044
?
 
During Year 12, Magtelkom declared and paid dividends of HUF72,729 million and made 
other adjustments, which increased retained earnings by HUF307 million.
a. Compute Magtelkom’s balance in Retained Earnings for Year 11.
b. Compute Magtelkom’s net income for Year 12.
17. Income statement relations. Selected income statement information for Novo Limited 
(Novo), a Hong Kong personal computer manufacturer, for the years ended March 31, 
Years 9 and 10. Novo applies Hong Kong financial reporting standards and reports its 
results in thousands of U.S. dollars. In answering this question, assume Novo uses either 
U.S. GAAP or IFRS; for purposes of this problem, this choice will not matter.
Year 10
Year 9
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,351,503
$13,978,309
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13,901,523
12,091,433
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,103,713
1,033,296
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
Profit Before Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
Advertising Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
595,902
488,150
Research and Development Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
229,759
196,225
Other Income (Expense). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
18,130
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47,613
26,197
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
484,708
?
 
Compute the missing amounts for Year 9 and Year 10.
18. Income statement relations. Selected income statement information for Years 11, 12, and 13 
for SwissTek, a Swiss engineering firm. SwissTek applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results 
in millions of U.S. dollars.
Year 13
Year 12
Year 11
Sales of Products  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$24,816
?
$17,622
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
595
?
464
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
Year 13
Year 12
Year 11
Earnings Before Interest and Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,023
2,557
?
Sales of Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,367
3,778
3,342
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,975
?
3,780
Cost of Services Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
2,570
2,305
Income Before Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
2,076
1,199
Other Operating Income (Expense). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
139
37
Interest and Other Financial Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
286
?
407
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,968
6,744
?
Cost of Products Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17,292
13,967
13,205
Other Non-operating Income (Expense)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
(321)
(258)
Interest and Dividend Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
273
147
?
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,757
1,390
?
 
Compute the missing amounts for each of the three years.
19. Income and equity relations. Selected information based on the comparative balance sheets 
for James John Corporation (James John), a U.S. clothing designer, manufacturer, and 
retailer, for the years ended March 31, Years 10, 11, and 12, appears next. James John 
applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
James John Corporation
Balance Sheet Data
March 31, Year 12, Year 11, and Year 10
March 31
Year 12
Year 11
Year 10
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
$    1.1
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
$(27.2)
0.0
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,742.3
?
1,090.3
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
(87.1)
(80.0)
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
872.5
783.6
?
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,334.9
?
1,675.7
 
 
James John issued no new shares of common stock after Year 10. In Year 11 James 
John reported net income of $308.5 million and declared and paid cash dividends of $19.6 
million. In Year 12 James John paid $234.4 million to repurchase shares of common stock.
Compute the missing amounts for each of the three years.
20. Income and equity relations. Selected information based on the comparative balance sheets 
and income statements of Palmgate Company (Palmgate), a U.S. manufacturer of con-
sumer products, for the years ended December 31, Years 7, 8, and 9, appears in the follow-
ing display. Palmgate applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars.
Palmgate Company
Selected Financial Statement Information
December 31, Year 9, Year 8, and Year 7
Year Ended December 31
Year 9
Year 8
Year 7
Income Statement Information:
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,737.4
$ 1,353.4
$ 1,351.4
Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
414.4
?
1.5
Balance Sheet Information:
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
732.9
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

159
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Year Ended December 31
Year 9
Year 8
Year 7
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
(2,081.2)
(1,804.7)
Unearned Compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(218.9)
(251.4)
(283.3)
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
197.5
222.7
253.7
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,627.5
?
8,968.1
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
(7,581.0)
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,517.7
1,218.1
?
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
1,350.1
Other Information:
Dividends Declared and Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
677.8
607.2
Cost of Share Repurchases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
829.8
492.9
615.6
Common Shares Issued. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0
0
0
 
Compute the missing amounts for each of the three years.
21. Accumulated other comprehensive income relations. Selected information based on the com-
parative balance sheets for MosTechi Corporation (MosTechi), a Japanese electronics man-
ufacturer, appears next for the years ended March 31, Years 6, 7, and 8. MosTechi applies 
U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of yen (¥).
MosTechi Corporation
Balance Sheet Data
March 31, Year 8, Year 7, and Year 6
March 31
Year 8
Year 7
Year 6
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥  626,907
¥  624,124
¥  621,709
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . .
?
?
?
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
1,602,654
1,506,082
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
(3,127)
(6,000)
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,143,423
1,136,638
1,134,222
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,351,500
?
2,870,338
 
MosTechi’s other comprehensive income for Year 7 was ¥229,238; in Year 8 it was ¥40,944. 
During Year 8 MosTechi had net income of ¥126,328 and declared and paid dividends of 
¥25,042. During Year 8 MosTechi reported a ¥3,807 decrease to retained earnings to adjust 
for the cumulative effect of an accounting change. Compute the missing amounts for each 
of the three years.
22. Accumulated other comprehensive income relations. Selected information based on the com-
parative balance sheets for Solaronx Company (Solaronx), a U.S. defense manufacturer, 
appears in the following display for the years ended December 31, Years 10, 11, and 12. 
Solaronx applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of dollars.
Solaronx Company
Balance Sheet Data
December 31, Year 12, Year 11, and Year 10
December 31
Year 12
Year 11
Year 10
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$     5
$    5
$     5
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
(1,919)
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
December 31
Year 12
Year 11
Year 10
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
2,998
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(816)
(543)
(73)
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,097
9,722
9,540
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
?
 
Solaronx’s other comprehensive income for Year 12 was $774, compared to ($31) in Year 
11 and $275 in Year 10. In addition, in Year 12 Solaronx made a one-time adjustment of 
($1,338) to accumulated other comprehensive income. Comprehensive income for Year 12 
was $2,057, compared to $840 in Year 11 and $692 in Year 10. Dividends declared and 
paid increased from $356 in Year 10, to $394 in Year 11, to $429 in Year 12. Compute the 
missing amounts for each of the three years.
23. Discontinued operations. Selected information from PharmaCare’s financial statements for 
the years ended December 31, Year 6 and Year 7, appear below. PharmaCare is a German 
pharmaceutical company that applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of euros (€).
a. What portion of PharmaCare’s total net income in Year 7 came from discontinued oper-
ations? How does this compare to Year 6?
b. What portion of PharmCare’s total assets in Year 7 is associated with discontinued 
operations? How does this compare to Year 6?
c. What explains the large decline in PharmCare’s assets held for discontinued operations 
in Year 7?
PharmaCare
Balance Sheet and Income Statement Data
December 31, Year 7 and Year 6
December 31
Year 7
Year 6
Income from Continuing Operations (after taxes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 2,306
€ 1,526
Income from Discontinued Operations (after taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,410
169
Assets Held for Discontinued Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
2,925
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51,378
55,891
24. Discontinued operations. Selected financial information for Oratel S.A.E. (Oratel), an Egyp-
tian telecommunications firm, is shown in the following display for the years ended Decem-
ber 31, Year 13 and Year 12. Oratel applies Egyptian accounting standards and reports 
its results in thousands of Egyptian pounds (£). In answering this question, assume that 
Oratel uses either U.S. GAAP or IFRS; for the purposes of this problem, this choice will 
not matter.
Oratel S.A.E.
Balance Sheet and Income Statement Data
December 31, Year 13 and Year 12
December 31
Year 13
Year 12
Income from Continuing Operations (before taxes). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
£ 9,293,448
£ 4,456,900
Assets Held for Discontinued Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
7,327,709
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

161
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
December 31
Year 13
Year 12
Taxes on Income from Continuing Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,571,426
?
Income from Discontinued Operations (net of tax) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
1,020,213
Income from Continuing Operations (after tax)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
3,595,713
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,935,088
?
Assets Used in Continuing Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34,348,838
?
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,492,853
34,209,746
 
Compute the missing amounts for each of the two years.
PROBLEMS
25. Income statement formats. Information from Cementex Corporation’s (Cementex) income 
statements for the years ended December 31, Year 9 and Year 10, is shown in the following 
display. Cementex is a Mexican construction firm that applies Mexican accounting stan-
dards and reports its results in millions of pesos ($).
Cementex Corporation
Income Statement Data
December 31, Year 10 and Year 9
December 31
Year 10
Year 9
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$236,669
$213,767
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
157,696
?
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
77,320
Administrative and Selling Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
33,120
28,588
Distribution Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,405
?
Other Expenses, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,281
580
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
33,925
Financial Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,809
?
Financial Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
862
536
Income (Expense) from Financial Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,387
(161)
Other Financial Income (Expense)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,647
4,905
Equity in Income of Associates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,487
1,425
Profit Before Income Tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
34,845
Income Tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
Consolidated Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
Portion of Profit Attributable to Minority Interest  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
837
?
Portion of Profit Attributable to Cementex Shareholders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
27,855
 
Assume Cementex had an effective tax rate of 15.11% in Year 10 and 16.35% in Year 9.
a. Compute the missing amounts for each of the two years.
b. Prepare, in good format, an income statement for Cementex for Year 9 and Year 10 
assuming the firm applies IFRS.
26. Income statement formats. Information from GoodLuck Brands’s income statements for 
the years ended December 31, Years 6, 7, and 8, is shown next. GoodLuck Brands is a 
U.S.-based manufacturer and distributor. The company applies U.S. GAAP and reports its 
results in millions of U.S. dollars.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
Year 8
Year 7
Year 6
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$8,769.0
$7,061.2
$6,145.2
Cost of Products Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,618.9
3,843.0
3,342.1
Excise Taxes on Spirits and Wine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
514.0
326.5
299.7
Advertising, Selling, and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . 
2,070.1
1,694.4
1,433.6
Amortization of Intangibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
43.5
33.4
35.4
Restructuring Charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    21.2
   —  
     9.8
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,501.3
1,163.9
1,024.6
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
332.4
158.9
77.3
Other Financial Expense (Income)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (40.2)
    78.9
   (47.0)
Income Before Minority Interest and Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,209.1
  926.1
  994.3
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
311.1
324.5
261.1
Minority Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    67.9
    20.0
    17.2
Income from Continuing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  830.1
  581.6
  716.0
Income from Discontinued Operations, net tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   —  
    39.5
    67.8
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  830.1
$  621.1
$  783.8
 
Prepare, in good format, income statements for GoodLuck Brands for Year 6, Year 7, and 
Year 8, assuming the firm applies IFRS.
27. Correcting errors in income statement transactions. Broyo Corporation (Broyo), a large 
paper company, reported the following income statement for its year ended December 31, 
Year 13. Broyo applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of euros.
Year 13
Net Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 4,221
Cost of Products Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (3,110)
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,111
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(794)
Other Operating Income, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Share in Profits of Associated Companies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      1
Operating Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   335
Financial Income and Expenses, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (43)
Profit on Continuing Operations, before tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   292
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (72)
Profit from Continuing Operations, after tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   220
Profit from Discontinued Operations, net of tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     17
Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€   237
Portion of Profit Owned by Minority Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     1
Portion of Profit Owned by Shareholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   236
 
Broyo supplied additional information about the following six transactions or events that 
happened during Year 13, with all euro amounts reported in millions.
a. On October 5, Year 13, Broyo signed a sales agreement with Office Supplies Interna-
tional. The agreement calls for delivery of 50,000 boxes of paper at a total price of 
€200. On this date, Broyo recognized revenues of €200, and recognized cost of sales of 
€160. No deliveries under the contract had occurred by December 31, Year 13.
b. On October 18, Year 13, Broyo signed a contract with a customer for €45. The customer 
provided a cash deposit at this time of €20, which Broyo recorded as revenues. Broyo did 
not recognize any expenses on October 18, Year 13.
c. Broyo fulfilled all terms of the contract in part b on November 28, Year 13. Broyo’s cost 
of the inventory delivered was €36. Because Broyo had recorded revenues in October, it 
made no entry on November 28.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

163
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
d. During the fourth quarter of Year 13, Broyo spent €11 on research and development. 
Those expenditures, which were focused on creating a new waterproof paper, were 
unsuccessful. Broyo capitalized the €11 as a development asset, which it plans to amor-
tize, beginning in Year 14, over 10 years.
e. On December 1, Year 13, Broyo delivered to a customer €266 of paper products, with a 
cost of €250. The customer promised to pay Broyo in January Year 14. Because Broyo 
had not received the cash by December 31, Year 13, it did not record anything for this 
transaction.
f. On December 5, Year 13, Broyo sold one of its pulp plants for €100. Prior to the sale, 
the pulp plant had a balance sheet carrying value of €80. Broyo recorded the transac-
tion as follows: debited cash for €100, debited plant and equipment for €80, credited 
cost of goods sold for €80, and credited revenues for €100.
 
For each transaction, determine whether revenues and expenses are overstated or under-
stated. Ignore income tax effects.
28. Correcting errors in income statement transactions. Dragonfly Limited (Dragonfly), a diver-
sified electronics firm headquartered in Singapore, reported the following income state-
ment information for its year ended December 31, Year 7. Dragonfly applies Singapore 
financial reporting standards and reports its results in thousands of Singapore dollars ($). 
In answering this problem, assume Dragonfly uses either U.S. GAAP or IFRS; for pur-
poses of this problem, this choice will not matter.
Year 7
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 460,830
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (416,378)
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  44,452
Other Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,558
Selling and Marketing Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(20,714)
General and Administrative Costs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(20,254)
Development Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1,232)
Finance Costs, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(6,692)
Gain on Sale of Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,546
Share in Results of Associated Companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       (2)
Profit Before Tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   3,662
Taxation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (1,094)
Profit (Loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   2,568
Portion of Profit Owned by Minority Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (567)
Portion of Profit Owned by Shareholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   3,135
 
Assume that Dragonfly supplied additional information about the following six hypo-
thetical transactions or events that happened during Year 7, with all monetary amounts 
reported in thousands of Singapore dollars.
a. In January Year 7, Dragonfly collected $1,000 cash from customers who had purchased 
items on credit in December Year 6. Dragonfly had delivered the items by mid- December 
Year 6. Dragonfly recognized January revenues of $1,000.
b. On February 2, Year 7, the firm agreed to supply a customer with $25,000 of high-end 
electronics products. On this date, Dragonfly recognized revenues of $25,000 and cost 
of sales of $18,000 reflecting the carrying value of the high-end inventory. Dragonfly 
delivered on the agreement in September Year 7.
c. On June 4, Year 7, Dragonfly sold some land it had purchased many years earlier, prior 
to the boom in the real estate market. The carrying value of the land on the firm’s 
books was $454, and Dragonfly sold it for $7,000. Dragonfly recorded a gain on the sale 
of the land of $6,546.
d. During Year 7, the firm incurred $1,232 in development costs associated with a new 
product that the firm had developed; the firm expensed these costs. The product design 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
and manufacture is nearly complete. The firm’s auditor has decided that Dragonfly 
should have capitalized the development costs.
e. In December Year 7, Dragonfly recognized interest income on investments in market-
able securities of $230. The firm included this income in sales revenues.
f. Dragonfly spent $15,000 for advertising in Year 7. Because Dragonfly management 
believed the advertising would result in future income, it capitalized the expenditures as 
an asset. No amortization of the asset has yet taken place.
 
For each transaction, determine whether revenues and expenses for Year 7 are over- or 
understated.
29. Classification and interpreting income statements. SeaBreeze Inc., a Taiwan-based semi-
conductor manufacturer, reported the following information for Year 12. SeaBreeze Inc. 
applies IFRS and reports in millions of yuan (¥).
Year 12
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥ 1,891,466
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (1,737,427)
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   154,039
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       (98,524)
Profit Before Tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    55,515
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       (23,594)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥    31,921
 
Further information available to you reveals the following five items (all financial figures 
reported in millions of yuan).
a. During Year 12 SeaBreeze had ¥10,000 in gains on sales of assets. The firm included the 
gains as part of Revenues.
b. SeaBreeze included financial income of ¥25,800 as part of Revenues, and financial 
expenses of ¥12,000 as part of Cost of Sales.
c. The firm included a ¥6,000 write-down of inventory in Selling, General, and Admin-
istrative Expenses. Normally in this industry, such a write-down is included in Cost of 
Sales.
d. The firm included research and development expenditures of ¥34,000 in Cost of Sales. 
None of the expenditures related to proven technologies (and so were correctly not 
capitalized).
e. During Year 12 the firm committed to a plan to discontinue part of its operations. The 
discontinued operations accounted for ¥22,000 of gross profit.
 
Evaluate the way SeaBreeze classified each of the five items on its income statement. If you 
disagree with the classification, state your reasoning and determine the effect on the firm’s 
gross margin and net income from the alternative classification that you would recommend.
30. Classification and interpretation of income statements. Dyreng Plc. (Dyreng), a Belgian-
based construction firm, reported the following information for Year 11. Dyreng applies 
IFRS and reports in thousands of euros (€).
Year 11
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 18,957.2
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (14,161.9)
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  4,795.3
Other Operating Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
107.9
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,929.5)
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       (36.5)
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

165
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Year 11
Operating Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€    937.2
Finance Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(347.2)
Income from Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      14.5
Profit Before Taxes and Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    604.5
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      (203.7)
Net Profit from Continuing Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     400.8
Results of Discontinued Operations (net of tax) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      23.7
Net Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€    424.5
 
Further information available to you reveals the following six items, with all euro amounts 
reported in thousands.
a. During Year 11 Dyreng signed an agreement with the City of London to build a new 
terminal at Gatwick airport. The construction will commence in Year 12. As evidence 
of its commitment to the project, the City of London gave Dyreng a deposit of €80 
toward the contract price of €240. Dyreng recognized revenues in Year 11 of €240 on 
this transaction. Because Dyreng had not yet performed work, it recorded no costs of 
sales at the time it recognized the revenue.
b. Dyreng recognized revenues of €700 in Year 11 related to a contract signed in Year 10. 
It had performed all the work in Year 10, but the customer did not remit payment until 
Year 11. It recognized the cost of the work performed, €660, as expense when it recog-
nized the revenue.
c. In Year 11 Dyreng consolidated its administrative functions and sold an office building 
for €560. The carrying value of the building was €600. The firm reported this transac-
tion in revenues and cost of sales, respectively.
d. After preparing its income statement for Year 11, Dyreng realized that €45 of income 
associated with discontinued operations was included in Other Operating Income. 
Ignore tax effects in evaluating this transaction.
e. During Year 11 Dyreng completed a renovation project. The contract price was €450, 
and the firm expended €230 in materials, labor, and overhead costs. Dyreng sent the bill 
to the client, but because it did not receive payment in Year 11, the firm did not record 
this transaction in its income statement for Year 11.
f. In Year 11, a firm offered to pay Dyreng to lease the advertising space on scaffolding 
that Dyreng was erecting for a renovation project. The client offered Dyreng €960 to 
lease the advertising space for one year. Dyreng accepted the offer and recorded €960 
as a reduction of the cost of sales of the renovation project. At the end of Year 11, six 
months of the lease remained.
 
Evaluate the way Dyreng classified each of the six items on its income statement. If you 
disagree with this classification, state your reasoning and determine the effect on the firm’s 
gross profit and pretax profit from continuing operations from the alternative classification 
that you would recommend.
31. Calculation of tax rates. A multinational computer equipment manufacturer reported the 
following amounts for two recent years (in millions of U.S. dollars). The firm applies U.S. 
GAAP.
Year 10
Year 9
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 88,396
$ 87,548
Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (76,862)
  (75,791)
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11,534
11,757
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (3,441)
   (4,045)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  8,093
$  7,712
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166
Chapter 5 
Income Statement: Reporting the Results of Operating Activities
a. Compute the ratio of net income divided by revenues for each year.
b. Compute the ratio of income before taxes divided by revenues for each year.
c. Compute the ratio of income tax expense divided by income before taxes, a ratio called 
the effective tax rate.
d. What do these ratios suggest as to the principal reason for the change in profitability 
between Year 10 and Year 9?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

W
hat do Delta Airlines and Delphi have in common? Both firms filed for bankruptcy during 
the early 2000s. Firms filing for bankruptcy often operated profitably for many years pre-
ceding their bankruptcy. The bankruptcies occurred because these firms were unable to generate 
enough cash to cover operating costs and debt service payments. The ability to generate cash flows 
and to manage their timing is critical to the success of business enterprises. For this reason, U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require that firms prepare a statement of cash flows showing the sources and 
uses of cash during the period. The statement of cash flows reports the impact of a firm’s oper-
ating, investing, and financing activities on cash flows during the period. The statement of cash 
flows relates to, but differs from, the statement of financial position (balance sheet) and statement 
of operations (income statement).
NEED FOR A STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
How can a profitable firm run out of cash? Two explanations suggest answers.
1.  Net income for a particular period does not equal cash flow from operations. Chapter 1 points 
out that most firms use the accrual basis of accounting to measure operating performance. 
This means that income does not equal cash flow for a given period. To understand why this 
is the case, recall the principles of revenue and expense recognition:
■ Revenue recognition. Firms typically recognize revenue at the time of sale, regardless of 
when they receive the cash from the sale. Some firms, such as airlines, receive cash before
providing services and recognizing revenues. Other firms, such as manufacturers and dis-
tributors, receive cash after providing goods and recognizing revenues. Thus, revenues on 
the income statement do not generally equal cash received from customers for that period.
■ Expense recognition. Firms recognize expenses either in the period when they recognize 
associated revenues or in the period when they consume materials or services used in oper-
ations. The cash outflow related to a specific expense does not always occur in the period 
when the firm recognizes the expense. Thus, expenses on the income statement do not 
generally equal cash paid to suppliers of materials and services for that period.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Statement of Cash Flows
C h a p t e r 
6
1. Understand why using the accrual basis 
of accounting to prepare the balance 
sheet and income statement creates the 
need for a statement of cash flows.
2. Understand the types of transactions 
that result in cash flows from operat-
ing, investing, and financing activities.
3. Develop an ability to prepare a state-
ment of cash flows from compara-
tive balance sheets and an income 
statement.
4. Develop an ability to analyze the state-
ment of cash flows.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Most of the cash outflows for operating expenses occur before the firm receives the cash 
inflows from a sale. This lag between cash outflows and cash inflows can lead to cash shortages, 
particularly for a growing firm. Consider the typical firm where cash disbursements to employ-
ees and suppliers precede cash collections from customers. The faster this firm grows (that is, 
the faster it hires more employees and rents more space to expand the business), the greater is 
the shortfall in cash. The firm might, for example, borrow funds from a bank to pay employees 
and suppliers while it waits to collect cash from customers.
These examples highlight the fact that, for any accounting period, the income state-
ment does not reflect the cash flows for the period. Stated differently, using the accrual basis 
of accounting to measure net income creates the need for a separate financial statement that 
reports the impact of operations on cash flows. That statement helps the reader judge a firm’s 
cash flow needs and how the firm has dealt with those needs.
2.  Firms receive cash inflows and disburse cash outflows because of investing and financing 
activities. The income statement does not report many of a firm’s investing and financ-
ing inflows and outflows directly. To understand how investing and financing flows affect 
income and cash differently, consider the following examples:
■ Firms building their productive capacity generally use cash to acquire property, plant, 
and equipment. The firm capitalizes (that is, records an asset, not an expense) its expen-
ditures for property, plant, and equipment in the period of acquisition. Later periods’ 
income statements reflect the expensing of these costs, in the form of depreciation 
expense.
■ Debt service payments require cash. Some of those payments are for interest expense, 
which the income statement will report. Other payments reflect principal repayments. 
These principal payments are not expenses, so they never appear on an income statement.
■ Some firms use cash to pay dividends. Dividends are not expenses on the income state-
ment. Dividends are distributions of net assets to owners.
Neither the balance sheet nor the income statement displays the firm’s sources and uses of 
cash. A balance sheet reports the balance in the cash account at the beginning and end of the 
accounting period but does not explain why cash changed during the period. The income state-
ment measures the increase (or decrease) in net assets from selling goods and providing services 
for more (or less) than their costs. Accrual accounting results in an increase in net assets when 
the firm earns income—but seldom is all this income in cash. The statement of cash flows helps 
a reader understand how a firm obtains and uses cash.
OVERVIEW OF THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Exhibit 6.1 presents a statement of cash flows for Kellogg Group for the fiscal year ended 
December 31, 2013. We discuss the indirect and direct methods of computing cash flow from 
operations later in this chapter. To facilitate later discussions, we also provide Kellogg Group’s 
balance sheets for fiscal years 2012 and 2013 (Exhibit 6.2) and its income statement for 2013 
(Exhibit 6.3).
THE STATEMENT EXPLAINS THE REASONS FOR THE CHANGE 
IN CASH BETWEEN BALANCE SHEET DATES
The last few lines of Kellogg Group’s statement of cash flows report the amount of cash on the 
firm’s balance sheet at the beginning and the end of the period. These amounts are the same 
amounts reported on Kellogg Group’s fiscal 2013 balance sheet as the beginning cash balance 
($524 million) and ending cash balance ($255 million). Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that 
the statement of cash flows explain changes in cash and cash equivalents. Cash equivalents rep-
resent short-term, highly liquid investments in which a firm has temporarily placed excess cash. 
Throughout this text, we use the term cash flows to refer to flows of both cash and cash equiva-
lents.1 The remaining lines on the statements of cash flows show the inflows and outflows of 
 1 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 95, “Statement of Cash Flows,” 1987 (Codification 
Topic 230); IASB, International Accounting Standard No. 7, “Statement of Cash Flows,” 1992.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

169
Overview of the Statement of Cash Flows
cash during the period. These inflows and outflows explain the change in cash between the two 
balance sheet dates. Thus, the statement of cash flows reports flows or changes in cash over 
time, whereas the balance sheet reports the amount of cash at specified dates.
THE STATEMENT CLASSIFIES THE REASONS FOR THE CHANGE IN CASH 
AS AN OPERATING, OR INVESTING, OR FINANCING ACTIVITY
The inflows and outflows of cash during the year appear in the statement of cash flows in one 
of three categories: operating, investing, and financing. Figure 6.1 presents the three types of 
cash flows, described next.
1.  Operations A financially healthy company generates sustained cash inflows from sell-
ing goods and providing services. The amount of cash flow from operations indicates 
the extent to which operating activities generate more cash than they use. A firm can use 
cash flow from operations to acquire buildings and equipment, pay dividends, retire long-
term debt, and pay for other investing and financing activities.
2.  Investing The second section of the statement of cash flows shows the amount of cash 
flow from investing activities. The acquisition of noncurrent assets, particularly property, 
plant, and equipment, usually represents a major ongoing use of cash. A firm must replace 
such assets as they wear out or become obsolete, and it must acquire additional noncurrent 
assets if it wishes to grow. A firm may obtain part of the cash needed to acquire noncur-
rent assets from sales of existing noncurrent assets. Such cash inflows seldom, however, 
cover the cost of new asset acquisitions. Firms not experiencing rapid growth can often 
finance the acquisition of noncurrent assets with cash flow from operations. Rapidly grow-
ing firms must often borrow funds or issue common shares to finance these acquisitions.
Kellogg Group
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.1
Indirect Method
Direct Method
2013
2013
Cash flows from operations:
Cash flows from operations:
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,192 
Sources of Cash:
Add: Depreciation Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
243 
 
Receipts from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$12,690
Changes in working capital:
Uses of Cash:
 
 
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(132)
 
Cash Paid for Goods Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(7,049)
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
27 
 
Cash Paid for Selling, General, and Administrative Items . .
(3,554)
 
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
136 
 
Cash Paid for Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(276)
 
Accrued Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (140)
 
Cash Paid for Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       (485)
Cash Flows from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,326
Cash Flows from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,326
Cash flows from investing:
Cash flows from investing:
Capital Expenditures on Property, Plant, and 
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(525)
Capital Expenditures on Property, Plant, 
 
and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(525)
Purchases of Long-Term Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (264)
Purchases of Long Term Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       (264)
Cash Flows Used in Investing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (789)
Cash Flows Used in Investing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  (789)
Cash flows from financing:
Cash flows from financing:
Payments on Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(233)
Payments on Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(233)
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (573)
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       (573)
Cash Flows Used in Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (806)
Cash Flows Used in Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  (806)
Change in Cash Flows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (269)
Change in Cash Flows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  (269)
Beginning Cash Balance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  524
Beginning Cash Balance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   524
Ending Cash Balance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  255
Ending Cash Balance
$   255
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Kellogg Group
Consolidated Balance Sheet
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.2
2013 
2012 
CURRENT ASSETS
Cash and Cash Equivalents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  255
$  524
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,143 
1,011 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   897
   924
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,295
$2,459
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,500 
3,975 
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,567
 1,324
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,933 
2,651 
Long-Term Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,138
 1,874
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$7,366
$6,984
CURRENT LIABILITIES
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
561 
425 
Income Taxes and Interest  Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
78 
78 
Accrued Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   102
   242
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  741 
$  745 
Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,789 
2,022 
Shareholders' Equity
Retained Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,836
 4,217
 
Total Shareholders' Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,836
$4,217
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$7,366
$6,984
Kellogg Group
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
(amounts in millions of US$, except per-share data)
EXHIBIT 6.3
2013 
Sales Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,822
Cost of Goods Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(7,212)
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(243)
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (3,414)
Operating Profit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,953
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(276)
Earnings Before Income Tax. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,677
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (485)
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,192
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

171
Overview of the Statement of Cash Flows
3.  Financing Third, a firm obtains cash from borrowing and from issuing shares of stock. It 
uses cash to pay dividends to shareholders, to repay borrowing, and to reacquire outstand-
ing shares of stock. These amounts appear as cash flow from financing activities in the 
statement of cash flows.
Ambiguities in Classifying Cash Flows Cash flows do not always fit neatly into one 
of these three categories. For example, you might think of cash received from investments in 
 securities—received in the form of interest and dividends—as coming from operating activi-
ties. The logic for this treatment is that interest and dividends appear as revenues in the income 
statement. Alternatively, you might view cash received from interest and dividends as coming 
from investing activities. The logic for this treatment is that cash flows related to the purchase 
and sale of investments in some securities appear as investing activities in the statement of cash 
flows. U.S. GAAP requires firms to classify cash receipts from interest and dividends as an 
operating activity and to classify cash flows related to the purchase and sale of investments in 
securities as an investing activity. IFRS permits firms to classify cash received from interest and 
dividends as operating, or investing, or financing activities, provided the classification is consis-
tently applied across periods.
Similar ambiguities arise with interest expense. Classifying the cash outflow for interest 
expense as an operating activity would achieve consistency with its inclusion in the income 
statement as an expense. In contrast, classifying the cash outflow for interest expense as a 
financing activity would achieve consistency with the classification of debt issues and retire-
ments as a financing activity. U.S. GAAP requires firms to classify cash payments for interest 
expense as an operating activity. IFRS permits firms to select the classification (operating, or 
investing, or financing) for cash payments of interest expense, again requiring consistent clas-
sification from period to period. Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, issuing or repaying debt is 
a financing activity, as is paying cash dividends.
Cash Received from
Sales of Goods and
Services
Cash Received from
Sales of Investments
and Property, Plant,
and Equipment
Cash Received from
Issue of Debt or Capital
Stock
Cash Paid for
Operating Goods
and Services
Cash Paid for Acquisition
of Investments and
Property, Plant, and
Equipment
Cash Paid for Dividends
and Reacquisition of
Debt or Capital Stock
Cash Flow
from Operations
Cash Flow
from Investing
Cash Flow
from Financing
Net Change in Cash
for the Period
Operations
Investing
Financing








 

FIGURE 6.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Finally, certain purchases and sales of securities can be either an investing activity or an 
operating activity, and increases and decreases in certain short-term borrowings can be either 
an operating activity or a financing activity.
 PROBLEM  6.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Classifying cash flows by type of activity. Indicate whether each of the following 
transactions of the current period would appear as an operating, investing, or financing 
activity in the statement of cash flows. If any transaction would not appear in the 
statement of cash flows, suggest the reason. Assume the firm uses U.S. GAAP.
a. Disbursement of $96,900 to merchandise suppliers.
b. Receipt of $200,000 from issuing common shares.
c. Receipt of $49,200 from customers for sales made this period.
d. Receipt of $22,700 from customers this period for sales made last period.
e. Receipt of $1,800 from a customer for goods the firm will deliver next period.
f. Disbursement of $16,000 for interest expense on debt.
g. Disbursement of $40,000 to acquire land.
h. Issue common shares with market value of $60,000 to acquire land.
i. Disbursement of $25,300 as compensation to employees for services rendered this 
period.
j. Disbursement of $7,900 to employees for services rendered last period but not paid 
for last period.
k. Disbursement of $53,800 for a patent purchased from its inventor.
l. Acquisition of a building by issuing a note payable to a bank.
m. Disbursement of $19,300 as a dividend to shareholders.
n. Receipt of $12,000 from the sale of equipment that originally cost $20,000 and had 
$8,000 of accumulated depreciation at the time of sale.
o. Disbursement of $100,000 to redeem bonds at maturity.
p. Disbursement of $40,000 to acquire shares of IBM common stock.
q. Receipt of $200 in dividends from IBM relating to the shares of common stock 
acquired in transaction p above.
READING AND INTERPRETING THE INFORMATION 
IN THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Refer to Exhibit 6.1. Kellogg Group reported positive cash flow from operations in 2013 in the 
amount of $1,326 million. This amount exceeded Kellogg Group’s cash outflows for investing 
purposes of $789 million. Business terminology refers to the excess of cash flow from opera-
tions over cash flow used for investing as free cash flow.2 Kellogg Group’s free cash flow for fis-
cal 2013 was $537 (= $1,326 – $789) million.
Firms use free cash flow for various purposes. For example, to repay borrowing, pay a 
dividend, repurchase common shares, or add to cash on the balance sheet. In the most recent 
year, Kellogg Group reports that it paid dividends on common stock ($573 million) and repaid 
bonds payable ($233 million). Kellogg Group’s net cash outflow for financing activities was 
$806 million, or $269 million more than its free cash flow. Thus, as the last rows of Exhibit 6.1 
 2 Free cash flow is not a technical term in accounting. It is a term that financial analysts and investment bankers 
use, and has various definitions. Be sure you understand the definition as others use it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

173
Overview of the Statement of Cash Flows
show, Kellogg Group’s cash balance declined by $269 million, from $524 million at the begin-
ning of 2013 to $255 million at the end of 2013. This decline is also evident from a comparison 
of the cash balances on Kellogg Group’s balance sheet (Exhibit 6.2).
PRESENTATION FORMATS FOR THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS permit flexibility with respect to the display of information in the 
statement of cash flows. There are, however, the following requirements:
■ 
Firms must report cash flows from operations, investing, and financing for the current year 
and the prior two years.
■ 
Firms must report the beginning and ending cash balances, and the change in the cash bal-
ance. The change in cash must reconcile to the sum of the cash inflows and outflows from 
operating, investing, and financing activities.
■ 
Within the investing and financing cash flow categories, the presentation for most items 
should not net cash inflows against cash outflows. Instead, the firm must show the gross 
(that is, not netted) cash inflows and cash outflows. Gross reporting requires, for example, 
that firms show the amount of cash spent to acquire property, plant, and equipment for the 
year separately from the amount of cash received on sales of property, plant, and equip-
ment during the year.3
■ 
The operating, investing, and financing sections of the statement of cash flows do not report 
nonmonetary, sometimes called non-cash, transactions. Nonmonetary transactions affect 
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet but do not result in cash inflows or cash outflows. 
Examples include the acquisition of equipment in exchange for shares of stock or the con-
version of a firm’s debt into common shares. Firms must disclose nonmonetary transactions 
in the body of the statement of cash flows, or in a separate schedule, or in a note.
To illustrate these requirements refer to Great Deal, Inc.’s statement of cash flows (Exhibit 1.3) 
and to Thames Limited’s statement of cash flows (Exhibit 1.7). Both firms
■ 
Separately report cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities;
■ 
Reconcile beginning and ending cash balances to the change in cash flows during the year; 
and
■ 
Use the indirect method of reporting cash flows, which calculates cash flow from opera-
tions by reference to net income. We discuss the indirect method later in this chapter.
THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS RECONCILES NET 
INCOME WITH CASH FLOW FROM OPERATIONS
Your first exposure to constructing a statement of cash flows occurred in Chapter 3. There you 
analyzed every entry (change) in the Cash account and placed each change in a statement of 
cash flows. You did not classify cash flows into operating, investing, or financing activities. 
Although both U.S. GAAP and IFRS state a preference for the presentation of cash flows from 
operations as you derived them in Chapter 3 (the direct method), most firms present cash flows 
from operations as a reconciliation of net income to operating cash flow (the indirect method).
1. Direct method The direct method of presenting the cash from operations section of the 
statement of cash flows reports the amounts of cash received from customers less cash 
disbursed to suppliers, employees, lenders, and taxing authorities. The right panel of 
Exhibit 6.1 shows Kellogg Group’s statement of cash flows using the direct method.
2. Indirect method The indirect method of presenting the cash from operations section of the 
statement of cash flows begins with net income for a period and presents adjustments to 
net income for revenues and expenses not matched with cash receipts from customers or 
disbursement to suppliers of goods and services in the current period. The left panel of 
Exhibit 6.1 shows Kellogg Group’s statement of cash flows using the indirect method.
 3 Because gross reporting provides more information than net reporting, standard setters view gross reporting as 
providing a better representation of the firm’s operating, investing, and financing activities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Most firms report cash flow from operations using the indirect method. Before the FASB or 
IASB expressed preference for the direct method, most firms used the indirect method, so both 
preparers and users were familiar with it.4 Experienced financial analysts who use the statement 
of cash flows generally understand the adjustments required to convert net income to cash flow 
from operations. Our experience in teaching the statement of cash flows indicates that on ini-
tial exposure to the statement of cash flows, some students have difficulty understanding these 
adjustments, and therefore, find the direct method easier to understand. We illustrate the com-
putation of cash flow from operations using both the indirect method (because it is widely 
used) and the direct method (because it may be easier to understand). The two methods differ 
with respect to their derivation of cash flow from operations and are identical with respect to 
their derivations of cash flow from investing and cash flow from financing:
Statement of Cash Flows
Cash Flow from Operations (CFO) 
using indirect method
Cash Flow from Operations (CFO) 
using direct method
Cash Flow from Investing (CFI)
Cash Flow from Investing (CFI)
Cash Flow from Financing (CFF)
Cash Flow from Financing (CFF)
Change in Cash = CFO + CFI + CFF
Change in Cash = CFO + CFI + CFF
PREPARING THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
A firm could prepare its statement of cash flows directly from entries in its Cash account, 
including classifying each transaction affecting cash as an operating, or investing, or financing 
activity. As the number of transactions affecting cash increases, this approach becomes cum-
bersome. Most firms design their accounting systems to accumulate the information needed to 
prepare income statements and balance sheets. They transform information from the income 
statement and balance sheet into a statement of cash flows. We present a T-account work sheet 
for transforming balance sheet and income statement information and for preparing the state-
ment of cash flows. This approach relies on understanding the formula for calculating the 
change in cash from the balance sheet, described next.
THE CASH CHANGE EQUATION
To understand the preparation of a statement of cash flows, you must understand how changes 
in cash relate to changes in non-cash accounts. The accounting equation states
Balance Sheet 
Equation (Eq.1)
Assets
= Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
Cash + Non-cash Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
This equation must be true for balance sheets constructed at the start of the period and at 
the end of the period. If the start-of-period and end-of-period balance sheets maintain the 
accounting equation, then the following equation must also hold:
(Eq.2)
Change 
in Cash +
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
= Change in 
Liabilities +
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
Rearranging terms in this equation, we obtain the equation for the change in cash:
Cash Change 
Equation (Eq.3)
Change 
in Cash = Change in 
Liabilities +
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
−
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
 4 If the firm uses the direct method, it must also provide a separate reconciliation of net income to cash flows 
from operations. The reconciliation can appear either at the bottom of the statement of cash flows or in a sepa-
rate note.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

175
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
The left-hand side of the cash change equation (Eq. 3) represents the change in cash. The 
right-hand side of the equation reflects changes in all non-cash accounts and must also equal 
the change in cash. The equation states that the change in cash (left-hand side) equals the 
change in liabilities plus the change in shareholders’ equity minus the change in non-cash assets 
(right-hand side). For example, a bank loan increases cash and increases a liability, whereas the 
issue of common stock increases cash and increases shareholders’ equity. Each of these transac-
tions increases both sides of Equation 3.
Paying cash to acquire non-cash assets, for example, inventory or equipment, decreases cash 
and increases non-cash assets. Increases in non-cash assets have a negative sign on the right-
hand side of the equation, so paying cash to acquire assets decreases both sides of Equation 
3. We identify the causes of the change in cash by studying the changes in non-cash accounts and 
classifying each change as operating or investing or financing activities. The preceding italicized 
sentence provides the overview of the procedures that underlie the T-account work sheet for the 
statement of cash flows.
T-ACCOUNT WORK SHEET
The T-account work sheet does not show accounts as they appear in the firm’s general ledger. 
Rather, it is like scratch paper, used for computations that are not part of the formal record-
keeping system. We use the T-account work sheet to show the effects of transactions on the 
Cash account. Given the large number of transactions affecting the Cash account during a 
period, most firms prepare the statement of cash flows after they have prepared the income 
statement and the balance sheet. This section presents a step-by-step procedure for preparing 
the statement of cash flows from the balance sheet and the income statement.
Step 1 Obtain balance sheets for the beginning and end of the period covered by the state-
ment of cash flows and an income statement for that period. We use the comparative balance 
sheets of Kellogg Group for December 31, 2012 and 2013 (Exhibit 6.2) and its income state-
ment for fiscal 2013 (Exhibit 6.3).
Step 2 Prepare a T-account work sheet. An example based on the Kellogg Group for fiscal 
2013 appears in Exhibit 6.4. The top of the work sheet shows a master T-account titled Cash, 
subdivided into three sections labeled Operations, Investing, and Financing. The number at the 
top of each T-account is the beginning balance; the number at the bottom is the ending bal-
ance. The beginning and ending cash amounts for Kellogg Group are $524 million and $255 
million, respectively, and correspond to the amounts reported in its balance sheet (Exhibit 6.2). 
The check marks indicate the figures are balances. The master T-account, Cash, represents the 
left-hand side of Equation 3 for the change in cash.
After preparing the master T-account for Cash (the top of Exhibit 6.4), complete the 
work sheet by preparing T-accounts for each liability, shareholders’ equity, and non-cash asset 
account. The lower portion of Exhibit 6.4 shows the T-accounts for each of Kellogg Group’s 
non-cash accounts that changed during fiscal 2013. The balance in the account Income Taxes 
and Interest Payable did not change so the work sheet does not include a T-account for this 
item. Enter the beginning and ending balances in each account, from the balance sheet (see 
Exhibit 6.2). The sum of the changes in these individual T-accounts expresses the right-hand 
side of Equation 3 for the change in cash.
Cash Change Equation (Eq. 3)
Change 
in Cash = Change in 
Liabilities +
Change in 
Shareholders’ Equity −
Change in 
Non-cash Assets
Step 3 Explain the change in the master Cash T-account between the beginning and the end 
of the period. We do this by accounting for the cash effect of the change in each non-cash 
account during the period. First, reconstruct the entries originally recorded in the accounts 
during the period. Enter those entries into the same accounts on the T-account work sheet. 
Second, classify the entries in the master account for cash as an operating, or investing, or 
financing activity. The net change in all non-cash accounts provides the information needed 
to account for the change in cash, the left-hand side of Equation 3. If the reconstructed 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
transactions explain the net change in the right-hand side of the Cash Change Equation 
(Eq. 3), they will also explain the causes of the change in cash (the left-hand side).
In constructing the T-account work sheet, we make analytic entries that resemble journal 
entries. These entries are not part of a firm’s record-keeping system, and that appear only on 
the work sheet. Once we complete the T-account work sheet and prepare the statement of cash 
flows, we discard the analytic entries or save them in a file to remind us next period what we did 
this period.
The debits on the T-account work sheet must equal the credits. Common errors include 
partial recording of a transaction and recording part of a transaction on the wrong side of a 
T-account. The errors become evident on completion of the work sheet when the entries in one 
or more accounts on the T-account work sheet do not explain the change in the account dur-
ing the period. The preparer must then retrace each of the entries to discover the source of the 
error.
Reconstructing the transactions during the year usually proceeds more easily by accounting 
first for supplementary information. The following information applies to Kellogg Group for 
2013:
1. Net income is $1,192 million (Exhibit 6.3).
2. There were no sales, disposals, or impairments of property, plant, and equipment dur-
ing the period. Depreciation expense is $243 (= $1,567 – $1,324) million as reported on 
the income statement (Exhibit 6.3). This amount also equals the change in the accumu-
lated depreciation account reported on the balance sheet between 2012 and 2013 of $243 
(= $1,567 – $1,324) million.
3. Dividends declared and paid total $573 million. This amount also reconciles to the change 
in retained earnings:
Kellogg Group
T-Account Work Sheet
Cash
✓
524
Operations
Investing
Financing
✓
255
Accounts Receivable
Inventory
Property, Plant, and 
Equipment (Cost)
✓
1,011
✓
924
✓
3,975
✓
1,143
✓
897
✓
4,500
Accumulated Depreciation
Long-Term Investments
Accounts Payable
1,324
✓
1,874
✓
425
✓
1,567
✓
2,138
✓
561
✓
Accrued Liabilities
Bonds Payable
Retained Earnings
320
✓
2,022
✓
4,217
✓
180
✓
1,789
✓
4,836
✓
EXHIBIT 6.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

177
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
Beginning 
Retained Earnings
+
Net Income
−
Dividends
= Ending Retained 
Earnings
or
Dividends
=
Beginning 
Retained Earnings +
Net Income
−Ending Retained 
Earnings
For Kellogg Group: 
Dividends
=
$4,217 million
+ $1,192 million −$4,836 million
=
$573 million
The analytic entry to record the information about net income is as follows:
(1) 
Cash (Operations: Net Income). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,192
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,192
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
All the journal entries that together record the process of earning $1,192 million in net 
income are equivalent to the following single journal entry:
 
Net Assets (= All Assets Minus All Liabilities)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,192
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,192
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
+1,192
+1,192
(Opns.)
Summary entry equivalent to recording earnings of $1,192 million.
The preceding journal entry summarizes all the effects on the balance sheet of the firm’s 
income earning activities, as one debit to Net Assets. Both the T-account work sheet and the 
cash flow from operations section of an actual statement of cash flows, for the indirect method, 
start with the provisional assumption that all earnings produce cash from operations. Subse-
quent additions and subtractions adjust for transactions where that assumption is invalid. 
Thus, in analytic entry (1), the debit shows a provisional increase in cash from operations equal 
to net income for the period.
Cash Change Equation (Eq. 3)
Change 
in Cash = Change in 
Liabilities +
Change in 
Shareholders’ Equity −
Change in 
Non-cash Assets
Not all expenses decrease cash. To calculate cash from operations, we must add back to net 
income the amounts of expenses that do not use cash this period but instead use non-cash net 
assets in this period. An example is depreciation expense, illustrated in entry (2):
(2) 
Cash (Operations: Depreciation Expense Addback) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
243
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
243
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Depreciation expense, subtracted in calculating net income, did not reduce cash this period. 
Some time ago, Kellogg Group used cash to acquire the property, plant, and equipment it now 
depreciates. The use of cash appeared on the statement of cash flows for the earlier period, as 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
an investing use of cash. (We revisit this use of cash when we consider the analytical entry for 
the Property, Plant, and Equipment account.) The analytic entry for depreciation expense adds 
back depreciation expense to net income in calculating cash flow from operations.
Next, we record the supplementary information concerning dividends of $573 million 
declared and paid:
(3) 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
573
 
Cash (Financing: Dividends; Subtraction). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
573
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Dividends reduce retained earnings and cash. Paying cash dividends is a financing activity 
on the statement of cash flows.
Once the T-account work sheet reflects the supplementary information, we must make 
inferences about the reasons for the remaining changes in the non-cash balance sheet accounts.5 
Explanations for the changes in non-cash accounts appear below, in balance sheet order.
The Accounts Receivable account shows an increase of $132 (= $1,143 – $1,011) million. 
The analytic entry to record this information in the work sheet is as follows:
(4) 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
132
 
Cash (Operations: Subtractions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
132
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The firm’s operations of the period generated sales, but not all of these sales resulted in an 
increase in cash. Some of the sales increased accounts receivable. Because we start the state-
ment of cash flows with net income (provisionally assuming that all sales generated cash), we 
must subtract the portion of revenues that did not produce cash in arriving at cash from opera-
tions. The portion of revenues that did not produce cash equals the excess of sales on account 
over cash collections from customers. This amount equals the change in Accounts Receivable. 
The amount of the increase (decrease) in accounts receivable is the amount that must be sub-
tracted from (added to) net income to calculate cash from operations.
The next non-cash account that changed, Inventory, shows a decline of $27 (= $897 – $924) 
million. The analytic entry in the work sheet to explain the change in Inventory is as follows:
(5) 
Cash (Operations: Addition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
27
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
27
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Kellogg Group reduced the amount of inventory on its balance sheet. To calculate cash 
from operations, we must add to net income the decrease in inventories during the year. If 
inventories had increased, we would subtract the amount of the increase.
The next non-cash account, Property, Plant, and Equipment (PPE), shows an increase of 
$525 (= $4,500 – $3,975) million. Point (2) of the supplemental information states that Kellogg 
Group had no sales, disposals, or impairments of PPE during 2013. The only remaining trans-
action that could affect the PPE account is the purchase of new PPE during 2013. The amount 
of the purchase must equal the increase in this account, $525 million. The analytic entry is as 
follows:
(6) 
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
525
 
Cash (Investing: Acquisitions of Property, Plant, and Equipment)  . . . 
 
525
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
 5 The preparer of a statement of cash flows for an actual firm will use information in the firm’s accounting 
records regarding the change in each account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

179
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
The next non-cash account, Long-Term Investments, increased $264 (= $2,138 – $1,874) 
million during 2013. Absent other information, we assume Kellogg Group acquired long-term 
investments for cash during 2013. The analytic entry is as follows:
(7) 
Long-Term Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
264
 
Cash (Investing: Acquisition of Long-Term Investments)  . . . . . . . . . 
 
264
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The next non-cash account, Accounts Payable, increased in 2013 from $425 million to $561 
million at the end of the year, $136 million. The analytic entry to explain this increase is as 
follows:
(8) 
Cash (Operations: Additions)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
136
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
136
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
To understand this analytic entry, assume that Kellogg Group increased its accounts pay-
able because it purchased a resource (such as inventory) on credit. At the end of 2013, Kellogg 
Group acquired the resource but has not yet paid the supplier. Kellogg Group’s cash from oper-
ations is, therefore, higher this year by the amount of the increase in accounts payable.
The next non-cash account showing a change is Accrued Liabilities. The analytic entry to 
explain the decrease in the amount of Accrued Liabilities is as follows:
(9) 
Accrued Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
140
 
Cash (Operations: Subtraction). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
140
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The reasoning behind this analytic entry is the opposite as for analytic entry (8). Accrued 
liabilities declined by $140 (= $102 – $242) million, indicating that Kellogg Group reduced this 
liability (by paying cash) more than it increased resources acquired from creditors. (Acquiring 
resources from creditors increases Accounts Payable.) The net effect is an outflow of cash from 
operations by the amount of the decrease, $140 million.
Bonds Payable, the final non-cash account with a change not yet explained, shows a 
decrease of $233 (= $1,789 – $2,022) million for fiscal 2013. We infer that Kellogg Group used 
cash to repay some of its bonds payable during the year. The analytic entry is as follows:
(10)  Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
233
 
Cash (Financing: Paid Bonds Payable) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
233
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Exhibit 6.5 presents the completed T-account work sheet for Kellogg Group for 2013. The 
10 analytic entries explain all changes in the non-cash T-accounts and show annotations in the 
components of change in the Cash account.
Step 4 In the final step, we use the information in the master T-account for cash in the com-
pleted work sheet to prepare a statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.1 presents the Kellogg Group 
statement of cash flows. We describe the preparation of the statement of cash flows—under 
both the direct and indirect methods—in the next section.
DIRECT METHOD OF PREPARING THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
In this section, we describe how to prepare the cash flow from operations section of the state-
ment of cash flows using the direct method. The panel on the right-hand side of Exhibit 6.1 
displays the statement of cash flows derived using the direct method. The derivation of the 
direct method follows the three steps shown in the three panels in Exhibit 6.8.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
 PROBLEM  6.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Preparing a T-account work sheet for a statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.6 presents a 
comparative balance sheet for Robbie Corporation as of December 31, 2012 and 2013. 
Exhibit 6.7 shows the income statement for 2013. During 2013 the firm sold no property, 
plant, and equipment. It declared and paid dividends of $2,000. Prepare a T-account 
work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows for 2013. Use the format 
shown in Exhibit 6.5.
Step 1 Copy the income statement into the left-hand box.
Step 2 Copy into the middle box all the additions and subtractions in the operations sec-
tion of the master Cash account in the T-account work sheet, including the $1,192 of net 
Kellogg Group
T-Account Work Sheet (with Changes in Non-cash Accounts)
Cash
✓
524
Operations
Net Income
(1)
1,192
132 (4)
Increased Accounts Receivable
Depreciation Expense: 
(2)
243
140 (9)
Decreased Accrued Liabilities
 Addback
Decreased Inventory
(5)
27
Increased Accounts
(8)
136
 Payable
Investing
525 (6)
Acquisition of Property, 
 Plant, and Equipment
264 (7)
Acquisition of Long-Term
 Investments
Financing
573 (3)
Paid Dividends
233(10)
Paid Bonds Payable
✓
255
Accounts Receivable
Inventory
Property, Plant, and 
Equipment (Cost)
✓
1,011
✓
924
✓
3,975
(4)
   132
27 (5)
(6)
   525
✓
1,143
✓
897
✓
4,500
Accumulated Depreciation
Long-Term Investments
Accounts Payable
1,324
✓
1,874
✓
425
✓
   243 (2)
264 (8)
136 (8)
1,567
✓
2,138
✓
561
✓
Accrued Liabilities
Bonds Payable
Retained Earning
320
✓
2,022
✓
4,217
✓
140 (9)
(10)  
233
(3)
573
1,192 (1)
180
✓
1,789
✓
4,836
✓
EXHIBIT 6.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

181
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
Robbie Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheet
December 31, 2013 and 2012
(Problem 6.2 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
Robbie Corporation
Income Statement
For 2013
(Problem 6.2 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
December 31
2013
2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 25
$ 10
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
15
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  18
  20
 Total Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 65
$ 45
Noncurrent Assets
Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 66
$ 50
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (31)
    (25)
 Total Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 35
$ 25
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
$ 70
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable for Merchandise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 37
$ 30
 Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 37
$ 30
Long-Term Debt
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  18
  10
 Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 55
$ 40
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 20
$ 10
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  25
  20
 Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 45
$ 30
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
$ 70
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 180
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(140)
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(25)
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(6)
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
          (2)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   7
EXHIBIT 6.6
EXHIBIT 6.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
income shown below the box. Place the number next to the income statement item to which 
the addition or subtraction relates. For example, place the Accounts Receivable subtraction 
next to Sales Revenue, the Depreciation adjustment next to Depreciation Expense, and so on. 
To do this, you need to understand which income statement item a given addition or subtrac-
tion refers to. In placing the number in column (b), use parentheses if the number represents 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Kellogg Group
Deriving Direct Method Cash Flow from Operations
Using Data from T-Account Work Sheet
EXHIBIT 6.8
Each step is a spearate panel. Later versions condense all work into a single panel.
1. Copy Income Statement and Cash Flow from Operations
Operations
(a)
(b)
Changes in Related Balance 
Sheet Accounts From 
T-Account Work Sheet
(c)
(d)
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . .
$12,822 
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . .
(7,212)
Depreciation Expense   . . . . .
(243)
Selling, General and 
Administrative Expense  . . . .
(3,414)
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . .
(276)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . .
(485)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,192
        
 
$  1,326
= Cash Flow from Operations 
Derived via Indirect Method
$    —
2. Copy Information from T-Account Work Sheet Next to Related Income Statement Item
Operations
(a)
Copy from 
T-Account 
Work Sheet
(b)
Changes in Related 
Balance Sheet Accounts 
from T-Account 
Work Sheet
(c)
(d)
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . .
$12,822 
(132)
= Accounts Receivable 
Increase
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . .
(7,212)
27 
= Inventory Decrease
136 
= Accounts Payable Increase
Depreciation Expense. . . . . .
(243)
243 
= (Expense Not Using Cash)
Selling, General, and 
Administrative Expense  . . . .
(3,414)
(140)
= Accrued Liabilities Decrease
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . .
(276)
Income Taxes and Interest 
Payable (no change in 
balance sheet account)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . .
(485)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,192
$1,192
= Net Income
$1,326
= Cash Flow from Operations 
via Indirect Method
$    —
3. Sum Across Rows to Derive Direct Receipts and Expenditures
Operations
(a)
Copy from 
T-Account 
Work Sheet
(b)
Changes in Related 
Balance Sheet Accounts 
from T-Account Work 
Sheet
(c)
Direct 
Method
(d)
From Operations: Receipts 
Less Expenditures
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . .
$12,822
(132)
= Accounts Receivable 
Increase
$12,690 = Receipts from Customers
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . .
(7,212)
27 
= Inventory Decrease
(7,049) = Payments for Goods Available 
for Sale
136 
= Accounts Payable Increase
Depreciation Expense. . . . . .
(243)
243 
= (Expense Not Using Cash)
—
Selling, General, and 
Administrative Expense  . . . .
(3,414)
(140)
= Accrued Liabilities Decrease
(3,554) = Payments for Selling, General, 
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . .
(276)
Income Taxes and Interest 
Payable (no change in 
balance sheet account)
(276) =
 
and Administrative Items 
Payments for Interest 
Expense
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . .
(485)
(485) = Payments for Income Taxes
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,192
$1,192
= Net Income
$1,326
= Cash Flow from Operations 
via Indirect Method
$ 1,326 = Cash Flow from Operations via 
Direct Method
Note that the information in column (b) is cash flow from operations derived with the indirect method.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

183
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
a decrease in cash; no parentheses means the number represents an increase in cash. Add the 
numbers in column (b) to check that you have shown the indirect method’s computation of 
cash flow from operations. Column (b) resembles the cash flow from operations section of the 
statement of cash flows prepared using the indirect method, except that the numbers have a dif-
ferent order—net income is at the bottom, not at the top—and the other numbers are in income 
statement order.
Step 3 Add across the numbers in columns (a) and (b), and write the sums in column (d). 
Label the sum as either Receipts or Payments, and describe the nature of the receipt or pay-
ment. Add the numbers in column (d). If you have done the work correctly, the sum in column 
(d) will match the sum in column (b) and will equal cash flow from operations.
INDIRECT METHOD OF PREPARING THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The indirect method applies to the cash from operations section of the statement of cash flows. 
The indirect method begins with reported net income, and adjusts net income to derive cash 
flow from operations. We illustrate the adjustments and the calculation of cash flow from oper-
ations under the indirect method using the data provided for Kellogg Group. Kellogg Group’s 
statement of cash flows for fiscal 2013, prepared using the indirect method, is shown in the 
panel on the left-hand side of Exhibit 6.1.
The first line shows Kellogg Group’s net income, $1,192 million, from the income statement 
(Exhibit 6.3). The first adjustment to net income is to add non-cash depreciation expense of 
$243 million (the third line of Kellogg Group’s income statement in Exhibit 6.3). To under-
stand this adjustment, note that Kellogg Group used cash in some earlier period to acquire a 
building or equipment. In that prior period, it reported the use of cash as an investing activity. 
Depreciation appears as an expense on the income statement because it reflects the use of a 
portion of the buildings and equipment whose service life extends over many years. Accounting 
recognizes a portion of the cost of the cost of these assets as depreciation expense each period. 
Depreciation expense decreases shareholders’ equity and increases accumulated depreciation, 
which decreases net assets.6 The journal entry that the firm would make to recognize deprecia-
tion expense is:
 
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
243
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
243
Journal entry to record depreciation expense of $243 million for the year.
Depreciation expense does not use cash. This is evident by the fact that cash is not cred-
ited in the above journal entry. The amount of depreciation expense does, however, reduce net 
income.
The indirect method starts with net income, which includes a subtraction for depreciation 
expense (the third line of Exhibit 6.3 shows this subtraction). Because depreciation expense 
reduces net income but does not use cash, adding the depreciation expense amount back to 
net income yields an amount that is closer to cash flows. Thus, under the indirect method, the 
adjustment that adds back depreciation removes the effect of a non-cash expense, in calculating 
operating cash flows.7
The remaining adjustments to net income relate to changes in working capital items. In par-
ticular, Exhibit 6.1 shows subtractions of $132 million for accounts receivable and $140 million 
for accrued liabilities and additions of $27 million for inventories and $136 million for accounts 
payable. We explain one of these adjustments—accounts receivable—and leave the others for 
later chapters.
 6 The accounting for long-lived assets is discussed in Chapter 10. We introduce depreciation expense and accumu-
lated depreciation here because they are central to the statement of cash flows.
 7 To see this another way, imagine a firm whose only activity for a period was the recording of depreciation 
expense of $100—nothing else. That firm would show negative net income, a loss, of $100 and no change in 
cash. Cash flow from operations is zero. So, the reconciliation must start with the net loss of –$100, then add 
back the $100 depreciation expense, in order to reconcile the –$100 net loss with the zero cash flow from opera-
tions. Later chapters explain why the change in the balance sheet account for accumulated depreciation rarely 
equals the income statement amount for depreciation expense.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Recall that accounts receivable represent the amount that customers who purchased on 
credit owe at the balance sheet date. To derive the amount of cash Kellogg Group collected 
from its customers during 2013, it is helpful to understand the following:
■ 
Cash collected from prior period credit sales. Kellogg Group made sales in earlier periods 
as well in the current period. Kellogg Group received cash this period from customers 
who purchased in prior periods. The revenue from those prior sales appeared in the prior 
period’s income statement. Those sales increased Kellogg Group’s accounts receivable in 
the prior period and were followed by a decrease in accounts receivable this period when 
Kellogg Group collected the cash.
■ 
Cash sales this period and credit sales this period that were also paid this period. Kellogg 
Group received additional cash from customers who (a) paid cash this period and (b) pur-
chased on credit and paid this period. Both cases result in no change in accounts receivable 
from the beginning to the end of 2013.
■ 
Credit sales this period that have not yet been paid. Kellogg Group made credit sales in 2013 
that it will collect in future periods.
Exhibit 6.2 shows that, as a result of the above transactions, Kellogg Group’s accounts receiv-
able increased  by $132 (= $1,143 – $1,011) million during 2013. Thus, the amount of cash 
Kellogg Group collected from customers in 2013 equals its sales revenues for 2013 ($12,822 mil-
lion, reported in Exhibit 6.3), reduced by the increase in accounts receivable during this period 
(or increased by the decrease in accounts receivable during this period).8 Thus, Kellogg Group 
collected $12,690 million cash from customers in 2013 ($12,822 million sales revenue – $132 
million increase in accounts receivable).9
To reflect the amount of cash collected from customers, the indirect method adjusts net 
income for the difference between revenues recognized ($12,822 million) and the amount of 
cash collected ($12,690 million). That difference is the change in accounts receivable during the 
period. Under the indirect method, the firm will subtract from income an increase in accounts 
receivable and add to income a decrease in accounts receivable to arrive at cash flow from 
operations.
The following summarizes the adjustments to net income required under the indirect 
method to account for changes in working capital items:
Working Capital Account
Adjustment to Net Income Required to Derive Cash 
Flow from Operations Under the Indirect Method
Change in Current Asset:
 Increase
Subtraction of the amount of the increase
 Decrease
Addition of the amount of the decrease
Change in Current Liability:
 Increase
Addition of the amount of the increase
 Decrease
Subtraction of the amount of the decrease
To understand that the indirect and direct methods calculate the same amount of cash from 
operations, consider the following summary. The indirect method starts with net income, equal 
to revenues minus expenses. Then, it adjusts net income for revenues or expenses that produce 
or use cash in amounts different from the revenue or expense item. The direct method lists each 
revenue amount that increases cash and each expense amount that reduces cash.
 8 To see this another way, consider two unrealistic assumptions. First, assume that during a period a firm col-
lects no cash from any of the accounts receivable on its balance sheet at the beginning of the period. Then, the 
amount of cash the firm receives from customers equals sales revenue less the increase in accounts receivable. 
Second, assume that a firm has historically made sales on account but that in the current period it makes all its 
sales for cash and collects some of the accounts receivable on its balance sheet at the beginning of the period. 
Then, the amount of cash it receives during the period equals sales revenue plus the decrease in accounts 
receivable.
 9 This is the same amount reported as Receipts from Customers under the direct method (right-hand panel of 
Exhibit 6.1).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

185
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
 PROBLEM  6.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Deriving the statement of cash flows from a T-account work sheet. Refer to Problem 6.2 for 
Self-Study and its solution, including Exhibit 6.13.
a. Using the information in the T-account worksheet in Exhibit 6.13 and the format of 
Exhibit 6.8, derive cash flows from operations, using the direct method, for Robbie 
Corporation for 2013.
b. Prepare the cash from operations section of Robbie Corporation’s statement of cash 
flows for 2013 using the direct method.
c. Prepare the cash from operations section of Robbie Corporation’s statement of cash 
flows for 2013 using the indirect method.
d. Prepare the cash from investing section and the cash from financing section of Robbie 
Corporation’s statement of cash flows for 2013.
e. Reconcile the net cash flow of Robbie Corporation in 2013 with the change in the 
cash account shown on its balance sheet.
EXTENSION OF THE ILLUSTRATION TO MORE COMPLEX TRANSACTIONS
The illustration for Kellogg Group is simpler than the typical published statement of cash flows 
in at least four respects:
1. Only a few balance sheet accounts require explanation.
2. Several more complex transactions that affect cash flow from operations do not arise.
3. Each transaction recorded in Step 3 involves only one debit and one credit.
4. Except for the Retained Earnings account, each explanation of a non-cash account change 
involves only one analytic entry on the work sheet.
Most of the complications that arise in interpreting published statements of cash flows relate to 
accounting events that later chapters discuss. We illustrate here one complication, arising from 
an asset sale. We first assume the firm sold some of its equipment during the year at its carrying 
value. That is, we assume the cash proceeds from the sale equal the acquisition cost of the asset 
less the accumulated depreciation on the asset. With this assumption, there is no gain or loss on 
the sale.
Sale of Equipment with No Gain or Loss Reconsider the Kellogg Group example, 
assuming that Kellogg Group sold some equipment during 2013 for $13 million cash. It originally 
paid $20 million for this equipment, and the accumulated depreciation on the equipment was $7 
million. The entry made during the year to record the sale of the equipment was as follows:
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Buildings and Equipment (Cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
Journal entry for sale of equipment at carrying value.
Further assume the net decrease in cash for 2013 is still $269 million. To reflect the new 
information about the sale of the asset, we add one new journal entry (1a), replace journal 
entry (6) with (6a), and replace analytic entry (2) with (2a). The following analytic entry in the 
T-account work sheet recognizes the effect of the sale of equipment:
(1a) Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
The debit to Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) shows the proceeds of the sale. As a result 
of analytic entry (1a), the T-accounts for Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost) and Accumu-
lated Depreciation appear as follows:
Property, Plant, and 
Equipment (Cost)
Accumulated 
Depreciation
✓
3,975
1,324
✓
20
(1a)
(1a)
7
✓
4,500
1,567
✓
We can now analyze the change in the Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost) account: the 
T-account requires a net debit amount of $525 million to balance. The T-account indicates a 
credit (entry 1a) of $20 million to recognize the sale of equipment. To explain the net increase 
in the Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost) account, given the decrease of $20 million, it 
must be the case that Kellogg Group acquired new PPE for $545 (= $525 + $20) million during 
2013.
The reconstructed analytic entry, which replaces analytic entry (6), and which completes the 
explanation of the change in this account is as follows:
(6a) Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
545
 
Cash (Investing: Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment)  . . . . 
 
545
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
Likewise, to explain the change in the T-account for Accumulated Depreciation, we con-
sider the net credit change of $243 million and the debit entry of $7 million (1a), to recognize 
the sale of the asset. Thus, depreciation expense for 2013 must have been $250 (= $243 + $7) 
million. The reconstructed analytic entry, which replaces analytic entry (2) and which completes 
the explanation of the change in the Accumulated Depreciation account is as follows:
(2a) Cash (Operations: Depreciation Expense Addback) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The increase in depreciation expense, $7 million, reduces income, from $1,192 to $1,185 
(=  $1,192 – $7) million. There is no effect on cash from operations. Exhibit 6.9 presents a 
revised T-account work sheet for Kellogg Group incorporating the new information on the sale 
of equipment.
Loss on Sale of Equipment Now assume that during 2013 Kellogg Group sold the 
equipment discussed previously for $12 million, instead of $13 million. The entry made to 
record the sale of the equipment is as follows:
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12
Loss on Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Buildings and Equipment (Cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
This entry removes from the accounting records all amounts related to the equipment sold 
including its acquisition cost of $20 million and the $7 million of accumulated depreciation 
recognized while Kellogg Group used the equipment. The entry also records the cash Kellogg 
Group received from sale of the equipment. The difference between the cash proceeds and the 
carrying value of the equipment is a loss of $1 [= $12 – ($20 – $7)] million. This loss reduces 
net income by $1 million.
The following analytic entry on the T-account work sheet would recognize the effect of the 
sale of equipment for $12 million:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

187
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
(1a) Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12
Cash (Operations: Loss on Sale of Equipment Addback)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The debit to Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) shows the $12 million proceeds of the 
sale. The debit to Cash (Operations: Loss on Sale of Equipment Addback) for $1 million 
adds back to net income the loss on the sale of equipment. Like the depreciation expense 
addback, the debit to Cash (Operations: Loss on Sale of Equipment Addback) does not rep-
resent an operating source of cash. The addback offsets the subtraction of the loss in comput-
ing net income. The loss reduced income but did not use cash this period. The firm spent cash 
Kellogg Group
Revised T-Account Work Sheet
Cash
✓
524
Operations
Net Income
(1)
1,185
132 (4)
Increased Accounts Receivable
Depreciation Expense: 
(2a)
250
140 (9)
Decreased Accrued Liabilities
 Addback
Decreased Inventory
(5)
27
Increased Accounts
(8)
136
 Payable
Investing
Proceeds from Sale of
(1a)
13
545 (6a)
Acquisition of Property, 
 Property, Plant, and
 Plant, and Equipment
 Equpiment
264 (7)
Acquisition of Long-Term
 Investments
Financing
573 (3)
Paid Dividends
233(10)
Paid Bonds Payable
✓
255
Accounts Receivable
Inventory
Property, Plant, and 
Equipment (Cost)
✓
1,011
✓
924
✓
3,975
(4)
   132
27 (5)
(6)
   525
20 (1a)
✓
1,143
✓
897
✓
4,500
Accumulated Depreciation
Long-Term Investments
Accounts Payable
1,324
✓
1,874
✓
425
✓
(1a)
7
   250 (2)
264 (8)
136 (8)
1,567
✓
2,138
✓
561
✓
Accrued Liabilities
Bonds Payable
Retained Earnings
320
✓
2,022
✓
4,217
✓
140 (9)
(10)  
233
(3)
573
1,185 (1)
180
✓
1,789
✓
4,829
✓
EXHIBIT 6.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

188
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
sometime in the past, and it disposed of the assets purchased with that cash for an amount less 
than their carrying value.
The impact of selling the equipment at a loss on various lines of the statement of cash 
flows is as follows:
OPERATIONS
Net Income (Loss on Sale of Equipment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   (1)
Loss on Sale of Equipment Addback  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  1
 
Cash Flow from Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 0
INVESTING
Proceeds from Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$12
Change in Cash from Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$12
One might view the recognition of a loss on the sale of equipment as indicating that the 
firm recorded insufficient depreciation during prior periods. If Kellogg Group had known for 
certain that it would receive $12 million for the equipment, it would have recognized another $1 
million of depreciation expense during the periods when it used the equipment. Then, the sale 
of the equipment would then have resulted in no gain or loss.
Gain on Sale of Equipment Extending this illustration still further, assume that Kellogg 
Group received $15 million cash when it sold the equipment. The entry to record this sale is as 
follows:
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
 
Gain on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2
Journal entry to record sale of equipment.
This entry, like the one to record the sale at a loss, removes the balance sheet amounts for 
the cost of the equipment and its accumulated depreciation, and records the cash proceeds. In 
this case the cash proceeds exceed the carrying value of the equipment, resulting in a gain. This 
gain increases net income by $2 million.
The following analytic entry in the T-account work sheet would recognize the effect of the 
sale of equipment for $2 million:
(1a) Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7
 
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
 
Cash (Operations: Gain on Sale of Equipment Subtraction)  . . . . . . . . 
 
2
Analytic entry recorded in T-account work sheet.
The debit to Cash (Investing: Sale of Equipment) shows the $2 million proceeds of the sale. 
The credit to Cash (Operations: Gain on Sale of Equipment Subtraction) reduces net income 
for the gain on the sale of equipment that did not provide an operating cash inflow. Unless 
we subtract the $2 million gain in the operations section of the work sheet, we overstate the 
amount of cash inflow from this transaction, as the following analysis summarizes:
OPERATIONS
Net Income (Gain on Sale of Equipment) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 2
Subtraction for Gain on Sale of Equipment Not Providing an
 
Operating Cash Inflow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   (2)
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 0
INVESTING
Proceeds from Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$15
Change in Cash from Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$15
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

189
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
 PROBLEM  6.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Preparing a statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.10 presents a comparative balance sheet 
for Gordon Corporation as of December 31, 2012 and 2013. Exhibit 6.11 presents the 
income statement for 2013. Supplemental information pertaining to Gordon Corporation 
follows:
■ During 2013 the company declared and paid dividends of $120,000.
■ During 2013 the company sold buildings and equipment that originally cost $55,000 
and had accumulated depreciation at the time of sale of $30,000.
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of the statement of cash flows for 
2013 using the indirect method for cash flows from operations.
b. Derive a presentation for cash flows from operations using the format of Exhibit 6.8.
c. Present a statement of cash flows for 2013 using the direct method for cash flows 
from operations.
Gordon Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheet
December 31, 2013 and 2012
(Problem 6.4 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
December 31
2013
2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   40
$   70
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
420
320
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
470
360
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    70
    50
 Total Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000
$  800
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  250
$  200
Buildings and Equipment (Net of Accumulated Depreciation of
 $840 in 2013 and $800 in 2012)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,150
 1,000
 Total Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,400
$1,200
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,400
$2,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  440
$  320
Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80 
60
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   360 
   170
 Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  880
$  550
Noncurrent Liabilities
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   200
   250
 Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,080
$  800
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  540
$  500
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   780
   700
 Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,320
$1,200
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,400
$2,000
EXHIBIT 6.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
USING INFORMATION FROM THE 
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The statement of cash flows provides information that helps the reader assess (1) the impact of 
operations on liquidity and (2) the relations among cash flows from operating, investing, and 
financing activities.
IMPACT OF OPERATIONS ON LIQUIDITY
Perhaps the most important omission from the balance sheet and the income statement is 
how the operations of a period affected cash flows. Increased earnings do not always gener-
ate increased cash flow from operations. When increased earnings result from expanding 
operations, the firm usually has decreased cash flow from operations. A growing, successful 
firm may have increasing amounts for accounts receivable and inventories, resulting in a lag 
between earnings and cash flows. The need to wait for the collection of accounts receivable but 
to acquire and pay for additional inventory in anticipation of future sales can lead to negative 
cash from operations. Growing businesses often use financing from issuing debt or common 
shares to meet their cash needs. A failure to obtain long-term financing can lead to chronic 
liquidity problems.
On the other hand, increased cash flow can accompany reduced earnings. Consider, for 
example, a firm that is experiencing operating problems and reduces the scope of its activities. 
Although such a firm likely will report reduced net income or even losses, it might experience 
positive cash flow from operations. The positive cash flow results from its collecting accounts 
receivable from prior periods while it does not replace inventories, thus saving cash.
RELATIONS AMONG CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING, 
INVESTING, AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES
The relations among the cash flows from each of the three principal business activities differ 
depending on the characteristics of the firm’s products and its maturity, for example a new and 
rapidly growing firm versus a stable and mature firm. Consider each of the four following pat-
terns of cash flows.
Cash Flows from:
Firm A
Firm B
Firm C
Firm D
Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (3)
$  7
$15
$ 8
Investing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(15)
(12)
(8)
(2)
Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
        18
   5
    (7)
     (6)
Net Cash Flow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$         0
$  0
$ 0
$ 0
Gordon Corporation
Income Statement
For 2013
(Problem 6.4 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,600
Less:
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(900)
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(70)
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(255)
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(30)
Loss on Sale of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(15)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (130)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  200
EXHIBIT 6.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

191
Interpretative Issues Involving the Statement of Cash Flows
Firm A is a new, rapidly growing firm that is not yet profitable. It experiences buildups of its 
accounts receivable and inventories and, thus, has negative cash flow from operations. To sus-
tain its growth, Firm A invests in plant and equipment and relies on external sources of cash to 
finance both its operating and its investing activities.
Firm B is a more seasoned firm than Firm A, but one that is still growing. It operates profit-
ably and generates positive cash flow from operations. This cash flow from operations, however, 
falls short of the amount needed to finance acquisitions of plant and equipment. Firm B there-
fore requires external financing.
Firm C illustrates the cash flow pattern of a mature, stable firm. It generates sufficient cash 
flow from operations to acquire new plant and equipment, to repay financing from earlier peri-
ods, and, perhaps, to pay dividends.
Firm D is a firm in the early stages of decline. Its cash flow from operations is positive, per-
haps because of decreases in accounts receivable and inventories. In the later stages of decline, 
its cash flow from operations may turn negative. A declining firm reduces its capital expendi-
tures and uses some of its cash flow from operations to retire outstanding debt and shares. It 
may also use cash to invest in developing new products or to enter other industries.
These four cases do not, of course, cover all of the patterns of cash flows found in financial 
reports. They illustrate how the characteristics of a firm’s products and industry can affect the 
interpretation of information in the statement of cash flows.
INTERPRETATIVE ISSUES INVOLVING 
THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Some analysts view cash flow from operations as equally important, or more important, 
than net income as a performance measure and in doing valuations.10 Interpreting cash from 
operations as a measure of operating performance requires considering cash flows along two 
dimensions:
1. Their timing.
2. Their classification and disclosure in the statement of cash flows and related notes.
TIMING OF OPERATING CASH FLOWS
Firms have some choice as to when they disburse cash. Delaying payments to suppliers during 
the last few days of an accounting period conserves cash and thereby increases cash flow from 
operations for that period. The cash payments during the early part of the next period reduce 
cash flow from operations in that period. Thus, delaying payment increases cash flow from oper-
ations during the first period and decreases cash flow from operations during the second period. 
The firm can repeat the process at the end of the second period—delaying payments from then 
to the third period—to offset the negative cash flow effects of the payments made early in the 
second period. A growing firm that delays payments at the end of every period reports larger 
cash flow from operations each period than if it had not delayed making the cash payments at 
the end of every period. Such a firm is, in effect, obtaining short-term financing from its suppli-
ers. Absent contracts or other agreements that preclude delayed payments, this business practice 
is legal. Sufficiently delayed payments might harm a firm’s reputation or its credit rating.
CLASSIFICATION AND DISCLOSURE OF TRANSACTIONS
Earlier in this chapter we discussed certain ambiguities in the classification of cash flows. Other 
ambiguous classifications involve complex financial instruments that are beyond the scope 
of this textbook. Still others involve transactions that you have not yet seen. An analyst who 
wishes to use cash flows from operations as an indicator of performance should be aware that 
classification decisions can affect cash from operations, perhaps significantly.
10 When performing a valuation (for example, of a firm), it is important to distinguish between one-time and 
recurring items. The statement of cash flows often presents operating items in a way that makes interpreting 
this recurring/non-recurring distinction difficult. Rather, one needs to study the income statement items, as 
Chapter 17 describes.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Example 1 Distinguishing cash flows to acquire inventory from cash flows for investing activ-
ities. Suppose a firm purchases items such as films and games for short-term rentals to custom-
ers. The useful lives of these items range from about six months to two years.
■ 
Are these items inventory? If so, cash paid to acquire the items is an operating cash flow.
■ 
Or, are the items noncurrent assets? If so, the cash paid is an investing cash flow.
The firm does not sell the items; it rents them. Accounting practice classifies the cash payments 
to acquire the rental items as part of operations. The classification does not affect total cash 
paid by the firm to acquire rental items. Cash from operations is larger if the firm classifies the 
expenditure as an acquisition of noncurrent assets.
Example 2 Many auto dealers finance a portion of their inventories by borrowing from 
banks. These arrangements are commonly known as “floor plan financing.” Is a floor plan 
financing an operating cash flow, because it functions like accounts payable in financing inven-
tories, or is it a financing cash flow? Accounting practice classifies the arrangements as financ-
ing. The classification does not affect total cash flows nor does it affect the substance of the 
financing arrangement, but it does affect cash from operations.
 PROBLEM  6.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Effect of transactions on the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 shows a simplified 
statement of cash flows for a period. Numbers appear on 11 of the lines in the statement. 
Other lines (indicated with an “S”) are various subtotals and grand totals; ignore these 
(continued)
Simplified Statement of Cash Flows
(Problem 6.5 for Self-Study)
EXHIBIT 6.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
OPERATIONS
Cash Receipts from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1)
Less: Cash Payments to Suppliers, Employees, and Others  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  −(2)
Cash Flow from Operations [= (1) – (2)]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 −S1
Reconciliation of Net Income to Cash Flow from Operations
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          (3)
Additions to Net Income to Compute Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             +(4)
Subtractions from Net Income to Compute Cash Flow from Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             −(5)
Cash Flow from Operations [= (3) + (4) – (5)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S1
INVESTING
Proceeds from Dispositions of “Investing” Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+(6)
Cash Used to Acquire “Investing” Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 −(7)
Cash Flow from Investing [= (6) – (7)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S2
FINANCING
Cash Provided by Increases in Debt or Capital Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+(8)
Cash Used to Reduce Debt or Capital Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
−(9)
Cash Used for Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
−(10)
Cash Flow from Financing [= (8) – (9) – (10)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S3
Net Change in Cash [= S1 + S2 + S3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(11)
Cash, Beginning of the Period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S4
Cash, End of the Period [= (11) + S4]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S5
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

193
Solutions to Self-Study Problems 
in the remainder of the problem. Assume that the accounting cycle is complete for the 
period and that the firm has prepared all of the financial statements. It then discovers 
that it has overlooked a transaction. It records that transaction in the accounts and 
corrects all of the financial statements. For each of the following transactions, indicate 
which of the numbered lines of the statement of cash flows change, and state the amount 
and direction of the change. If net income, line (3), changes, be sure to indicate whether it 
decreases or increases. Ignore income tax effects.
 
(Hint: First, construct the entry the firm would make in its accounts to record the 
transaction. Then, for each line of the journal entry, identify the line of Exhibit 6.12 that 
the transaction affects.)
a. Depreciation expense of $2,000 on an office computer.
b. Purchase of machinery for $10,000 cash.
c. Declaration of a cash dividend of $6,500 on common stock; the firm paid the divi-
dend by the end of the fiscal year.
d. Issue of common shares for $12,000 cash.
e. Proceeds of the sale of an investment in another firm’s common shares, a noncurrent 
asset, for $15,000 cash; the firm sold the investment for its book value of $15,000.
SUMMARY
The statement of cash flows reports the effects of a firm’s operating, investing, and financing 
activities on cash flows. Information in the statement helps readers to understand the following 
concepts:
1. The effect of operations on the liquidity of a firm.
2. The level of capital expenditures needed to support ongoing and growing levels of activity.
3. The major changes in the financing of a firm.
Preparing the statement of cash flows requires analyzing changes in balance sheet accounts 
during the period, as represented by the cash change equation (Eq. 3). As an outcome of the 
balance sheet equation, the net change in cash equals the net change in all non-cash accounts.
The statement of cash flows usually presents cash flow from operations in the indirect 
format, beginning with net income for the period. The indirect format adjusts net income for 
revenues not providing cash, for expenses not using cash, and for changes in working capital 
accounts. The result is cash flow from operations. Some firms use the direct method to present 
cash flow from operations, listing all receipts generated by revenue transactions and subtract-
ing all expenditures for expenses that use cash during the current period. The cash flows from 
investing activities and financing activities appear after cash flow from operations.
Interpreting a statement of cash flows requires an understanding of the economic char-
acteristics of the industries in which a firm conducts its activities, including capital intensity, 
growth characteristics, and similar factors.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 6.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Classifying cash flows by type of activity.)
a. Operating
b. Financing
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
c. Operating
d. Operating
e. Operating
f. Operating
g. Investing
h. Item does not affect cash flows during the current period and would therefore not appear 
in the statement of cash flows. The firm must disclose this transaction in a separate sched-
ule or a note to the financial statements.
i. Operating
j. Operating
k. Investing
l. Item does not affect cash flows during the current period and would therefore not appear 
in the statement of cash flows. The firm must disclose this transaction in a separate sched-
ule or note to the financial statements.
m. Financing
n. Investing
o. Financing
p. Investing
q. Operating
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 6.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Robbie Corporation; preparing a T-account work sheet for a statement of cash flows.)
Exhibit 6.13 presents a completed T-account work sheet for Robbie Corporation.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 6.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Robbie Corporation; deriving the statement of cash flows from a T-account work sheet.)
a.  Exhibit 6.14 derives the direct method presentation for cash flows from operations from the 
T-account work sheet in Exhibit 6.13. 
b.  Robbie Corporation’s statement of cash flows derived under the direct method is as follows:
Sources of Cash:
 
Receipts from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 173,000
Uses of Cash:
 
Cash Paid for Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(131,000)
 
Cash Paid for Selling, General, and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(25,000)
 
Cash Paid for Interest Charges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (2,000)
Cash Flow from Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 15,000
c.  Robbie Corporation’s statements of cash flows derived under the indirect method is shown 
below:
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  7,000
Depreciation Expense (Addition)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6,000
Adjustments for Changes in Working Capital:
 
Increase in Accounts Receivable (Subtraction). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(7,000)
 
Decrease in Inventory (Addition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,000
 
Increase in Accounts Payable (Addition). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   7,000
Cash Flow from Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$15,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

195
Solutions to Self-Study Problems 
d.  Robbie Corporation’s cash flows from investing and financing for 2013 is as follows:
Cash Flow from Investing
Purchased Property, Plant and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  (16,000)
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$(16,000)
Cash Flow from Financing
Issued Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$    8,000
Issued Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
Paid Dividends on Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (2,000)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 16,000
e.  Net change in Robbie Corporation’s cash flows for 2013 follows:
Cash Flow from Operations (Direct or Indirect Method)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  15,000
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(16,000)
Cash Flow from Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  16,000
Net Cash Flow  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$15,000
Cash Balance, Beginning of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  10,000
Cash Balance, End of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$25,000
Robbie Corporation
T-Account Work Sheet
(Problem 6.2 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
Cash
✓
10
Operations
(2)
2
7 (1)
(4)
6
(5)
7
(8)
7
Investing
16 (3)
Financing
(6)
8
2 (9)
(7)
10
✓
25
Accounts Receivable
Merchandise Inventories
Property, Plant, 
and Equipment
✓
15
✓
20
✓
50
(1)
7
2 (2)
(3)
16
✓
22
✓
18
✓
66
Accumulated 
Depreciation
Accounts Payable 
for Merchandise
Bonds Payable
25
✓
30
✓
10
✓
6 (4)
7 (5)
8 (6)
31
✓
37
✓
18
✓
Common Stock
Retained Earnings
10
✓
20
✓
10 (7)
(9)  
2
7 (8)
20
✓
25
✓
EXHIBIT 6.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 6.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Gordon Corporation; preparing a statement of cash flows.)
Exhibit 6.15 presents a completed T-account work sheet for Gordon Corporation. 
Exhibit  6.16 derives a direct method presentation of cash flows for operations. Exhibit 6.17
presents a formal statement of cash flows.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 6.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Effect of transactions on the statement of cash flows.) Preparing the journal entry for each 
transaction aids in understanding the effect on the 11 numbered lines in Exhibit 6.12.
a. 
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
0
0
−2,000
−2,000
This entry has no impact on operating cash flows, so it has no effect on lines (1) and (2). It 
involves a debit to an income statement account, so line (3) decreases by $2,000. Deprecia-
tion expense reduces net income but does not affect cash line (11). Thus, line (4) increases 
by $2,000 for the addback of depreciation expense to net income. This addback eliminates 
the effect of depreciation on both cash flow from operations and cash.
b. 
Machinery. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
(continued)
Robbie Corporation
Deriving Direct Method Cash Flow from Operations
Using Data from T-Account Work Sheet
(Problem 6.3 for Self-Study)
EXHIBIT 6.14
1. Copy Income Statement and Cash Flow from Operations
2. Copy Information from T-Account Work Sheet Next to Related Income Statement Item
3. Sum Across Rows to Derive Direct Receipts and Expenditures
Operations
(a)
Indirect 
Method
(b)
Changes in Related 
Balance Sheet Accounts from 
T-Account Work Sheet
(c)
Direct 
Method
(d)
From Operations:
Receipts Less Expenditures
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . .
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . .
Selling and Administrative 
Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . .
Depreciation Expense. . . .
Interest Expense. . . . . . .
$ 180,000 
$(7,000)
= Accounts Receivable Increase (1)
Inventory Decrease (2)
Accounts Payable for Merchandise 
Increase (5)
$ 173,000
Receipts from Customers
(140,000)
2,000
=
$  (131,000) Payments for Merchandise
7,000
=
(25,000)
(No balance sheet account changes.)
(25,000) Payments for Selling and 
Administrative Services
(6,000)
6,000
(Expense Not Using Cash) (4)
—
(2,000)
—
Interest Payable (no change in 
balance sheet)
(2,000) Payments for Interest
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . .
$   7,000
$ 7,000
= Net Income  Totals . . . . . . . .
$  15,000
= Cash Flow from Operations 
Derived via Direct Method
$15,000
= Cash Flow from Operations 
Derived via Indirect Method
Note that the information in column (b) is cash flow from operations derived with the indirect method, with items in a different order.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

197
Solutions to Self-Study Problems   
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
−10,000
(Invst.)
0
0
+10,000
This entry does not involve receipts from customers nor payments to suppliers, so it does 
not affect lines (1) and (2). It involves a credit to Cash, so line (11) decreases by $10,000. 
Because line (11) is the net change in cash for the period, some other line must change 
as well. Acquisitions of equipment represent Investing activities, so line (7) increases by 
$10,000. Note that line (7) has a negative sign, so this means an increase to an amount 
subtracted; increasing this line reduces cash.
Gordon Corporation
T-Account Work Sheet
(Problem 6.4 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
Cash
✓
70
Operations
(1)
200
100 (5)
(4)
70
110 (6)
(3)
15
20 (7)
(10)
120
(11)
20
(12)
190
Investing
(3)
10
50 (8)
245 (9)
Financing
(14)
40
120 (2)
50(13)
✓
40
Accounts Receivable
Merchandise Inventory
Prepayments
✓
320
✓
360
✓
50
(5)
100
(6)
110
(7)
20
✓
420
✓
470
✓
70
Land
Buildings and Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation
✓
200
✓
1,800
800
✓
(8)
50
(9)
245
55 (3)
(3)
30
70 (4)
✓
250
✓
1,990
840
✓
Accounts Payable
Income Taxes Payable
Other Current Liabilities
320
✓
60
✓
170
✓
120(10)
20(11)
190(12)
440
✓
80
✓
360
✓
Bonds Payable
Common Stock
Retained Earnings
250
✓
500
✓
700
✓
(13)
50
40(14)
(2)
120
200 (1)
200
✓
540
✓
780
✓
EXHIBIT 6.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
c. 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,500
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
−6,500
(Finan.)
0
−6,500
0
This entry involves a credit to Cash, so line (11) decreases by $6,500. Dividends are a 
financing activity, so line (10) increases by $6,500.
d. 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
+12,000
(Finan.)
0
+12,000
0
The debit to Cash means that line (11) increases by $12,000. Issuing stock is a financing 
transaction, so line (8) increases by $12,000.
Gordon Corporation
Deriving Direct Method Cash Flow from Operations Using Data 
from T-Account Work Sheet
(Problem 6.4 for Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.16
1. Copy Income Statement and Cash Flow from Operations
2. Copy Information from T-Account Work Sheet Next to Related Income Statement Item
3. Sum Across Rows to Derive Direct Receipts and Expenditures
Operations
(a)
Indirect 
Method
(b)
Changes in Related 
Balance Sheet Accounts from 
T-Account Work Sheet
(c)
Direct 
Method
(d)
From Operations:
Receipts Less Expenditures
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,600
$(100)
= Accounts Receivable Increase 
$1,500
Receipts from Customers
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . .
(900)
120
= Accounts Payable Increase
(890)
Payments for Merchandise
(110)
= Merchandise Inventory Increase
—
Depreciation Expense. . . . .
(70)
70
(Expense Not Using Cash)
Selling and Administrative 
Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(255)
190
= Other Current Liabilities Increase
(85)
Payments for Selling and 
Administrative Services
(20)
= Prepayment Increase
Interest Expense. . . . . . . .
(30)
—
= Interest Payable (no change in
(30)
Payments for Interest
Loss on Disposal of 
Buildings and Equipment. . .
(15)
15
      balance sheet) 
(Loss Not Using Cash)
—
Income Tax Expense  . . . . .
(130)
20
= Income Taxes Payable Increase
(110)
Payments for Income Taxes
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . .
$  200
$ 200
= Net Income  Totals . . . . . . . .
$  385
= Cash Flow from Operations 
Derived via Direct Method
$ 385
= Cash Flow from Operations 
Derived via Indirect Method
Note that the information in column (b) is cash flow from operations derived with the indirect method, with items in a different order.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

199
Solutions to Self-Study Problems   
e. 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Investment in Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
Change 
in Cash
=
Change in 
Liabilities
+
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
–
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
+15,000
(Finan.)
0
0
−15,000
The debit to Cash means that line (11) increases by $15,000. Selling investments in securi-
ties is an investing activity, so line (6) increases by $15,000.
Gordon Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows
For 2013
(Problem 6.4 For Self-Study)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.17
© Cengage Learning 2014
OPERATIONS
Receipts from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,500
Payments to Suppliers of Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(890)
Payments for Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(85)
Payments to Lenders for Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(30)
Payments for Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (110)
Cash Flow from Operating Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 385
RECONCILIATION OF NET INCOME TO CASH PROVIDED BY OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  200
Additions:
 Depreciation Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70
 Loss on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15
 Increase in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120
 Increase in Income Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 Increase in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
190
Subtractions:
 Increase in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(100)
 Increase in Merchandise Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(110)
 Increase in Prepayments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (20)
 Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  385
INVESTING
Acquisition of Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    (50)
Sale of Buildings and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10
Acquisition of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (245)
 Cash Used for Investing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(285)
FINANCING
Common Stock Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   40
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(120)
Repayment of Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (50)
 Cash Used for Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (130)
Net Decrease in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$      (30)
Cash, Beginning of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   70
Cash, End of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  40
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Statement of cash flows
Cash equivalents
Cash flow from operations
Cash flow from investing activities
Cash flow from financing activities
Free cash flow
Direct method
Indirect method
cash change equation
T-account work sheet
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. “One can most easily accomplish the reporting objective of the income statement under 
the accrual basis of accounting and the reporting objective of the statement of cash flows 
by issuing a single income statement using the cash basis of accounting.” Evaluate this 
proposal.
 3. “The accrual basis of accounting creates the need for a statement of cash flows.” Explain.
 4. “The statement of cash flows provides information about changes in the structure of a 
firm’s assets and sources of financing.” Explain.
 5. A student remarked: “The direct method of computing cash flow from operations is easier 
to understand than the indirect method. Why do the majority of firms follow the indirect 
method in preparing their statements of cash flows?” Respond to this student.
 6. The statement of cash flows classifies cash expenditures for interest expense as an operat-
ing activity but classifies cash expenditures to redeem debt as a financing activity. Explain 
this apparent paradox.
 7. Under U.S. GAAP, the statement of cash flows classifies cash expenditures for interest on 
debt as an operating activity but classifies cash expenditures for dividends to shareholders 
as a financing activity. Explain this apparent paradox.
 8. The statement of cash flows classifies changes in accounts payable as an operating activity 
but classifies changes in short-term bank borrowing as a financing activity. Explain this 
apparent paradox.
 9. The acquisition of equipment by assuming a mortgage is a transaction that firms cannot 
report in their statement of cash flows but must report in a supplemental schedule or note. 
Of what value is information about this type of transaction? What is the reason for its 
exclusion from the statement of cash flows?
10. One writer stated, “Depreciation expense is a firm’s chief source of cash for growth.” 
A reader criticized this statement by replying, “The fact remains that if companies had 
elected, in any year, to charge off $10 million more depreciation than they did charge off, 
they would not thereby have added one dime to the total of their cash available for expand-
ing plants or for increasing inventories or receivables. Therefore, to speak of depreciation 
expense as a source of cash is incorrect and misleading.” Comment on these statements, 
taking into account income tax effects.
11. A firm generated net income for the current year, but cash flow from operations was nega-
tive. How can this happen?
12. A firm operated at a net loss for the current year, but cash flow from operations was posi-
tive. How can this happen?
13. The sale of equipment for an amount of cash greater than the carrying value of the equip-
ment results in a cash receipt equal to the carrying value of the equipment plus the gain on 
the sale, which appears in income. How might the accountant treat this transaction in the 
statement of cash flows? Consider both the direct and indirect methods.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

201
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
EXERCISES
14. Derive sales revenue from data in the statement of cash flows and balance sheet. Microchem 
Corporation reported a balance of €5,196 million in accounts receivable at the beginning 
of the year and €5,334 million at the end of the year. Its statement of cash flows using the 
direct method reported cash collections from customers of €33,551 million for the year. 
Assuming that Microchem Corporation makes all sales on account, compute the amount 
of sales during the year.
15. Derive cost of goods sold from data in the statement of cash flows. The section showing 
cash flow from operations, using the indirect method, for Electropin Company reported an 
increase in inventories during the year of $1,753 million and no change in accounts payable 
for inventories. The direct method would show cash payments for inventory, purchased and 
manufactured, totaling $64,713 million. Compute Electropin’s cost of goods sold for the 
year.
16. Derive cost of goods sold from data in the statement of cash flows. The section showing cash 
flow from operations, using the indirect method, for Taylor Stores reported an increase in 
inventories of $5.7 million during the year. It reported also that the balance in accounts 
payable for inventories increased by $5.9 million. The direct method would show cash pay-
ments for merchandise inventory purchased of $646.9 million. Compute Taylor’s cost of 
goods sold for the year.
17. Derive wages and salaries expense from data in the statement of cash flows. Yoshi Group 
reported in its reconciliation of net income to cash flow from operations a decrease in 
wages and salaries payable of ¥21 million during the year. It provided data showing that 
cash payments for wages and salaries to employees for the year were ¥8,853 million. Com-
pute the amount of Yoshi Group’s wages and salaries expense for the year.
18. Derive cash disbursements for dividends. JAJ Incorporated reported a balance in retained 
earnings of $26,571 million at the beginning of the year and $28,132 million at the end 
of the year. Its dividends payable account increased by $233 million during the year. It 
reported net income for the year of $5,030 million. How much cash did JAJ disburse for 
dividends during the year? Indicate where this information would appear in the simplified 
statement of cash flows in Exhibit 6.12.
19. Effect of borrowing and interest on statement of cash flows. Gillette Limited borrowed £250 
million on October 1 by issuing bonds. The debt carries an annual interest rate of 6%, 
which it must pay on April 1 and October 1 of each year. The debt matures 20 years after 
its issue date. Gillette’s accounting period ends on December 31 of each year. Using the 
format of Exhibit 6.12, indicate the effects of all these transactions on Gillette’s statement 
of cash flows for the year of issue, when the bonds were outstanding from October 1 
through December 31.
20. Effect of income taxes on statement of cash flows. Radion Corporation reported a balance 
in Income Taxes Payable of $78.1 million at the beginning of the year, $60.1 million at the 
end of the year, and income tax expense for the year of $161.5 million. Using the format 
of Exhibit 6.12, indicate the effects of all these transactions on Radion’s statement of cash 
flows for the year.
21. Effect of rent transactions on statement of cash flows. Jennings Company reported a balance 
in its Prepaid Rent (Advances to Landlord) account of $1,200 on January 1, 2014, for use 
of the building for the month of January 2014. On February 1, 2014, the firm paid $18,000 
as the annual rental for the period from February 1, 2014, to January 31, 2015. It recorded 
this rental payment by debiting Prepaid Rent (Advances to Landlord) and crediting Cash 
for $18,000. At the end of 2014, the firm made all proper adjusting entries to correctly 
report balance sheet and income statement amounts. Using the format of Exhibit 6.12, 
indicate the effects of all these transactions on the firm’s statement of cash flows for 2014.
22. Calculating components of cash inflow from operations. Exhibit 6.18 provides items from 
the financial statements of Infotech Corporation, a systems engineering firm, for the year. 
How much cash did Infotech collect from its customers during the year?
23. Calculating components of cash outflow from operations. Refer to Exhibit 6.18, which pro-
vides items from the financial statements of Infotech Corporation.
a. How much cash did Infotech pay during the year to its suppliers of goods?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
 
In the dynamic version of this spreadsheet available on the Web site, you can change 
any of the numbers in the yellow shaded section and see the effect of the change in the 
statement of cash flows section for cash flows from operations.
a. Download the spreadsheet and change the first line of the income statement from $25 
to $27, increasing income by $2. What is the effect on S1?
b. How much cash did Infotech pay during the year to its employees and suppliers of other 
services?
24. Spreadsheet for understanding the relation between changes in income statement items and 
changes in items in the statement of cash flows. The spreadsheet on the textbook’s Web site 
contains a dynamic version of the spreadsheet reproduced below:
Infotech Corporation
Data from Income Statement for Current Year
(Exercises 22 and 23)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 14,508
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(11,596)
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(114)
Other Expenses, Including Salaries and Wages Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(2,276)
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (210)
 Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    312
DATA FROM BEGINNING- AND END-OF-YEAR BALANCE SHEETS
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$782 Decrease
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
66 Decrease
Prepayments for Other Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
102 Decrease
Accounts Payable for Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90 Increase
Current Liabilities for Wages and Salaries Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
240 Decrease
EXHIBIT 6.18
© Cengage Learning 2014
 
A 
 
B 
C
1 
 
 
 
Lines in Schematic
2 
 
 
 
Statement of
3 
Income Statement 
 
 
Cash Flows
 4 
Revenues matched with cash inflows this period  . . . . . . . . . . .
$   25 
Line (1)
 5 
Revenues and gains with no cash inflows this period  . . . . . . . .
1
 6 
Expenses matched with expenditures this period  . . . . . . . . . . .
(15) 
Line (2)
 7 
Expenses and losses with no cash outflow this period . . . . . . . .
  (4)
 8 
Net Income   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    7
Line (3)
 9 
Direct Method for Deriving Cash Flow from Operations
10 
Revenues matched with cash inflows this period  . . . . . . . . . . .
$   25 
Line (1)
11 
Expenses and losses with no cash outflow this period . . . . . . . .
 (15) 
Line (2)
12 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   10 
S1
13 
Indirect Method for Deriving Cash Flow from Operations 
14 
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    7 
Line (3)
15 
Addback Expenses and Losses not Using Cash this Period . . . . . .
4 
Line (4)
16 
Subtract Revenues not Producing Receipts this Period . . . . . . . .
  (1) 
Line (5)
17 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   10 
S1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

203
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
b. Go back to the original configuration. Change only the second line of the income state-
ment from $1 to $5, increasing income by $4. What are the effects on lines (1) – (5) and 
S1 of the cash flows from operations sections?
c. Go back to the original configuration. Now, make two changes: change the third line of 
the income statement from ($15) to ($17) and at the same time, change the fourth line 
from ($4) to ($2), leaving income unchanged. What are the effects on lines (1) – (5) and 
S1 of the cash flows from operations sections?
25. Working backward from changes in the Buildings and Equipment account. The comparative 
balance sheets of Dearing Incorporated show a balance in the Buildings and Equipment 
account at cost year-end of $17,369 million; a year earlier, the balance was $16,825 million. 
The Accumulated Depreciation account shows a balance of $5,465 million at year-end and 
of $4,914 million a year earlier. The statement of cash flows reports that expenditures for 
buildings and equipment during the year totaled $1,314 million. The income statement 
indicates a depreciation charge of $1,253 million during the year. The firm sold buildings 
and equipment during the year at their carrying value.
 
 
Calculate the acquisition cost and accumulated depreciation of the buildings and equip-
ment that Dearing sold for cash during the year and the proceeds from the disposition.
26. Preparing a statement of cash flows from changes in balance sheet accounts. The compara-
tive balance sheets of Incloud Airlines show the following information for a recent year 
(amounts in thousands of US$):
Change
Amount
Direction
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   40,308a
Increase
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15,351
Decrease
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15,117
Increase
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,776
Increase
Property, Plant, and Equipment (at Cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,134,644b
Increase
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
264,088b
Increase
Other Non-operating Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,711
Increase
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
660
Decrease
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114,596
Increase
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
244,285
Increase
Other Non-operating Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140,026
Increase
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96,991
Increase
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
340,879c
Increase
aCash was $378,511 at the beginning of the year and $418,819 at the end of the year.
bIncloud Airlines did not sell any property, plant, and equipment during the year.
cNet income was $474,378.
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for Incloud Airlines for the year. Treat changes in 
non-operating assets as investing transactions and changes in non-operating liabilities 
as financing transactions.
b. Discuss briefly the pattern of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activi-
ties for Incloud Airlines for the year.
27. Calculating and interpreting cash flow from operations. The following items appear in the 
financial statements of Bamberger Enterprises for a recent year (amounts in thousands of 
US$):
Sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 14,600
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(210)
Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(200)
Other Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (13,900)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$    290
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
 
The changes in the current asset and current liability accounts were as follows:
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$780 
Decrease
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
80 
Decrease
Prepayments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
100 
Decrease
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
90 
Increase
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
240 
Decrease
a. Compute the amount of cash flow from operations.
b. Comment on the major reasons why cash flow from operations exceeds net income.
28. Calculating and interpreting cash flow from operations. Selected data for Finanka, a Finnish 
cellular phone manufacturer, appear below (amounts in millions of euros):
2013
2012
2011
2010
Net Income (Loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€3,847
€2,542
€1,689
€1,032
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,009
665
509
465
Increase (Decrease) in:
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,304
982
1,573
272
 
Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
422
362
103
121
 
Prepayments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(49)
33
17
(77)
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
458
312
140
90
 
Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
923
867
1,049
450
a. Compute the amount of cash flow from operations for each of the four years using the 
indirect method.
b. Discuss briefly the most important reasons why cash flow from operations differs from 
net income or net loss for each year.
29. Calculating and interpreting cash flows. Market Star is a marketing services firm that cre-
ates advertising copy for clients and places the advertising in television, magazines, and 
other media. Accounts receivable represent amounts owed by clients, and accounts payable 
represent amounts payable to various media. Market Star has purchased other marketing 
services firms in recent years. Selected data for Market Star for three recent years appear 
next (amounts in millions of US$):
2013
2012
2011
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 499
$ 363
$279
Depreciation and Amortization Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
226
196
164
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
514
648
238
Increase (Decrease) in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
13
35
Increase (Decrease) in Prepayments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
(10)
64
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
277
786
330
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
420
278
70
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
130
115
Acquisition of Investments in Securities (noncurrent). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
885
643
469
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
104
88
Long-Term Debt Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
599
83
208
Common Stock Issued (Reacquired)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(187)
(252)
42
a. Prepare a comparative statement of cash flows for Market Star for the three years. Use 
the indirect method of computing cash flow from operations.
b. Discuss the relation between net income and cash flow from operations and the pattern 
of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities during the three years.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

205
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
30. Effects of gains and losses from sales of equipment on cash flows. Exhibit 6.19 presents an 
abbreviated statement of cash flows for Largay Corporation for the current year (amounts 
in thousands of US$). After preparing this statement of cash flows for the current year, 
you discover that the firm sold an item of equipment on the last day of the year but failed 
to record it in the accounts or to deposit the check received from the purchaser. The equip-
ment originally cost $50,000 and had accumulated depreciation of $40,000 at the time of 
sale. Recast the statement of cash flows in the exhibit, assuming that Largay Corporation 
sold the equipment for cash in the following amounts (ignore income taxes):
a. $10,000
b. $12,000
c. $8,000
31. Effect of various transactions on the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 shows a simpli-
fied statement of cash flows for a period. Numbers appear on 11 of the lines in the state-
ment. Other lines are various subtotals and grand totals; ignore these in the remainder 
of the problem. Assume that the accounting cycle is complete for the period and that the 
firm has prepared all of the financial statements. It then discovers that it has overlooked 
a transaction. It records that transaction in the accounts and corrects all of the financial 
statements. For each of the following transactions, indicate which of the numbered lines of 
the statement of cash flows change, and state the amount and direction of the change. If 
net income, line (3), changes, be sure to indicate whether it decreases or increases. Ignore 
income tax effects. (Hint: First, construct the entry the firm would enter in the accounts to 
record the transaction in the accounts. Then, for each line of the journal entry, identify the 
line of Exhibit 6.12 affected.)
a. Amortization of a patent, treated as an expense, $600.
b. Acquisition of a factory site financed by issuing capital stock with a market value of 
$50,000 in exchange.
c. Purchase of inventory on account for $7,500; assume inventory had increased for the 
year before the firm recorded this overlooked transaction.
d. Purchase of inventory for cash of $6,000; assume inventory had increased for the year 
before the firm recorded this overlooked transaction.
Largay Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows
Current Year
(Exercise 30)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15
Changes in Working Capital Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (40)
 Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 75
INVESTING
Acquisition of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(30)
FINANCING
Repayment of Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (40)
 Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  5
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  27
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 32
EXHIBIT 6.19
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
e. Uninsured fire loss of merchandise inventory totaling $1,500; assume inventory had 
increased for the year before the firm recorded this overlooked transaction.
f. Collection of an account receivable totaling $1,450; assume accounts receivable had 
increased for the year before the firm recorded this overlooked transaction.
g. Issue of bonds for $10,000 cash.
h. Sale of equipment for cash at its carrying value of $4,500.
PROBLEMS
32. Inferring cash flows from financial statement data. Exhibit 6.20 presents data from the 
financial statements for Heidi’s Hide-Out, a bar and video-game club, with private party 
rooms for rent. Heidi’s deals with
■ 
 Many employees, to some of whom it has made advances on wages and to some of 
whom it owes wages for past work;
■ 
 Many landlords, to some of whom it has made advance payments and to some of 
whom it owes rent for past months;
■ 
 Many customers, some of whom have paid for special parties not yet held and some 
of whom have not yet paid for parties already held; and
■ 
 Many suppliers of goods, including food and beverages, some of whom Heidi’s has 
paid for orders not yet received and some of whom have delivered goods for which 
Heidi’s has not yet paid.
Heidi’s and its customers, suppliers, and employees settle all transactions with cash, never 
with non-cash assets.
Heidi’s Hide-Out
Selected Detail from Financial Statements
Current Year
(Problem 32)
Beginning 
of Year
End of 
Year
BALANCE SHEETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$22,000
$  10,000
Accounts Receivable from Retail Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
8,900
Inventory of Retail Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,000
10,000
Advances to Employees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
1,500
Advances to Landlords (Prepaid Rent)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
5,600
Advances to Suppliers of Retail Merchandise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 10,000
   10,500
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$57,000
$  46,500
Accounts Payable to Suppliers of Retail Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 8,000
$   7,700
Advances from Retail Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,000
10,000
Rent Payable to Landlords  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
5,300
Wages Payable to Employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
1,800
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 32,000
   21,700
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$57,000
$  46,500
INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR
Sales Revenue from Retail Customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 120,000
Cost of Retail Merchandise Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$90,000
Rent Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
33,000
Wage Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 20,000
 Less: Total Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$(143,000)
Net Income (Loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (23,000)
EXHIBIT 6.20
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

207
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Calculate the amount of cash received from retail customers during the current year.
b. Calculate the amount of cash Heidi’s paid landlords during the current year for the 
rental of space.
c. Calculate the amount of cash Heidi’s paid employees during the current year.
d. Calculate the amount of cash Heidi’s paid suppliers of retail merchandise, which 
includes the food and beverages it sells to retail customers, during the current year.
33. Inferring cash flows from balance sheet and income statement data. (Based on a problem 
prepared by Stephen A. Zeff.) You work for the Plains State Bank as an analyst special-
izing in the financial statements of small businesses seeking loans from the bank. Digit 
Retail Enterprises Inc. provides you with its balance sheet for December 31, 2012 and 2013 
(Exhibit 6.21), and its income statement for 2013 (Exhibit 6.22). Digit Retail Enterprises, 
Inc., acquired no new property, plant, and equipment during the year.
a. Calculate the amount of cash received from customers during 2013.
b. Calculate the acquisition cost of merchandise purchased during 2013.
c. Calculate the amount of cash paid to suppliers of merchandise during 2013.
d. Calculate the amount of cash paid to salaried employees during 2013.
Digit Retail Enterprises, Inc.
Balance Sheet
(Problem 33)
December 
31, 2013
December 
31, 2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 50,000
$ 36,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
38,000
23,000
Notes Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
7,500
Interest Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
100
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
65,000
48,000
Prepaid Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
9,000
Prepaid Rent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      —
   2,000
 Total Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$165,000
$125,600
Property, Plant, and Equipment
At Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 90,000
$100,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (35,000)
     (20,000)
Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 55,000
$ 80,000
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$220,000
$205,600
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDER’S EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable—Merchandise Suppliers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 20,000
$ 18,000
Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,800
2,100
Rent Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
—
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,100
8,500
Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,500
—
Dividends Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,600
4,200
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   3,700
   1,300
 Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 43,700
$ 34,100
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$164,500
$160,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,800
11,500
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$176,300
$171,500
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$220,000
$205,600
EXHIBIT 6.21
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
e. Calculate the amount of cash paid to insurance companies during 2013.
f. Calculate the amount of cash paid to landlords for space rented during 2013.
g. Calculate the amount of dividends paid during 2013.
h. Calculate the amount of cash received when property, plant, and equipment were sold 
during 2013.
34. Preparing and interpreting a statement of cash flows using a T-account work sheet. Condensed 
financial statement data for Hale Company for the current year appear in Exhibits  6.23 and 
6.24. During the current year, the firm sold for $5,000 equipment costing $15,000 with 
$10,000 of accumulated depreciation.
Digit Retail Enterprises, Inc.
Income Statement
For 2013
(Problem 33)
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$270,000
Gain on Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,200
Interest Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     200
 Total Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$273,400
Less Expenses:
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$145,000
Salaries Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68,000
Rent Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,000
Insurance Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,000
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20,000
Other Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  13,800
 Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$263,800
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  9,600
EXHIBIT 6.22
© Cengage Learning 2014
Hale Company Comparative
Balance Sheet
(Problem 34)
January 1
December 31
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  52,000
$  58,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
93,000
106,000
Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
151,000
162,000
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
30,000
Buildings and Equipment (Cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
790,000
830,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (460,000)
    (504,000)
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 656,000
$ 682,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable for Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 136,000
$ 141,000
Interest Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
8,000
Mortgage Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120,000
109,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250,000
250,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  140,000
  174,000
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 656,000
$ 682,000
EXHIBIT 6.23
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

209
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for Hale Company for the year using the indi-
rect method of computing cash flow from operations. Support the statement with a 
T-account work sheet.
b. Derive a presentation of cash flows from operations using the direct method.
c. Present a statement of cash flows for Hale Company using the direct method for 
cash flows from operations. Include reconciliation of net income to cash flow from 
operations.
d. Comment on the pattern of cash flows from operations, investing, and financing 
activities.
35. Preparing and interpreting a statement of cash flows using a T-account work sheet. Finan-
cial statement data for Dickerson Manufacturing Company for the current year appear in 
Exhibit 6.25. Additional information includes the following:
(1) Net income for the year was $568,000; dividends declared and paid were $60,000.
(2) Depreciation expense for the year was $510,000 on buildings and machinery.
(3) The firm sold for $25,000 machinery originally costing $150,000 with accumulated 
depreciation of $120,000.
(4) The firm retired bonds during the year at their book value.
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for Dickerson Manufacturing Company for the year 
using the indirect method to compute cash flow from operations. Support the statement 
with a T-account work sheet.
b. Comment on the pattern of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
36. Preparing direct method of deriving cash flow from operations from data in published annual 
report. GTI, Inc., manufactures parts, components, and processing equipment for elec-
tronics and semiconductor applications in the communication, computer, automotive, and 
appliance industries. Its sales tend to vary with changes in the business cycle since the sales 
of most of its customers are cyclical. Exhibit 6.26 presents balance sheets for GTI as of 
December 31, 2011, 2012, and 2013, and Exhibit 6.27 presents income statements for 2012 
and 2013. Notes to the firm’s financial statements reveal the following (amounts are in 
thousands of U.S. dollars):
(1) Depreciation expense, included in Administration Expenses, was $641 in 2012 and $625 
in 2013.
(2) Other Noncurrent Assets represent patents. Patent amortization, included in Adminis-
trative Expenses, was $25 in 2012 and $40 in 2013.
(3) Changes in Other Current Liabilities and Other Noncurrent Liabilities are both operat-
ing transactions relating to Administrative Expenses.
Hale Company
Statement of Income and Retained Earnings
Current Year
(Problem 34)
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,200,000
Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Cost of Goods Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$788,000
 Wages and Salaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
280,000
 Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
54,000
 Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  22,000
  Total Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,156,000
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   44,000
Dividends on Common Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (10,000)
Addition to Retained Earnings for Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   34,000
Retained Earnings, January 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   140,000
Retained Earnings, December 31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 174,000
EXHIBIT 6.24
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows for 
GTI for 2012 and 2013.
b. Prepare a statement of cash flows for GTI for 2012 and 2013. Present cash flows from 
operations using the indirect method.
c. Present a derivation of cash flows from operations for 2012 using the direct method.
d. Discuss the relation between net income and cash flow from operations and the pattern 
of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
37. Interpreting a statement of cash flows based on the direct method for presenting cash flow 
from operations. Exhibit 6.28 shows the consolidated income statements for Carter Cor-
poration for three recent years. Carter uses the direct method for presenting its cash flows 
from operations, which appears in Exhibit 6.29.
a. What was the change in accounts receivable during 2013?
b. Accounts payable for inventories increased by $181.4 during 2013. What was the change 
in inventories during 2013?
c. By how much did the amount paid for interest during 2013 differ from interest expense? 
Give the amount and indicate whether the amount paid exceeded, or was less than, expense.
d. Note that income increased by a bit more than 10% between 2011 and 2012 but nearly 
doubled between 2012 and 2013. What cause(s) can you suggest for this dramatic change?
38. Interpreting a statement of cash flows based on the direct method for presenting cash flow 
from operations. Refer to information about Carter Corporation in the preceding problem.
Dickerson Manufacturing Company
Comparative Balance Sheet
(Problem 35)
January 1
December 31
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   358,000
$   324,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
946,000
1,052,000
Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,004,000
  1,208,000
 Total Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,308,000
$ 2,584,000
Noncurrent Assets
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   594,000
$   630,000
Buildings and Machinery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,678,000
9,546,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (3,974,000)
 (4,364,000)
 Total Noncurrent Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,298,000
$ 5,812,000
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,606,000
$ 8,396,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   412,000
$   558,000
Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
274,000
290,000
Other Short-Term Payables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    588,000
    726,000
 Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,274,000
$ 1,574,000
Noncurrent Liabilities
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,984,000
  1,934,000
 Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,258,000
$ 3,508,000
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,672,000
$ 1,704,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2,676,000
  3,184,000
 Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 4,348,000
$ 4,888,000
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,606,000
$ 8,396,000
EXHIBIT 6.25
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

211
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
GTI, Inc.
Balance Sheets
(Problem 36)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
December 31
2013
2012
2011
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   367
$   475
$   430
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,545
3,936
3,768
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,094
2,966
2,334
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    122
    270
    116
 Total Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,128
$ 7,647
$ 6,648
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,027
4,598
3,806
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    456
    559
    193
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 9,611
$12,804
$10,647
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable (to suppliers of inventory). . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   796
$   809
$ 1,578
Notes Payable to Banks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,413
231
11
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    695
    777
  1,076
 Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,904
$ 1,817
$ 2,665
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,084
4,692
2,353
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    113
     89
    126
 Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,101
$ 6,598
$ 5,144
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   289
$   289
$    —
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
86
85
83
Additional Paid-in Capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,394
4,392
4,385
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,259)
  1,440
  1,035
 Total Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,510
$ 6,206
$ 5,503
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 9,611
$12,804
$10,647
EXHIBIT 6.26
© Cengage Learning 2014
GTI, Inc.
Income Statements
(Problem 36)
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
2013
2012
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 11,960
$ 22,833
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(11,031)
(16,518)
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(3,496)
(4,849)
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(452)
(459)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     328
    (590)
Net Income (Loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (2,691)
$    417
Dividends on Preferred Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (8)
     (12)
Net Income (Loss) Available to Common Shareholders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (2,699)
$    405
EXHIBIT 6.27
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Carter Corporation
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Problems 37 and 38)
EXHIBIT 6.28
© Cengage Learning 2014
Carter Corporation
Excerpts from Statements of Cash Flows
Cash Flow from Operations Presented with the Direct Method
(Problems 37 and 38)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.29
© Cengage Learning 2014
a. What was the change in accounts receivable during 2012?
b. Inventories increased by $624.1 during 2012. What was the change in accounts payable 
for inventories during 2012?
c. By how much did the amount paid for interest during 2012 differ from interest expense? 
Give the amount and indicate whether the amount paid exceeded, or was less than, 
expense.
39. Working backward through the statement of cash flows. Quintana Company presents the 
balance sheet shown in Exhibit 6.30 and the statement of cash flows shown in Exhibit 6.31 
for 2013. The firm sold investments, equipment, and land for cash at their net book value. 
The accumulated depreciation of the equipment sold was $20,000.
 
 
Prepare a balance sheet for the beginning of the year, January 1, 2013.
In millions, except per share amounts
2013
2012
2011
Net revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$76,329.5
$43,821.4
$37,006.7
Cost of revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 60,221.8
 32,079.2
 27,312.1
 Gross profit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,107.7
11,742.2
9,694.6
Total operating expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,314.4
  9,300.6
  7,675.1
Operating profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,793.3
2,441.6
2,019.5
Interest expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    434.6
    215.8
    110.5
Earnings before income tax provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,358.7
2,225.8
1,909.0
Income tax provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,721.7
    856.9
    684.3
Net earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,637.0
1,368.9
1,224.7
Preference dividends, net of income tax benefit. . . . . . 
     14.2
     13.9
     14.1
Net earnings available to common shareholders. . . . . . 
$ 2,622.8
$ 1,355.0
$ 1,210.6
BASIC EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE:
 Net earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    1.97
$    1.65
$    1.49
 Weighted average common shares outstanding. . . . . 
  1,328.2
    820.6
    811.4
DILUTED EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE:
 Net earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    1.92
$    1.60
$    1.45
 Weighted average common shares outstanding. . . . . 
  1,371.8
    853.2
    841.6
Dividends declared per common share  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 0.22875
$ 0.15500
$ 0.14500
2013
2012
2011
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES:
 Cash receipts from revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 61,986.3
$ 43,273.7
$ 36,923.1
 Cash paid for inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(45,772.6)
(31,422.1)
(26,403.9)
 Cash paid to other suppliers and employees. . . . 
(10,768.6)
(9,065.3)
(8,186.7)
 Interest and dividends received . . . . . . . . . . . . 
33.6
15.9
6.5
 Interest paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(468.2)
(228.1)
(135.9)
 Income taxes paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1,780.8)
    (831.7)
    (591.0)
Net cash provided by operating activities . . . . . . . 
   3,229.7
   1,742.4
   1,612.1
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

213
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Quintana Company
All Balance Sheet Accounts
December 31, 2013
(Problem 39)
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   25,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
220,000
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
320,000
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
Buildings and Equipment (at cost). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(200,000)
Investments (noncurrent). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   100,000
 Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,005,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  280,000
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
85,000
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   340,000
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,005,000
EXHIBIT 6.30
© Cengage Learning 2014
Quintana Company
Statement of Cash Flows
For 2013
(Problem 39)
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 200,000
Additions:
 Depreciation Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60,000
 Increase in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
Subtractions:
 Increase in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(30,000)
 Increase in Merchandise Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(40,000)
 Decrease in Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (45,000)
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 170,000
INVESTING
 Sale of Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  40,000
 Sale of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 Sale of Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 Acquisition of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (130,000)
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(65,000)
FINANCING
 Common Stock Issued. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  60,000
 Bonds Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (200,000)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (100,000)
Net Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   5,000
EXHIBIT 6.31
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
40. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.32 presents a statement of cash flows for 
Swoosh Shoes, Inc., for three years.
a. Why did Swoosh experience increasing net income but decreasing cash flow from opera-
tions during this three-year period?
b. What is the likely explanation for the changes in Swoosh’s cash flow from investing dur-
ing the three-year period?
c. How did Swoosh finance its investing activities during the three-year period?
d. Evaluate the appropriateness of Swoosh’s use of short-term borrowing during 2013.
41. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.33 presents statements of cash flows 
for Spokane Paper Group, a forest products company, for three recent years. During this 
period, it faced financial difficulty, which you can see by noting the pattern of losses 
increasing with time.
a. Spokane Paper Group operated at a net loss each year but generated positive cash flow 
from operations. Explain.
b. What is the likely explanation for the changes in Spokane Paper Group’s cash flow from 
investing activities during the three-year period?
c. What is the likely explanation for the changes in long-term financing during 2011 and 2012?
Swoosh Shoes, Inc.
Statement of Cash Flows
(Problem 40)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
2013
2012
2011
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 287
$ 243
$ 167
Depreciation and Amortization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34
17
15
Other Addbacks and Subtractions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    3
    5
     (5)
Working Capital Provided by Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 324
$ 265
$ 177
(Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . 
(120)
(105)
(38)
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(275)
(86)
(25)
(Increase) Decrease in Other Operating Current Assets  . 
(6)
(5)
(2)
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . 
59
36
21
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current 
 Operating Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   32
   22
   36
 Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  14
$ 127
$ 169
INVESTING
Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   2
$   1
$   3
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . 
(165)
(87)
(42)
Acquisition of Investment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     (48)
       (3)
     (1)
 Cash Flow from Investing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   (211)
$     (89)
$     (40)
FINANCING
Increase in Short-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 269
—
—
Increase in Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5
$   1
—
Issue of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3
2
$   3
Decrease in Short-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
(8)
(96)
Decrease in Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(10)
(2)
(4)
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (41)
      (26)
      (22)
 Cash Flow from Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 226
$     (33)
$    (119)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  29
$   5
$  10
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   89
   84
   74
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 118
$  89
$  84
EXHIBIT 6.32
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

215
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
42. Interpreting statement of cash flow relations. Exhibit 6.34 presents statements of cash flow 
for eight companies for the same year:
a. American Airlines (airline transportation)
b. American Home Products (pharmaceuticals)
c. Interpublic Group (advertising and other marketing services)
d. Procter & Gamble (consumer products)
e. Reebok (athletic shoes)
f. Texas Instruments (electronics)
g. Limited Brands (specialty retailing)
h. Upjohn (pharmaceuticals)
 
Discuss the relation between net income and cash flow from operations, and the pattern of 
cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for each firm.
43. Interpreting direct and indirect methods. Refer to Exhibit 6.35 for Fierce Fighters Cor-
poration, which shows excerpts from its Statements of Cash Flows, with cash flow from 
operations presented with the indirect method, for three recent years. We use these years 
to illustrate a period of successively decreasing cash flows from operations. The columns 
labeled Change and shaded purple do not appear in the original.
Spokane Paper Group
Statement of Cash Flows
(Problem 41)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
2013
2012
2011
OPERATIONS
Net Income (Loss). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    (63)
$    (77)
$   (154)
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
236
268
266
Other Addbacks (Subtractions)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
41
(43)
(56)
(Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . 
(68)
—
(46)
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6
(31)
(3)
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . 
55
15
9
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . 
    9
     (1)
   50
 Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 216
$ 131
$  66
INVESTING
Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 171
$  24
$ 202
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . 
(271)
(222)
(283)
Other Investing Transactions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      (75)
            9
    (31)
 Cash Flow from Investing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   (175)
$  (189)
$   (112)
FINANCING
Increase (Decrease) in Short-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . 
 $  25
$  27
$    (54)
Increase in Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
139
84
131
Increase in Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
287
191
Decrease in Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(116)
(269)
(164)
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(84)
(67)
(55)
Other Financing Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    2
     (2)
     (5)
 Cash Flow from Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$     (34)
$  60
$  44
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   7
$   2
$      (2)
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   22
   20
   22
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  29
$  22
$  20
EXHIBIT 6.33
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
Statements of Cash Flows for Selected Companies
(Problem 42)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 6.34
 
 
American
 
American 
Home 
Interpublic 
Procter & 
 
Texas 
Limited
 
Airlines 
Products 
Group 
Gamble 
Reebok 
Instruments 
Brands 
Upjohn
Operations
Net Income (Loss)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  (110) 
$   1,528 
$   125 
$   2,211 
$   254 
$     691 
$   455 
$   491
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,223 
306 
61 
1,134 
37 
665 
247 
175
Other Addbacks (Subtractions)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
166 
71 
23 
196 
(4) 
(9) 
— 
7
(Increase) Decrease in Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
37 
14 
(66) 
40 
(65) 
(197) 
(102) 
6
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(27) 
(157) 
16 
25 
(82) 
(60) 
(74) 
(21)
Increase (Decrease) in Payables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
34 
325 
59 
98 
35 
330 
118 
63
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . .
       54
   (185) 
  (15) 
    (55) 
   (2) 
      112
    110
  (11)
 Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   1,377
$   1,902
$   203
$   3,649
$   173
$   1,532
$   754
$   710
Investing
Capital Expenditures (net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$(2,080) 
$  (473) 
$ (79) 
$(1,841) 
$ (62) 
$(1,076) 
$(430) 
$(224)
Sale (Acquisition) of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
290 
24 
3 
23 
— 
(47) 
— 
(287)
Sale (Acquisition) of Other Businesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
— 
(9,161) 
— 
(295) 
— 
— 
(60) 
308
Other Investing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       36
     (5) 
  (85) 
      105
   (4) 
     —
     —
   (1)
 Cash Flow from Investing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(1,754) 
$(9,615) 
$(161) 
$(2,008) 
$ (66) 
$(1,123) 
$(490) 
$(204)
Financing
Increase (Decrease) in Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  (380) 
$   8,640 
$    35 
$  (281) 
$    37 
$    (1) 
$(322) 
$     5
Increase in Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
730 
— 
42 
414 
— 
1 
150 
15
Increase in Capital Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,081 
38 
19 
36 
13 
110 
17 
—
Decrease in Long-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(1,069) 
— 
(15) 
(797) 
(3) 
(88) 
— 
(46)
Acquisition of Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
— 
(314) 
(37) 
(14) 
(112) 
— 
— 
(32)
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(49) 
(903) 
(36) 
(949) 
(25) 
(79) 
(102) 
(264)
Other Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       82
       11
  (14) 
        1
  (12) 
        4
     —
     37
 Cash Flow from Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   395
$   7,472
$  (6) 
$(1,590) 
$(102) 
$   (53) 
$(257) 
$(285)
Change in Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$      18 
$  (241) 
$    36 
$      51 
$     5 
$     356 
$   7 
$   221
Cash, Beginning of Year   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       45
    1,937
    256
    2,322
     79
      404
34
    281
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$      63
$   1,696
$   292
$   2,373
$    84
$     760
$    41
$   502
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

217
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Using Exhibit 6.35, write a short (no more than 50 words) explanation of why Fierce 
Fighters’ cash flow from operations declined by about 20% per year between 2011 and 
2012 and then again between 2012 and 2013. If you cannot explain, then suggest why 
that might be.
b. Now refer to Exhibit 6.36 for Fierce Fighters, which shows excerpts from its Statements 
of Cash Flows, with cash flow from operations presented with the direct method, for the 
same three years as in part a. Write a short (no more than 50 words) explanation of why 
Fierce Fighter’s cash flow from operations declined by about 20% per year between 2011 
and 2012 and then again between 2012 and 2013. If you cannot explain, then suggest 
why that might be.
c. Which method of presenting cash flow from operations do you find easier to interpret?
44. Issues in manipulating cash flows from operations. Top financial management wants to 
increase cash flow from operations. It asks you to implement the following strategies. 
Which of these, if implemented, will increase cash flow from operations contrasted to the 
amount if you do not implement the strategy for the firm? Comment on the wisdom and 
suitability of these strategies.
a. The firm delays maintaining equipment until after the start of the next period.
b. The firm delays purchasing new equipment until after the start of the next period.
Fierce Fighters Corporation
Data Taken from Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Shaded Columns Showing Changes Do Not Appear in Original)
(Problem 43)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
Indirect Method
Years ended December 31
2013
2012
2011
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Change
Change
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  427
(181)
$  608
141
$  467
Adjustments to Reconcile Net Income to Net Cash 
 
Provided by Operations:
 Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
266
91
175
(18)
193
 Amortization of Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
379
173
206
10
196
 Common Stock Issued to Employees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
38
8
6
2
 Loss on Disposal of Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
(56)
56
56
—
 Loss (Gain) on Sales of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . .
(7)
(20)
13
(8)
21
 Retiree Benefits Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(269)
223
(492)
(243)
(249)
 Decrease (Increase) in Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,273
1,952
(679)
(849)
170
  Inventoried Costs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(28)
(105)
77
(95)
172
  Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
45
(28)
(73)
45
 Increase (Decrease) in Advances from Customers 
  on Long-Term Contracts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(648)
(1,314)
666
645
21
  Accounts Payable and Accruals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(696)
(783)
87
89
(2)
  Provisions for Contract Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(65)
(85)
20
28
(8)
  Deferred Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
174
(171)
345
115
230
  Income Taxes Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(13)
(41)
28
(30)
58
  Retiree Benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(75)
17
(92)
37
(129)
 Other Non-cash Transaction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    36
24
    12
(8)
    20
$  817
(193)
$1,010
(197)
$1,207
The changes are from right to left, from 2011 to 2012 and from 2012 to 2013. Each number in a change column is the difference: number to 
the left of the change minus the number to the right of the change.
EXHIBIT 6.35
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218
Chapter 6 
Statement of Cash Flows
c. The firm sells $1 million of accounts receivable for $980,000 cash to a financial insti-
tution but agrees to reimburse the purchaser for the amount by which uncollectible 
accounts exceed $20,000.
d. The firm delays paying for its employees’ insurance premiums until after the start of the 
next period.
e. The firm delays paying some suppliers until after the due date, and until after the start 
of the next period.
f. The firm sells goods for cash but promises the customers that they can return the goods 
for full refund after the start of the next period.
Fierce Fighters Corporation
Data Taken from Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Shaded Columns Showing Changes Do Not Appear in Original)
(Problem 43)
(all amounts in millions of US$)
Direct Method (Without Reconciliation of Net Income to Cash Flow from Operations)
Years ended December 31
2013
2012
2011
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Change
Change
Sources of Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Cash Received from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Collections from Customers on Long-Term Contracts  . . . . . . 
$   3,102
1,664
$ 1,438
(253)
$ 1,691
 Other Collections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,148
4,145
7,003
(447)
7,450
 Less: Cash Paid to Suppliers and Employees . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (13,251)
(6,001)
   (7,250)
465
      (7,715)
Net Cash Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    999
(192)
$ 1,191
(235)
$   1,426
Cash Contribution Margin Percentage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7.0%
14.1%
15.6%
Proceeds from Litigation Settlement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    220
220
$     —
—
$     —
Interest Received  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17
—
17
(1)
18
 Income Tax Refunds Received  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23
8
15
(60)
75
 Other Cash Receipts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      24
14
     10
3
      7
 Cash Provided by Operating Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  1,283
50
$ 1,233
(293)
$ 1,526
Other Operating Uses of Cash
 Interest Paid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    333
168
$   165
(51)
$   216
 Income Taxes Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
126
69
57
(28)
85
 Other Cash Payments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       7
6
      1
(17)
     18
 Cash Used in Operating Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    466
243
$   223
(96)
$   319
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    817
(193)
$ 1,010
(197)
$ 1,207
The changes are from right to left, from 2011 to 2012 and from 2012 to 2013. Each number in a change column is the difference: number to 
the left of the change minus the number to the right of the change.
EXHIBIT 6.36
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapter 1 introduced you to the financial statements of Great Deal, Inc. As shown in 
Exhibit 1.2, Great Deal earned $1,317 million in fiscal 2012, $1,003 million in fiscal 2011, and 
$1,407 million in 2010. Exhibit 1.1 shows that Great Deal’s total assets increased over the same 
period: from $12,758 million in 2010, to $15,826 million in 2011, to $18,302 million in 2012.
These financial data do not indicate whether Great Deal is performing well or poorly. Specifi-
cally, neither the balance sheet alone nor the income statement alone provides sufficient informa-
tion to answer the following questions about Great Deal’s performance and risk:
■ 
How does Great Deal’s recent profitability compare to its prior profitability, and to its com-
petitors’ profitability?
■ 
What is the source of Great Deal’s profitability? Does it derive from selling products and 
services at substantially higher prices than it costs to obtain those products and services? Or 
does it derive from selling large volumes of products and services? Or from a combination of 
the two?
■ 
What risks does Great Deal face? For example, is Great Deal able to pay its debts as they 
come due?
Answering these questions requires analysis of Great Deal’s financial statements and related 
information provided in the notes to the financial statements. This chapter introduces the tools 
and techniques of financial statement analysis. Figure 7.1 presents the typical steps in financial 
statement analysis and valuation.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Introduction to Financial 
Statement Analysis
C h a p t e r 
7
1. Understand the relation between the 
expected return and risk of invest-
ment alternatives and the role financial 
 statement analysis plays in providing 
information about returns and risk.
2. Understand the need to recognize the 
scale of operations in analyzing perfor-
mance. Scale is incorporated by the use 
of ratios.
3. Understand the usefulness of return 
on equity (ROE) and return on assets 
(ROA) as measures of profitability, 
and the relation between these two 
measures.
4. Understand the insights gained by 
disaggregating ROE using the DuPont 
Decomposition Analysis.
5. Understand the distinction between 
short-term liquidity risk and long-term 
liquidity risk and the financial ratios 
used to assess each.
6.  Develop skills to compare performance 
both over-time and across-firms.
7. (Appendix) Develop skills to prepare 
pro forma financial statements.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
1. Understand the purpose and content of three principal financial statements and related notes.
Our financial statement analysis considers the balance sheet, income statement, and state-
ment of cash flows, discussed in Chapters 4, 5, and 6, respectively.
2. Identify the economic characteristics of the industry. We begin by identifying the charac-
teristics of the firm’s industry. Great Deal is a U.S. retailer of consumer electronics, home 
office products, entertainment software, appliances, and related services. The principal eco-
nomic characteristics of this industry are as follows:
■ Nature of products. Great Deal offers products and services that are similar to the offer-
ings of its competitors. Common terminology refers to such products as commodities.
■ Extent of competition. The industry is competitive, with many firms offering similar 
products. Barriers to entry for new competitors include size, distribution network, and 
market penetration.
■ Growth characteristics. The U.S. market is saturated, so further growth must come from 
introducing new store concepts and expanding internationally.
3. Identify the company’s strategy. Next, we identify the firm’s strategy to compete in its indus-
try and gain competitive advantage. Great Deal emphasizes a broad product offering, rela-
tively low prices, and superior service. Great Deal also sells through both physical stores 
and the internet.
4. Calculate and interpret profitability and risk ratios. Most financial statement analyses exam-
ine ratios that capture either profitability or risk. Ratios based on financial statement data 
provide one analytical tool used to evaluate profitability and risk. This chapter describes 
and illustrates key profitability and risk ratios.
 
 
In analyzing a firm’s profitability or risk, it is often helpful to compare the firm’s 
performance to a benchmark. Two common benchmarks are the firm’s own performance 
in a prior period (time-series analysis), and competitors’ performance in the same period 
(cross-sectional analysis). We illustrate both types of analyses later in this chapter.
5. Prepare pro forma, or projected, financial statements. After studying the profitability and 
risk of a firm in the recent past, the analyst often prepares pro forma, or projected, finan-
cial statements for the next three to five years, using assumptions about economic, industry, 
and firm-specific conditions.1
6. Value the firm. Analysts use projected net income, cash flows, and other items from the 
financial statements to value the firm. This textbook does not consider valuation, which is 
an advanced topic in accounting and finance.
OBJECTIVES OF FINANCIAL 
STATEMENT ANALYSIS
The first question the analyst asks in analyzing a set of financial statements is, “What do I look 
for?” The response to this question requires an understanding of investment decisions. To illus-
trate, assume that you must decide how to invest a recent gift of $25,000. You narrow the invest-
ment decision to purchasing either a certificate of deposit at a local bank or the common stock 
Understand
the Financial
Statements
Identify
Economic
Characteristics
Identify
Company
Strategy
Analyze
Profitability
and Risk
Prepare
Pro Forma
Financial
Statements
Value
the Firm
Overview of Financial Statement Analysis
FIGURE 7.1
 1 Appendix 7.1 to this chapter illustrates the preparation of pro forma financial statements for Great Deal for 
fiscal year 2013 (the year ended February 27, 2014).
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

221
Objectives of Financial Statement Analysis
of Great Deal, Inc. Great Deal shares currently sell for $25 per share. You will base your deci-
sion on the return you anticipate from each investment and the risk associated with that return.
The bank currently pays interest at the rate of 3% annually on certificates of deposit. 
Because the bank will likely remain in business, you feel confident you will earn 3% each year. 
The return from investing in Great Deal’s common stock has two components. First, you antic-
ipate that Great Deal will continue to pay a cash dividend of at least $0.15 per share. Also, the 
market price of Great Deal’s stock will likely change between the time you purchase the shares 
and the time you sell them in the future. The difference between the eventual selling price and 
the purchase price, often called price appreciation (or price depreciation, if negative), is the sec-
ond component of the return from buying the stock.
The common stock investment involves more risk (that is, more variability of outcomes) 
than does the certificate of deposit investment. This is because Great Deal’s future profitabil-
ity will affect its future dividends and market price changes. If competitors open new stores or 
introduce new products or services that erode Great Deal’s market share, future income might 
be less than you currently anticipate. On the other hand, if Great Deal opens new stores, or 
introduces successful new products or services, its future income might be greater than you cur-
rently anticipate. Economy-wide factors such as inflation and unemployment will also affect the 
market price of Great Deal’s shares, as will factors such as changes in exchange rates that affect 
the cost of imported merchandise or government regulatory actions. Because most individu-
als prefer less risk to more risk, you will want a higher expected return if you purchase Great 
Deal’s shares than if you invest in a certificate of deposit.
Theoretical and empirical research has shown that the expected return from investing in a 
firm relates, in part, to the expected profitability of the firm. The analyst studies a firm’s past 
earnings to understand its operating performance and to help forecast its future profitability. 
Investment decisions also require assessing risk. A firm may find itself short of cash and unable 
to pay its suppliers on a timely basis. Or, it may have issued so much debt that it has diffi-
culty meeting the required interest and principal payments. The financial statements provide 
information for assessing how these and other risk elements affect expected return. Most finan-
cial statement analysis, therefore, explores some aspect of a firm’s profitability, or its risk, or 
both. Figure 7.2 summarizes the relation between financial statement analysis and investment 
decisions.
THE ROLE OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS IN ASSESSING PROFITABILITY AND RISK
Readers cannot easily answer questions about a firm’s profitability and risk from the raw 
information in financial statements. Nor can they easily compare two firms using these data. 
For example, one cannot assess profitability by examining the amount of net income. This is 
because a large amount of net income could result from a large firm earning small profits or 
Financial Statement
Analysis
Profitability
Expected Return
Risk
Investment Decision
Risk (Short-term
and Long-term
Liquidity)
Time Dimension
Past
Present
Future
Relation Between Financial Statement Analysis 
and Investment Decisions
FIGURE 7.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
from a small firm earning large profits. Similarly, it would not be wise to conclude that two 
firms are of equivalent financial health simply because they report the same amount of income. 
Rather, it is important to consider the size of the firm when assessing its profitability or when 
comparing two firms. Financial analysis uses financial ratios and common-size financial 
statements to deal with size or scale differences in a firm’s operations. Common-size income 
statements express each line in the income statement as a percentage of sales revenues. Com-
mon-size balance sheets express each line in the balance sheet as a percentage of total assets. 
We discuss common-size financial statements later in this chapter.
FINANCIAL RATIOS
Financial ratios incorporate the scale of operations by, for example, relating the amount of 
income the firm generates to the amount of investment in assets. The analyst expresses the rela-
tion between two financial statement items (income and investment, for example) in the form of 
a ratio. Some ratios compare items within the income statement; some use only balance sheet 
data; others relate items from multiple financial statements. Ratios aid financial statement anal-
ysis because they summarize data in a form easy to understand, interpret, and compare. After 
calculating the ratios, the analyst must compare them with a benchmark. The following list pro-
vides several possible benchmarks for a financial ratio:
1. The planned ratio for the period.
2. The corresponding ratio during the preceding period for the same firm.
3. The corresponding ratio for a similar firm in the same industry.
4. The average ratio for other firms in the same industry.
To demonstrate the calculation of financial ratios, we use the financial statement data for 
Great Deal, Inc., for fiscal years 2010, 2011, and 2012, appearing in Exhibit 1.1 (balance sheet), 
Exhibit 1.2 (income statement), and Exhibit 1.3 (statement of cash flows). We recommend that 
you trace the amounts in the financial ratios discussed in this chapter to the amounts in Great 
Deal’s financial statements.
ANALYSIS OF PROFITABILITY
A firm engages in operations to generate net income. For example, Great Deal sells electronics, 
office equipment and home appliances to consumers to generate net income. This section dis-
cusses two measures of profitability, return on equity and return on assets, and how these ratios 
relate to each other.
RETURN ON EQUITY
Return on equity (ROE) measures a firm’s performance in using the resources provided by 
shareholders to generate net income. This measure of profitability links net income to the por-
tion of the firm’s assets that shareholders have financed.
ROE =
Net Income
Average Shareholders’ Equity
The numerator of the ROE ratio is net income as reported in the income statement. 
Because net income includes payments to creditors (in the form of interest expense), net income 
can be thought of as the profits that are available to shareholders. We do not subtract dividends 
declared and paid to shareholders because dividends are distributions to shareholders of a por-
tion of the returns generated for them during the period. The firm’s board of directors makes 
the decision whether to pay dividends and specifies the amount. The denominator of the ROE 
ratio is the average amount of shareholders’ equity for a period.2 The average is taken over the 
time period in which net income (the numerator) was generated. For example, if the numerator 
 2 The measure of shareholders’ equity used in the ROE formula should be the balance sheet carrying value of 
the firm’s common shareholders’ equity. Thus, any preferred equity should be excluded. Chapter 15 discusses 
preferred equity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

223
Analysis of Profitability
captures yearly net income, then the denominator should be the average of the beginning of 
year and end of year amounts of shareholders’ equity.
Based on information from Great Deal’s balance sheet (Exhibit 1.1) and income statement 
(Exhibit 1.2), Great Deal’s ROE in fiscal 2012 is 21.7%:
ROE =
$1,317
= $1,317 = 21.7%
0.5 × ($5,156 + $6,964)
$6,060
Great Deal’s 21.7% ROE means that each dollar of shareholders’ equity generated 21.7 cents 
in net income. To determine whether an ROE of 21.7% indicates good or bad performance, we 
might compare Great Deal’s 2012 ROE to Great Deal’s ROE for the prior year. Great Deal’s 
ROE for fiscal 2011 was 20.7%:
ROE =
$1,003
= $1,003 = 20.7%
0.5 × ($4,524 + $5,156)
$4,840
Great Deal’s profitability (as measured by ROE) increased between 2011 and 2012.
RETURN ON ASSETS
Return on assets (ROA) measures a firm’s performance in using assets to generate net income 
independent of how those assets are financed (that is, with debt versus equity). ROA differs 
from ROE because ROE measures profitability for a specific form of financing—the portion 
provided by shareholders. The ROA formula is as follows:
ROA =
Net Income
Average Total Assets
ROA is the ratio of net income for a given period to average total assets for that same period. 
We use the data in Exhibit 1.1 and Exhibit 1.2 to calculate Great Deal’s ROA for fiscal 2012 as 
follows:
ROA =
Net Income
=
$1,317
= 7.7%
Average Total Assets
0.5 × ($15,826 + $18,302)
Great Deal’s ROA indicates that Great Deal earned $0.077 for each dollar of assets in fiscal 
2012. To determine whether this return indicates good or poor performance, we might compare 
Great Deal’s 2012 ROA with its ROA for the previous year. We calculate Great Deal’s ROA for 
fiscal 2011 as follows:
ROA =
Net Income
=
$1,003
= 7.0%
Average Total Assets
0.5 × ($12,758 + $15,826)
These results indicate that Great Deal improved its use of assets between 2011 and 2012. ROA 
increased from $0.07 per dollar of assets to $0.077 per dollar of assets, or a 10% increase in 
ROA (10% = [0.077 – 0.07]/0.07).
RELATION BETWEEN RETURN ON EQUITY AND RETURN ON ASSETS
Our previous analysis indicates that Great Deal’s ROE exceeds its ROA. For example, in fiscal 
2012 ROE was 21.7% compared to an ROA of 7.7%. What accounts for this relation, a common 
one for profitable firms? The key to understanding the relation between ROE and ROA lies in 
understanding financial leverage. Financial leverage measures the degree to which a firm’s assets 
are financed with debt. Financial leverage links return on equity and return on assets as follows:
ROE = ROA × Financial Leverage
Net Income
=
Net Income
×
Average Total Assets
Average Shareholders’ Equity
Average Total Assets
Average Shareholders’ Equity
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
This formula shows that return on equity equals return on assets multiplied by financial lever-
age, equal to the ratio of average total assets to average total shareholders’ equity.3 If a firm is 
100% equity financed (i.e., no assets are financed by debt), its financial leverage ratio is 1 (or 
100%). In contrast, a firm that financed 50% of its assets with equity would have a financial 
leverage ratio of 2 (or 200%).
Exhibit 7.1 shows the components of Great Deal’s ROE for fiscal years 2011 and 2012. 
Great Deal’s financial leverage ratio (average total assets divided by average shareholders’ 
equity) is 2.82 for fiscal 2012 (= [0.5 × ($15,826 + $18,302)]/[0.5 × ($5,156 + $6,964)]). A 
financial leverage ratio of 2.82 means that each dollar of equity finances about $2.82 of assets. 
The deviation of this ratio from 1.0 captures the degree to which assets are financed by non-
equity source of funds. We also see that the product of Great Deal’s ROA ratio (7.7%) and its 
financial leverage ratio (2.82) equals its ROE for 2012, 21.7%.
Comparing Great Deal’s ROE and ROE components in 2012 to those in 2011 reveals that 
the increase in ROE between 2011 and 2012 resulted from two offsetting effects. First, Great 
Deal’s ROA increased from 7.0% to 7.7%. Second, Great Deal’s financial leverage declined 
from 2.95 to 2.82. Because ROE increased overall, we can conclude that the first effect (the 
increase in ROA) exceeded the second effect (the decline in financial leverage).
 3 Financial leverage can be measured in a number of ways including the ratio of average total debt to average 
total assets, the ratio of average shareholders’ equity to average total assets, and the inverse of either of these 
ratios. The formula above uses the ratio of average total assets to average shareholders’ equity.
 4 Great Deal’s tax rate is 39.6% in fiscal 2011 and 36.5% in fiscal 2012.
C O N C E P T U A L  N O T E
The use of average total assets as the denominator in the 
ROA ratio means that the firm’s financing decisions do 
not affect the denominator of this ratio. Those financing 
decisions do, however, affect the numerator of ROA (net 
income) because interest expense reduces net income. 
To incorporate the effect of interest costs, the analyst 
adjusts the numerator of the ROA formula for the effects 
of financing choices. This adjustment results in the 
following adjusted ROA formula:
ROA = Net Income + After-tax Interest Expense
Average Total Assets
The adjusted ROA formula adds back interest expense 
(adjusted for its tax effects) to net income. Interest 
expense is deducted on the firm’s tax return in 
calculating taxable income, which is the income on 
which the firm pays taxes. Other things equal, interest 
expense benefits the firm by reducing its taxable income 
and, therefore, reducing its taxes paid. The amount of 
taxes saved or shielded because of the tax deductibility 
of interest expense is the amount of interest expense 
times one minus the firm’s tax rate. Because it includes 
an adjustment to income for the effects of the firm’s 
financing choices, the adjusted ROA formula is the 
technically correct formula for calculating ROA. Great 
Deal’s adjusted ROA for fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2012 
are calculated as follows:4
ROA = Net Income + After-tax Interest Expense
Average Total Assets
= $1,317 + (1 – 0.365)($94) = 8.1%
0.5 × ($15,826 + 18,302)
ROA = Net Income + After-tax Interest Expense
Average Total Assets
= $1,003 + (1 – 0.396)($94) = 7.4%
0.5 × ($12,758 + 15,826)
Although the adjusted formula is the correct formula 
to use when ROA is calculated on a standalone basis, it 
is not the formula that is used in the decomposition of 
ROE. Therefore, for purposes of this chapter, we use the 
unadjusted formula when we refer to the ROA ratio.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

225
Analysis of Profitability
 PROBLEM  7.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Analyzing return on equity. Balance sheets and income statements for Markum 
Corporation are provided in Exhibits 7.2 and 7.3, respectively. Using the information in 
these financial statements, answer the following questions about Markum’s profitability.
a. What was Markum’s return on equity (ROE) for 2013?
b.  What was Markum’s return on assets (ROA) for 2013?
c.  Why is Markum’s ROE different from its ROA in 2013?
Great Deal, Inc.
Components of the Return on Equity
ROE
=
Return on 
Assets
×
Financial 
Leverage
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21.7%
=
7.7%
×
2.82
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20.7%
=
7.0%
×
2.95
EXHIBIT 7.1
Markum Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheets
For Years 2012 and 2013
(in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 7.2
2013 
2012 
Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  6,000 
4.8%
$  4,000 
4.0%
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15,000 
12.1%
12,000 
12.0%
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  28,000 
 22.6%
  20,000 
 20.0%
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 49,000 
39.5%
$ 36,000 
36.0%
Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net  . . . . . . . . . . . .
  75,000 
 60.5%
  64,000 
 64.0%
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$124,000 
100.0%
$100,000 
100.0%
   
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 31,000 
25.0%
$ 24,800 
24.8%
Accrued Wages and Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  19,000 
 15.3%
  16,000 
 16.0%
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 50,000 
40.3%
$ 40,800 
40.8%
Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18,000 
14.5%
12,000 
12.0%
Shareholders' Equity:
 
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,500 
1.2%
1,000 
1.0%
 
Additional Paid-in Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24,500 
19.8%
18,000 
18.0%
 
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  30,000 
 24.2%
  28,200 
 28.2%
 
Total Shareholders' Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 56,000 
 45.2%
$ 47,200 
 47.2%
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity  . . . . . . . . .
$124,000 
100.0%
$100,000 
100.0%
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
DUPONT DECOMPOSITION ANALYSIS
A useful tool for understanding the sources of a firm’s profitability (as measured by ROE and 
ROA) is the DuPont Decomposition Analysis. This analysis disaggregates ROE into the financial 
leverage and ROA components (as we did in the previous section), and then disaggregates ROA 
further into the product of two other ratios: the profit margin ratio and the asset turnover ratio. 
Figure 7.3 illustrates this breakdown.
The ROA disaggregation is as follows:
ROA = Profit Margin × Asset Turnover Ratio
Net Income
= Net Income ×
Sales
Average Total Assets
Sales
Average Total Assets
Markum Corporation
Consolidated Income Statements
For Years 2012 and 2013
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 7.3
2013 
2012 
Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$92,000 
100.0%
$85,000 
100.0%
Cost of Goods Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 67,000 
 72.8%
 70,000 
 76.1%
Gross Profit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$25,000 
27.2%
$15,000 
16.3%
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. . . . . . . .
8,000 
8.7%
6,000 
6.5%
Research and Development Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  7,000 
  7.6%
  5,000 
  5.4%
Operating Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$10,000 
10.9%
$ 4,000 
4.3%
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,000 
  2.2%
  1,000 
  1.1%
Income Before Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 8,000 
8.7%
$ 3,000 
3.3%
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  3,200 
  3.5%
  1,200 
  1.3%
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,800 
  5.2%
$ 1,800 
  2.0%
Tax Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40.0%
40.0%
Return on Assets
Profit Margin
Asset Turnover
Ratio
Financial
Leverage
Return on Equity
DuPont Decomposition of ROE and ROA
FIGURE 7.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

227
Analysis of Profitability
The profit margin ratio (net income divided by sales revenue) measures a firm’s ability to 
control the level of expenses relative to sales, to increase selling prices relative to the level of 
expenses incurred, or a combination of the two. By controlling expenses or increasing selling 
prices, a firm can increase the profits from a given amount of sales activity and improve its 
profit margin.
The asset turnover ratio measures a firm’s ability to generate sales from its investment in 
assets, or alternatively, to control the amount of assets it uses to generate a particular level of 
sales revenues. The smaller the amount of assets the firm needs to generate a given level of 
sales, the better (larger) its assets turnover and the more profitable the firm.
Exhibit 7.4 presents the disaggregation of ROA for Great Deal into the profit margin ratio 
and asset turnover ratio for fiscal years 2011 and 2012. The data show that the previously noted 
increase in ROA from 7.0% in 2011 to 7.7% in 2012 is the result of two offsetting factors:
■ 
An increase in profit margin from 2.2% to 2.7% and
■ 
A decline in asset turnover from 3.1 to 2.9.
To pinpoint the causes of these changes, we analyze the changes in the profit margin and asset 
turnover ratios, in the next section.
A firm can improve its ROA by increasing the profit margin ratio, the rate of asset turnover, 
or both. It may be difficult to alter one or the other of these components. For example, a firm 
that sells commodity products in a competitive market likely has little opportunity to increase 
its profit margin by increasing prices. Such a firm would need to improve its total assets turn-
over (for example, shortening the holding period for inventories by imposing tighter inventory 
controls) to increase its ROA. A firm whose activities require substantial investments in prop-
erty, plant, and equipment and that operates efficiently near its capacity has limited ability to 
increase its ROA by increasing its total assets turnover. Such a firm might have more flexibility 
to take actions that increase the profit margin (for example, by creating brand loyalty for its 
products to increase sales).
The profit margin and asset turnover ratios are also related to each other. Holding other 
factors constant, we would expect that reducing the selling prices of products (thus reducing 
the profit margin) would increase sales of those products (thus increasing the asset turnover 
ratio). Conversely, raising selling prices (thus increasing the profit margin) would reduce sales 
volumes (thus reducing the asset turnover ratio).
ANALYZING CHANGES IN THE PROFIT MARGIN RATIO
Changes in a firm’s expenses relative to sales cause the profit margin ratio to change. To see the 
relation, we express the individual line items on the income statement as a percentage of sales. 
These percentages, for each individual expense and net income, are collectively referred to as a 
common-size income statement. The common-size income statements for Great Deal for fiscal 
years 2010–2012 are shown in Exhibit 7.5. Exhibit 7.5 indicates that Great Deal’s profit margin 
increased between 2011 and 2012 because of the following effects:
■ 
Cost of sales as a percentage of sales declined from 75.6% to 75.5%. Possible reasons for 
this decline include:
■ Great Deal’s increasing size (as measured by the growth in total assets between 2011 
and 2012) may have allowed it to purchase merchandise at lower cost, either because of 
quantity discounts or greater bargaining power over suppliers.
Great Deal, Inc.
Disaggregation of ROA for 2011 and 2012
ROA
=
Profit 
Margin
×
Asset 
Turnover 
Ratio
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.7%
=
2.7%
×
2.9
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.0%
=
2.2%
×
3.1
EXHIBIT 7.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
■ Great Deal may have shifted its sales mix toward products or geographical markets with 
lower cost of goods sold to sales percentages.
■ Great Deal may have improved its controls over the purchase, storage, and delivery of 
merchandise, reducing the cost of storage and obsolescence.
■ 
Selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expenses, as percentages of sales, declined 
from 20.0% to 19.9%. Possible reasons for this decline include:
■ A competitor’s bankruptcy may have reduced competition, permitting Great Deal to 
reduce advertising and other marketing costs.
■ Great Deal may have improved its distribution channels, resulting in lower SG&A 
expenses.
■ Great Deal may have shifted its sales mix toward products or geographical markets with 
lower levels of selling or administrative expenses.
■ 
Both restructuring charges and impairment charges declined as a percentage of sales. 
Restructuring charges declined from 0.2% to 0.1% and impairment charges declined from 
0.1% to 0.0%. The declines in these percentages indicate that Great Deal had fewer restruc-
turing events and fewer impairments in fiscal 2012 compared to fiscal 2011.
ANALYZING CHANGES IN THE ASSET TURNOVER RATIO
Changes in the rate of turnover of specific types of assets result in changes in the total assets 
turnover ratio. The analyst generally calculates separate turnover ratios for three types of 
assets: accounts receivable, inventory, and fixed assets.
Great Deal, Inc.
Common-Size Income Statements
For Years 2012, 2011, and 2010
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 7.5
2012
2011
2010
Revenue
$49,694 
100.0%
$45,015 
100.0%
$40,023 
100.0%
Cost of Goods Sold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  37,534 
 75.5%
 34,017 
 75.6%
 30,477 
 76.1%
Gross Profit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,160 
24.5%
$10,998 
24.4%
$ 9,546 
23.9%
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . .
9,873 
19.9%
8,984 
20.0%
7,385 
18.5%
Restructuring Charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52 
0.1%
78 
0.2%
0 
0.0%
Goodwill and Trade Name Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      0 
  0.0%
     66 
  0.1%
      0 
  0.0%
Operating Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,235 
4.5%
$ 1,870 
4.2%
$ 2,161 
5.4%
Other Income (Expense)
 
Investment Income and Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54 
0.1%
35 
0.1%
129 
0.3%
 
Investment Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0 
0.0%
(111)
−0.2%
0 
0.0%
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (94)
      −0.2%
     (94)
      −0.2%
     (62)
      −0.2%
Earnings Before Income Tax Expense and Equity 
in Income (Loss) of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,195 
4.4%
$ 1,700 
3.8%
$ 2,228 
5.6%
Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
802 
1.6%
674 
1.5%
815 
2.0%
Equity in Income (Loss) of Affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      1 
  0.0%
      7 
  0.0%
      (3)
  0.0%
Net Earnings Including Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,394 
2.8%
$ 1,033 
2.3%
$ 1,410 
3.5%
Net Earnings Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . .
     (77)
     −0.2%
     (30)
      −0.1%
      (3)
  0.0%
Net Earnings Attributable to Great Deal, Inc.  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,317 
  2.7%
$ 1,003 
   2.2%
$ 1,407 
  3.5%
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

229
Analysis of Profitability
Accounts Receivable Turnover The rate at which accounts receivable turn over indi-
cates how quickly a firm collects cash from credit sales. The accounts receivable turnover ratio 
equals sales revenue divided by average accounts receivable during the period:5
Sales
Average Accounts Receivable
The accounts receivable turnover ratio for Great Deal in fiscal 2012 is as follows:
Sales
=
$46,964
= 38.3 times per year
Average Accounts Receivable
0.5 × ($1,868 + $2,020)
The analyst often expresses accounts receivable turnover in terms of the average number 
of days that elapse between the time the firm makes the sale and the time it later collects the 
cash. This calculation is called days accounts receivable are outstanding or days outstanding for 
receivables. To calculate this ratio, divide 365 days by the accounts receivable turnover ratio. 
The days outstanding for accounts receivable for Great Deal during fiscal 2012 was 9.5 days 
(= 365 days/38.3 times per year). During fiscal 2011 its accounts receivable turnover was 55.9 
or 6.5 days. The declining accounts receivable ratios and the increasing days outstanding for 
receivables indicate that Great Deal has been slower to convert sales into cash collections in 
fiscal 2012 compared to fiscal 2011. The declining accounts receivable turnover and increased 
number of days on average to collect accounts receivable may result from the following factors:
■ 
Great Deal may, over time, be increasing the fraction of its sales made on credit (versus 
cash). Because our calculation includes cash sales (erroneously) in the numerator but not 
the denominator of the accounts receivable turnover ratio, a shift in the portion of cash 
sales over time will create shifts in the ratio itself.
■ 
Great Deal may be offering customers more attractive (to the customer) payment terms in 
order to increase sales. All else equal, customers would prefer to pay for sales later rather 
than earlier.
Most firms that sell to other businesses, as opposed to consumers, sell on account and col-
lect within 30 to 90 days. Interpreting any particular firm’s accounts receivable turnover and 
days receivable outstanding requires knowing the terms of sale. If a firm’s terms of sale are 
“net 30 days” and the firm collects its accounts receivable in 45 days, then collections do not 
match the stated terms. Such a result warrants a review of the credit and collection activity to 
ascertain the cause and to guide corrective action. If the firm offers terms of “net 45 days,” a 
days receivable outstanding of 45 days indicates that the firm handles accounts receivable in 
accord with stated terms.
Many firms sell to customers on account as a strategy to stimulate sales. Customers may 
purchase more willingly and purchase more if they are provided credit. Such firms may also 
encourage customers to delay paying for their purchases as a means for the selling firm to 
generate interest revenue through finance charges on the unpaid amounts. Thus, comparing 
accounts receivable turnovers over time or across firms requires an analysis of the growth rate 
in sales, the amount of interest revenue generated, the cost of administering the credit-granting 
activity, and the losses from uncollectible accounts.
Inventory Turnover The inventory turnover ratio indicates how fast firms sell their inven-
tory, measured in terms of the rate of movement of goods into and out of the firm. Inventory 
turnover equals cost of goods sold divided by the average inventory during the period:
Cost of Goods Sold
Average Inventory
 5 In theory, the numerator should include only credit sales (i.e., exclude cash sales) if the objective is to measure 
how quickly a firm collects its accounts receivable. Many firms, except some retailers that deal directly with 
consumers (such as fast food outlets), sell their goods and services on credit. Other firms, such as Great Deal, 
have both cash sales and credit sales. Firms seldom disclose the proportions of cash and credit sales in their 
financial reports. Thus, the analyst uses sales revenue in the numerator of the accounts receivable turnover 
ratio, recognizing that the inclusion of cash sales increases the numerator and thereby overstates the receivables 
turnover ratio.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

230
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
The numerator equals the cost of inventories sold during the period.6 The denominator 
equals the average cost of inventories on hand during the period. The inventory turnover ratio 
for Great Deal for fiscal 2012 is as follows:
Cost of Sales
=
$37,534
= 11.0 times per year
Average Inventory
0.5 × ($4,753 + $5,486)
Items remain in inventory an average of 33.2 days (= 365 days/11.0 times per year) before sale. 
In fiscal 2011, Great Deal’s inventory turnover ratio was 10.8 times or 33.8 days. The increasing 
inventory turnover ratio (and declining days inventory) might result from the following factors:
■ 
Improved inventory control systems, which would reduce the levels of inventory and the 
cost of storage and obsolescence. This explanation is consistent with the decreased cost of 
goods sold to sales percentage discussed earlier.
■ 
A shift in sales mix toward DVDs or CDs or other products that turn over more quickly.
Managing inventory turnover involves two opposing considerations. On the one hand, for 
a given amount of profit margin on the goods, firms prefer to sell as many goods as possible 
with a minimum of assets tied up in inventories. An increase in the rate of inventory turnover 
between periods indicates reduced costs of financing the inventory. On the other hand, man-
agement does not want to have so little inventory on hand that shortages result in lost sales. 
Increases in the rate of inventory turnover caused by inventory shortages could signal a loss of 
customers, thereby offsetting any advantage gained by decreased investment in inventory. Firms 
must balance these opposing considerations in setting the level of inventory and, thus, the rate 
of inventory turnover.
Fixed-Asset Turnover The fixed-asset turnover ratio measures the relation between sales 
and the investment in fixed assets—property, plant, and equipment. It is more difficult to under-
stand the notion that fixed assets “turn over” than to understand turnover for inventory. A more 
appropriate title for the fixed-asset turnover ratio might be the fixed-asset productivity ratio 
because it measures the sales generated from a particular level of investment in fixed assets:
Sales
Average Fixed Assets
The fixed-asset turnover ratio for Great Deal for fiscal 2012 is as follows:
Sales
=
$46,964
= 12.1 times per year
Average Fixed Assets
0.5 × ($4,174 + $4,070)
Thus, $1.00 invested in fixed assets during fiscal 2012 generated $12.10 in sales. In fiscal 2011, 
$1.00 invested in fixed assets generated $12.0 in sales. Thus, the fixed-asset turnover increased 
between 2011 and 2012. The analyst should interpret changes in the fixed-asset turnover ratio 
cautiously. Firms often invest in fixed assets (for example, new production facilities) well before 
these assets generate sales from products manufactured in their plants or sold in their stores. 
Thus, a low or decreasing fixed-asset turnover ratio may indicate an expanding firm preparing 
for future growth. On the other hand, a firm anticipating a decline in product sales could cut 
back its expenditures on fixed assets, thus increasing the fixed-asset turnover ratio.
Some analysts find the reciprocal of the fixed-asset turnover ratio helpful in comparing 
the operating characteristics of different firms. The reciprocal ratio measures the investment 
in fixed assets required to generate sales. For Great Deal, this reciprocal for 2012 is $0.08 
 6 Some analysts calculate the inventory turnover ratio using sales, rather than cost of goods sold, as the numera-
tor. As long as the ratio of selling price to cost of goods sold remains relatively constant, either measure will 
identify changes in the trend of the inventory turnover ratio. Using sales in the numerator, however, will lead to 
incorrect measures of the inventory turnover ratio for calculating the average number of days that inventory is 
on hand until sale.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

231
Analysis of Profitability
(= $1.0/12.1 times). This calculation implies that Great Deal required $0.08 of fixed assets to 
generate $1.00 of sales in fiscal 2012.
Summary of Asset Turnover Ratios Exhibit 7.6 presents the four turnover ratios 
discussed for Great Deal, for fiscal years 2011 and 2012. We noted earlier that the asset turn-
over ratio for Great Deal declined between 2011 and 2012. The accounts receivable turnover 
ratio decreased from 55.9 to 38.3 between 2011 and 2012. Accounts receivable represent 11% 
(= $2,020/$18,302) of Great Deal’s total assets in fiscal 2012. The decreasing accounts receiv-
able turnover ratio, taken alone, would decrease the total assets turnover. Inventory and fixed 
assets, on the other hand, together comprise approximately 52% of total assets (= [$5,486 +
$4,070]/$18,302) and both of these ratios increased by small amounts. The small changes in the 
inventory turnover ratio and the fixed-asset turnover ratio, coupled with the larger amounts 
of these assets, do not offset the effects of the decline in the accounts receivable turnover ratio. 
The offsetting effects of changes in these three asset turnover ratios led to the decline in the 
total assets turnover ratio between 2011 and 2012.
SUMMARY OF THE DUPONT DECOMPOSITION ANALYSIS
The DuPont decomposition analysis helps the analyst understand the sources of a firm’s per-
formance as measured by return on equity. The DuPont analysis shows the following:
■ 
ROE results from the interaction of its components: ROA and financial leverage. Financial 
leverage captures the choice about the portion of assets to finance through debt versus 
equity.
■ 
ROA results from the interaction of its components: profit margin and asset turnover. 
The profit margin results from the relation of expenses to sales. Asset turnover reflects the 
effects of turnover ratios for accounts receivable, inventory, and fixed assets.
 PROBLEM  7.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Analyzing the return on assets. Refer to the information for Markum Corporation 
provided in Problem 7.1 for Self-Study. Identify the likely reasons for the increasing 
return on assets ratio for 2013. Use common-size income statement percentages and 
individual asset turnover ratios in your interpretations.
SUMMARY OF PROFITABILITY ANALYSIS 
This chapter introduces two broad measures for assessing profitability: ROE and ROA. 
 Figure 7.4 summarizes the discussion. At Level 1, ROA and ROE measure overall profitabil-
ity and the effect of financial leverage. At Level 2, we disaggregate ROA into its profit margin 
and asset turnover components. At Level 3, we further disaggregate the profit margin and asset 
turnover ratios to gain additional insights into reasons for changes in profitability.
Great Deal Inc.
Asset Turnover Ratios
2012
2011
Total Assets Turnover. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2.9
 3.1
Accounts Receivable Turnover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
38.3
55.9
Inventory Turnover  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11.0
10.8
Fixed-Asset Turnover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12.1
12.0
EXHIBIT 7.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

232
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
ANALYSIS OF RISK
Investors deciding among potential investments must consider the comparative risks of those 
investments. Various factors affect the risk of a business enterprise:
1. Macroeconomic factors, such as inflation, interest rates, and unemployment rates.
2. Industry factors, such as competition, changes in technology, and changes in regulations.
3. Firm-specific factors, such as labor strikes, loss of facilities due to fire or other casualty, or 
key skills and talents of the management team.
An important risk assessment concerns liquidity, which refers to whether the firm is able to 
pay its bills in a timely manner. Assessing liquidity requires a time horizon. Consider the three 
questions that follow:
1. Does a firm have sufficient cash to pay its employees tomorrow?
2. Will the firm have sufficient cash to pay its suppliers in six months?
3. Will the firm have sufficient cash to repay a loan due in five years?
To answer the first question, we examine whether the amount of cash on hand and in the 
bank is sufficient to pay amounts owed to employees tomorrow. To answer the second question, 
we need to know the amount of cash the firm expects to generate from operations during the 
next six months, as well as the amount of any new borrowing that the firm expects to undertake. 
Cash obtained from either of these sources could be used to pay suppliers. To answer the third 
question, we focus on the long-run cash-generating ability of the firm and determine whether the 
amount of cash generated is sufficient to repay long-term debt as it comes due. Questions 1 and 
2 capture the firm’s short-term liquidity risk. Question 3 captures the firm’s long-term liquidity 
risk. We turn next to financial ratios that capture short-term and long-term liquidity risk.
MEASURES OF SHORT-TERM LIQUIDITY RISK
This section discusses four measures for assessing short-term liquidity risk:
1. Current ratio,
2. Quick ratio,
3. Cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratio, and
4. Working capital turnover ratios.
Return on Assets
Profit Margin
Various Expense
Percentages
Accounts
Receivable
Turnover
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Inventory
Turnover
Fixed Asset
Turnover
Asset Turnover
Ratio
Financial
Leverage
Return on Equity
Complete DuPont Decomposition
FIGURE 7.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

233
Analysis of Risk
Current Ratio The current ratio equals current assets divided by current liabilities. Current 
assets comprise cash and assets that a firm expects to turn into cash or sell or consume within 
approximately one year of the balance sheet date. Current liabilities include obligations that 
will require cash (or the rendering of services) within approximately one year. Thus, the current 
ratio indicates a firm’s ability to meet its short-term obligations. A current ratio of at least 1.0 
indicates that the firm has sufficient current assets on hand to cover its obligations due in the 
coming year. As shown below, Great Deal’s current ratio increased between fiscal years 2011 
and 2012, from 0.97 to 1.18:
 
= 
Current Assets
Current Ratio 
 
Current Liabilities
2012: $10,566/$8,987  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1.18
2011: $8,192/$8,435 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0.97
Changes in the trend of the current ratio can mislead. For example, when the current ratio 
exceeds 1.0, an increase of equal amount in both current assets and current liabilities results in 
a decline in the ratio, whereas equal decreases result in an increased current ratio.7 An implica-
tion of this arithmetic relation is that during a recession (when there are fewer growth opportu-
nities), a firm may use its cash to pay its current liabilities, causing the current ratio to increase. 
In contrast, during a boom period, a firm may conserve cash (in order to finance growth 
opportunities) by delaying payment of current liabilities, causing the current ratio to decrease. 
Thus, a high current ratio may accompany deteriorating business conditions, whereas a falling 
ratio may accompany profitable operations.
Furthermore, management can take actions to present a better current ratio at the balance 
sheet date than the normal current ratio during the rest of the year. For example, near the end of 
its accounting period a firm might delay purchases of inventory on account. Or, it might hasten 
the collection of a noncurrent loan receivable and use the proceeds to reduce current liabilities. 
Such actions will increase the current ratio. Analysts refer to such actions as window dressing.
Quick Ratio A variation of the current ratio is the quick ratio (sometimes called the 
acid test ratio). The quick ratio includes in the numerator only current assets that a firm could 
convert quickly into cash, typically, cash, marketable securities, and accounts receivable. Some 
businesses can convert their inventory into cash more quickly than other businesses can convert 
their receivables. The facts in each case will indicate whether the analyst should include receiv-
ables or exclude inventories. For purposes of this textbook, assume the numerator includes 
accounts receivable and excludes inventories. The denominator includes all current liabilities. A 
quick ratio approximately one-half of the current ratio is typical, although this varies by industry.
Assuming the quick ratio of Great Deal includes accounts receivable and excludes inven-
tory, the quick ratios for fiscal 2011 and 2012 are as follows:
 
=
 
Cash, Marketable
 
 
Securities, Accounts
 
 
Receivable
Quick Ratio 
 
Current Liabilities
2012: ($1,826 + $90 + $2,020)/$8,978. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0.44
2011: ($498 + $11 + $1,868)/$8,435 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0.28
Great Deal’s quick ratio, like its current ratio, increased between 2011 and 2012 because of 
increases in cash, marketable securities, and accounts receivable. For both years, Great Deal’s 
quick ratio is below the benchmark of one-half the current ratio. This is likely because Great 
Deal’s largest current asset, inventory, is not reflected in the quick ratio. Because it is reasonable 
 7 The general rule is that adding equal amounts to both the numerator and the denominator of a fraction moves 
that fraction closer to 1.0, whereas subtracting equal amounts from both the numerator and the denominator 
of a fraction makes that fraction diverge from 1.0.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
to believe that Great Deal could sell most if not all of its inventory quickly if it wanted to, we 
can calculate its quick ratios including inventory:
 
=
 
Cash, Marketable
 
 
Securities, Accounts
 
 
Receivable, and
 
 
Inventory
Quick Ratio Including Inventory 
 
Current Liabilities
2012: ($1,826 + $90 +$2,020 + $5,486)/$8,978 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1.05
2011: ($498 + $11 + $1,868 + $4,753)/$8,435 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0.85
These data indicate that Great Deal’s quick ratios are much higher when inventory is 
included.
Cash Flow from Operations to Current Liabilities Ratio Some analysts criti-
cize the current ratio and the quick ratio as measures of short-term liquidity risk because these 
ratios use balance sheet amounts at a specific time. If financial statement amounts at that time 
are unusually large or small, the resulting ratios will not reflect normal conditions. If manage-
ment knows that analysts will evaluate the firm using one of these ratios at a particular time, it 
can take steps to window dress that ratio. An example of the latter would be if a firm used cash 
to pay off a current liability (reducing both numerator and denominator) or acquired inventory 
on account (increasing both numerator and denominator).
The cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratio overcomes these deficiencies. The 
numerator of this ratio is cash flow from operations for the period and the denominator is 
average current liabilities for the period. Healthy mature firms typically have a ratio of 40% or 
more. The cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratios for Great Deal for 2011 and 
2012 are as follows:
 
= 
Cash Flow from Operations
Cash Flow from Operations to Current Liabilities Ratio 
 
Average Current Liabilities
2012: $2,206/[0.5 × ($8,435 + $8,978)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
25.3%
2011: $1,877/[0.5 × ($6,769 + $8,435)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
24.7%
Great Deal’s cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratios are below the 40% 
benchmark.
Working Capital Turnover Ratios Working capital turnover ratios help to assess a 
firm’s operating cycle (cash cycle, earnings cycle), which captures the length of time from the 
expenditure of cash to purchase or produce products for sale to the sale of products, collections 
from customers and payments to suppliers. Thus, the operating cycle can be thought of as the 
time period over which the firm needs to finance its operating outlays, equal to the net outlays 
associated with its production, sales, collection and payment cycles. During the operating cycle, 
a retailing firm such as Great Deal has several transactions:
1. Purchases inventory on account from suppliers,
2. Sells inventory for cash or on account to customers,
3. Collects amounts due from customers, and
4. Pays amounts due to suppliers.
This cycle recurs for most businesses. The number of days a firm holds inventories (that is, 
365 days/inventory turnover ratio) indicates the length of the period between the purchase and 
the sale of inventory during each operating cycle. The number of days receivables remain out-
standing (that is, 365 days/accounts receivable turnover ratio) indicates the length of the period 
between the sale of inventory and the collection of cash from customers during each operating 
cycle.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

235
Analysis of Risk
Firms must finance their investments in inventories and accounts receivable. Suppliers typi-
cally provide a portion of the needed financing. The number of days accounts payable remain 
outstanding (that is, 365 days/accounts payable turnover ratio) indicates the length of the 
period between the purchase of inventory on account and the payment of cash to suppliers 
during each operating cycle. The accounts payable turnover ratio equals purchases on account 
divided by average accounts payable. Although firms do not disclose their purchases, the ana-
lyst can derive the amount for a merchandising firm as follows:
Beginning Inventory + Purchases = Cost of Goods Sold + Ending Inventory
Rearranging terms yields the following:
Purchases = Cost of Goods Sold + Ending Inventory – Beginning Inventory
Great Deal’s purchases appear below for 2011 and 2012:
Purchases
=
Cost of 
Goods Sold
+
Ending 
Inventory
–
Beginning 
Inventory
2012
$38,267
=
$37,534
+
$5,486
–
$5,486
2011
$34,062
=
$34,017
+
$4,753
–
$4,708
The accounts payable turnover ratios for Great Deal for fiscal 2011 and 2012 are as follows:
 
= 
Purchases
Accounts Payable Turnover Ratio 
 
Average Accounts Payable
2012: $38,267/[0.5 × ($4,997 + $5,276)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
11.2
2011: $34,062/[0.5 × ($4,297 + $4,997)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
11.0
The average number of days Great Deal’s payables were outstanding was 33.2 days 
(=  365/11.0) in 2011 and 32.7 days (= 365/11.2) in 2012. Interpreting the accounts payable 
turnover ratio involves opposing considerations. An increase in the accounts payable turnover 
ratio (a decrease in days payable) indicates that a firm pays its obligations to suppliers more 
quickly, requiring cash and even wasting the benefits of cash if the firm makes payments earlier 
than necessary. On the other hand, a faster accounts payable turnover also means a smaller 
relative amount of accounts payable that the firm must pay in the near future. Most firms want 
to extend their payables as long as they can, but they also want to maintain their relations with 
suppliers. Businesses, therefore, negotiate for favorable payment terms and then delay paying 
until just before the last agreed moment.
The period of time (in days) during which a firm converts cash into goods and services, 
then sells those goods and services to customers, then collects cash from those customers is the 
firm’s operating cycle. We calculate Great Deal’s operating cycle as follows:
Year
Days
Inventory
+
Days 
Accounts 
Receivable
–
Days 
Accounts 
Payable 
Outstanding
=
Operating 
Cycle
2012
33.2
+
9.5
–
32.7
=
10.0
2011
33.8
+
6.5
–
33.2
=
 7.2
Great Deal reduced its days inventory, increased its days receivables, and reduced its days 
payable between 2011 and 2012. The net effect of these changes was to increase Great Deal’s 
operating cycle by 2.8 days (from 7.2 days to 10.0 days) between 2011 and 2012. Inspection of 
the components of the operating cycle reveals that this increase is primarily due to the increase 
in days receivables from 6.5 days to 9.5 days. Great Deal’s 2012 operating cycle of 10.0 days 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
means that Great Deal’s operating cash outflows occur about 10 days earlier, on average, than 
do its operating cash inflows. Thus, if it wanted to finance this gap, Great Deal would need to 
borrow for approximately 10 days.
Summary of Short-Term Liquidity Risk Analysis The current and quick ratios 
measure liquidity at a particular date. Great Deal’s current ratios are near the benchmark value 
of 1.0, while its quick ratios and operating cash flow to current liabilities ratios are lower than 
their benchmark values. Great Deal has been slower to collect its accounts receivable, with the 
days receivable increasing from 6.5 days in 2011 to 9.5 days in 2012. Great Deal has accelerated 
the sales of inventory, reducing its days inventory from 33.8 days in 2011 to 33.2 days in 2012. 
Finally, Great Deal financed a decreasing proportion of its purchases by delaying payments to 
suppliers, as evidenced by a decline in days payable from about 33.2 days in 2011 to about 32.7 
days in 2012. Taken as a whole, Great Deal’s short-term liquidity risk appears low.
 PROBLEM  7.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Analyzing short-term liquidity risk. Refer to the information for Markum Corporation in 
Exhibits 7.2 and 7.3.
a. Calculate Markum’s current ratio and quick ratio for 2013.
b. Calculate Markum’s working capital turnover ratios (accounts receivable turnover, 
inventory turnover and accounts payable turnover) for 2013.
c. What was Markum’s operating cycle (in days) for 2013?
d. What is your assessment of the short-term liquidity risk of Markum Corporation at 
the end of 2013?
MEASURES OF LONG-TERM LIQUIDITY RISK
Analysts use measures of long-term liquidity risk (also called solvency risk) to evaluate a firm’s 
ability to meet interest and principal payments on long-term debt and similar obligations as 
they become due. If a firm cannot make the payments on time, it becomes insolvent and may 
have to reorganize or liquidate.
A firm’s ability to generate income over several years provides the best protection against 
long-term liquidity risk. If a firm is profitable, it will either generate sufficient cash from opera-
tions or obtain needed financing from creditors and owners. Therefore, the measures of prof-
itability discussed previously apply to assessing long-term liquidity risk as well. In addition, 
analysts measure long-term liquidity risk with debt ratios, the cash flow from operations to 
total liabilities ratio, and the interest coverage ratio.
Debt Ratios Several variations of debt ratios measure long-term liquidity risk. Because of 
these variations, the analyst should take care when comparing debt ratios among firms. In par-
ticular, the analyst should understand which debt ratio is being calculated and compared.
We use three debt ratios to measure long-term liquidity risk:
1. Liabilities to Assets Ratio = Total Liabilities/Total Assets
2. Long-Term Debt Ratio = Long-Term Debt/Total Assets
3. Debt-Equity Ratio = Long-Term Debt/Shareholders’ Equity
The liabilities to assets ratio measures the portion of assets financed with liabilities. The long-
term debt ratio measures the portion of assets financed with long-term debt. The debt-equity 
ratio measures financing obtained from long-term debt relative to shareholders’ equity. In gen-
eral, higher debt ratios mean greater long-term liquidity risk, that is, a greater likelihood that 
the firm will be unable to meet interest and principal payments in the future. Most firms must 
decide how much financial leverage, with its attendant risk, they can afford.
Exhibit 7.7 shows these debt ratios for Great Deal for fiscal 2011 and 2012. Because the 
three debt ratios (and versions of them) correlate highly, analysts generally rely on one or two 
of these ratios to assess long-term liquidity risk.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

237
Analysis of Risk
The debt ratios for Great Deal show similar patterns between 2011 and 2012. All indicate 
that Great Deal’s long-term liquidity risk decreased.
In assessing debt ratios, analysts customarily vary the benchmark in relation to the stabil-
ity of the firm’s earnings and cash flows from operations. The more stable the earnings and 
cash flows, the higher is the acceptable or safe debt ratio. Public utilities, for example, have high 
liabilities to assets ratios, frequently on the order of 60% to 70%. The stability of earnings and 
cash flows of public utilities makes these high ratios acceptable to many investors. These same 
investors might find such high leverage unacceptable for firms with less stable earnings and 
cash flows.
Cash Flow from Operations to Total Liabilities Ratio Debt ratios do not con-
sider the availability of cash to service debt (that is, to pay interest and principal when due). 
The cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio overcomes this deficiency. This cash 
flow ratio resembles the one for assessing short-term liquidity risk, but here the denominator 
includes all liabilities (both current and noncurrent). A mature, financially healthy company 
typically has a cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio of 20% or more.
The cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratios for Great Deal are as follows:
 
= 
Cash Flow from Operations
Cash Flow from Operations to Total Liabilities Ratio 
 
Average Total Liabilities
2012: $2,206/[0.5 × ($10,670 + $11,338)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
20.0%
2011: $1,438/[0.5 × ($8,234 + $10,670)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
15.2%
Great Deal’s cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio was below the 20% bench-
mark in 2011 and reached this benchmark in 2012.
Interest Coverage Ratio Another measure of long-term liquidity risk is the number of 
times that income covers (pays for) interest charges. The interest coverage ratio equals income 
before interest expense and income tax expense divided by interest expense.8 This ratio indicates 
the relative protection that operating profitability provides debt holders. Analysts typically view 
an interest coverage ratio below 3.0 as risky, although they prefer a ratio that is stable over time 
to one that is somewhat higher on average but fluctuates. A benchmark value of 3.0 means that 
the firm has three times as much income before interest expense and income taxes as it needs to 
pay current interest charges.
Great Deal, Inc.
Debt Ratios
Liabilities to Assets Ratio
2012: $11,338/$18,302. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
61.9
2011: $10,670/$15,826. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
67.4
Long-Term Debt Ratio
2012: $1,104/$18,302. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6.0
2011: $1,126/$15,826. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7.1
Debt-Equity Ratio
2012: $1,104/$6,964  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15.9
2011: $1,126/$5,156  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
21.8
EXHIBIT 7.7
 8 If debt contracts require periodic repayments of principal, the denominator of the interest coverage ratio might 
include such required repayments.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Great Deal’s interest coverage ratios for 2011 and 2012 are as follows:
 
=
 
Net Income Before Interest
 
 
and Income Taxes
Interest Coverage Ratio 
 
Interest Expense
2012: ($2,195 + $94)/$94 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
24.4 times
2011: ($1,700 + $94)/$94 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
19.1 times
Great Deal’s interest coverage ratios increased from 19.1 times in 2011 to 24.4 times in 2012. 
Because the interest coverage ratios easily exceed the 3.0 benchmark, we infer that Great Deal 
has profitability to cover its interest charges.
One can criticize the interest coverage ratio as a measure of long-term liquidity risk because 
it uses income rather than cash flows in the numerator. Firms pay interest and other fixed pay-
ment obligations with cash, not with income. When the ratio is relatively low, the analyst should 
use some measure of cash flows, such as cash flow from operations, in the numerator.
Summary of Long-Term Liquidity Risk Analysis Long-term liquidity analysis 
focuses on the amount of debt (particularly long-term debt) in the financing structure of a firm 
and on the adequacy of net income and cash flows to service this debt. Great Deal has a low 
fraction of assets financed by long-term debt, and its interest coverage ratios are strong. Both 
suggest that Great Deal’s long-term liquidity risk is low.
 PROBLEM  7.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Analyzing long-term liquidity risk. Refer to the information for Markum Corporation in 
Exhibits 7.2 and 7.3.
a. Calculate the three debt ratios for Markum for 2012 and 2013: liabilities to assets 
ratio, long term debt ratio, debt-equity ratio.
b. Calculate the interest coverage ratio for 2012 and 2013.
c. Did Markum’s long-term liquidity risk improve or weaken between 2012 and 2013? 
What is your assessment of the long-term liquidity risk of Markum Corporation at 
the end of fiscal year 2013?
LIMITATIONS OF RATIO ANALYSIS
Ratio analysis, as a tool for understanding the financial health of a firm, has limitations:
1. Because ratios use financial statement data as inputs, factors that cause shortcomings in 
financial statements will affect the ratios computed from them.
2. Changes in many ratios correlate with each other and thus do not provide independent 
insights. For example, the current ratio and the quick ratio often change proportionally 
and in the same direction. Typically, analysts would compute a subset of ratios to assess a 
particular dimension of profitability or risk.
3. When comparing ratios between periods for the same firm, the analyst must recognize 
changes in economic conditions, for example, changes in product lines or geographic mar-
kets served, changes in prices, or corporate acquisitions.
4. When comparing ratios of a particular firm with those of similar firms, the analyst must 
recognize differences among the firms, for example, different methods of accounting, dif-
ferent operating methods, and different types of financing.
5. Financial ratios alone do not indicate good or poor management; they indicate areas 
that the analyst should investigate further. For example, a decrease in inventory turnover 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

239
Common-Size Financial Statements
(ordinarily considered an undesirable trend) may reflect the accumulation of merchandise 
to keep retail stores fully stocked during a period of anticipated increased demand. The 
analyst must combine ratios with an investigation of other facts before drawing conclusions.
COMMON-SIZE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Common-size financial statements, which show each item included on the statement as a per-
centage of some amount, are useful for analyzing a particular firm over time or for compar-
ing firms of different sizes. As noted at the start of this chapter, common-size balance sheets 
express each balance sheet item as a percentage of total assets. Common-size income statements 
express each income statement item as a percentage of revenues. We previously discussed Great 
Deal’s common-size income statements, shown in Exhibit 7.5. Exhibit 7.8 shows Great Deal’s 
 common-size balance sheets for fiscal years 2010–2012.
Exhibit 7.8 reveals that Great Deal’s accounts receivable as a percentage of total assets is 
11.0% for 2012. Is 11.0% high or low relative to other firms whose business models are similar 
to Great Deal’s? Is Great Deal’s common-size net property and equipment percentage of 22.2% 
in 2012 high or low? Comparing the items in Great Deal’s common-size balance sheet to those 
of other firms in the same industry can provide insight into whether Great Deal is performing 
better, or worse, than its competition.
Comparing firms using common-size balance sheets assumes that the size or scale of a 
business does not affect the relation between a given balance sheet item and total assets. Simi-
larly, comparing firms using common-size income statements assumes that the size or scale of 
a business does not affect the relation between a given income statement sheet item and total 
revenues. These assumptions may not hold. Large firms often achieve economies of scale that 
affect the proportionality of the components of their business, thus reducing the comparabil-
ity of their common-size ratios with those of smaller-scale competitors. For example, a large 
purchaser of goods and services (such as Great Deal) has negotiating power over its suppliers, 
relative to the negotiating power of a smaller purchaser (such as a small local electronics store). 
Greater negotiating power means that Great Deal can obtain:
■ 
Lower per-unit prices. Holding quantity constant, lower per-unit prices imply a lower per-
unit recorded amount for inventory, which affects both inventory turnover and the cost of 
goods sold percentage.
■ 
More frequent but proportionately smaller quantities purchased. Smaller but more frequent 
purchases reduce the quantity of inventory held by Great Deal, which improves inventory 
turnover.
■ 
Better payment terms. Better terms increase the time that Great Deal retains cash as 
opposed to paying it to the supplier, thus improving its accounts payable turnover ratio.
A comparison of Great Deal’s common-size financial statements with those of a smaller 
competitor, Consumers Electronics Limited (CEL), suggests that Great Deal has negotiating 
power. Exhibit 7.9 shows CEL’s common-size balance sheets for fiscal years 2010–2012 and 
Exhibit 7.10 shows its common-size income statements for the same periods. CEL’s financial 
information is presented in thousands of dollars, whereas Great Deal reports in millions of 
dollars. CEL is, therefore, substantially smaller than Great Deal. To discern the influence of 
negotiating power, we note that Great Deal has smaller common-size percentages for inventory 
and larger common-size percentages for accounts payable than CEL. Typically, analysts would 
not compare the common-size balance sheets of two firms that differ significantly in size. For 
example, an informed user would not compare Great Deal’s common-size balance sheet with 
the common-size balance sheet of a local electronics shop.
ANALYZING FIRM PERFORMANCE USING FINANCIAL RATIOS
As discussed earlier in this chapter, two common approaches to evaluating whether a firm has 
done well or poorly during a given accounting period involve comparing that firm to:
1. Its own performance, in an earlier time period.
2. Other firms’ performance, over the same time period as performance is measured.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Great Deal, Inc.
Common-Size Balance Sheets
For Years 2012, 2011, and 2010
(amounts in millions of US$)
EXHIBIT 7.8
2012
2011
2010
Assets
Current Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,826 
10.0%
$   498 
3.1%
$ 1,438 
11.3%
Short-Term Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90 
0.5%
11 
0.1%
64 
0.5%
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,020 
11.0%
1,868 
11.8%
549 
4.3%
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,486 
30.0%
4,753 
30.0%
4,708 
36.9%
Other Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,144 
  6.3%
  1,062
  6.7%
             583 
  4.6%
 
 Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,566 
57.7%
$ 8,192 
51.8%
$       7,342 
57.5%
Property and Equipment
0.0%
0.0%
Land and Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   757 
4.1%
$   755 
4.8%
$   732 
5.7%
Leasehold Improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,154 
11.8%
2,013 
12.7%
1,752 
13.7%
Fixtures and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,447 
24.3%
4,060 
25.7%
3,057 
24.0%
Property Under Capital Lease. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     95 
  0.5%
       112
  0.7%
     67 
  0.5%
$       7,453 
40.7%
$ 6,940 
43.9%
$ 5,608 
44.0%
Less: Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . 
  3,383 
 18.5%
  2,766
 17.5%
  2,302 
 18.0%
Net Property and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 4,070 
22.2%
$  4,174 
26.4%
$ 3,306 
25.9%
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,452 
13.4%
2,203 
13.9%
1,088 
8.5%
Trade Names. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
159 
0.9%
173 
1.1%
97 
0.8%
Customer Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
279 
1.5%
322 
2.0%
5 
0.0%
Equity and Other Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
324 
1.8%
395 
2.5%
605 
4.7%
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      452 
  2.5%
     367
  2.3%
       315 
  2.5%
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$18,302 
100.0%
$15,826
100.0%
$12,758 
100.0%
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,276 
28.8%
$ 4,997 
31.6%
$ 4,297 
33.7%
Unredeemed Gift Card Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . 
463 
2.5%
479 
3.0%
531 
4.2%
Accrued Compensation and Related 
Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
544 
3.0%
459 
2.9%
373 
2.9%
Accrued Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,681 
9.2%
1,382 
8.7%
975 
7.6%
Accrued Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
316 
1.7%
281 
1.8%
404 
3.2%
Short-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
663 
3.6%
783 
4.9%
156 
1.2%
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . 
        35 
  0.2%
      54
  0.3%
     33 
  0.3%
Total Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 8,978 
49.1%
$ 8,435 
53.3%
$ 6,769 
53.1%
Long-Term Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,256 
6.9%
1,109 
7.0%
838 
6.6%
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,104 
6.0%
1,126 
7.1%
627 
4.9%
Commitments and Contingencies 
 
Shareholders' Equity
 
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0 
0.0%
0 
0.0%
0 
0.0%
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42 
0.2%
41 
0.3%
41 
0.3%
 
Additional Paid-in Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
441 
2.4%
205 
1.3%
8 
0.1%
 
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,797 
31.7%
4,714 
29.8%
3,933 
30.8%
 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive 
Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
        40 
  0.2%
   (317)
−2.0%
     502 
  3.9%
 
Total Great Deal Shareholders' Equity  . . . . . 
$ 6,320 
34.5%
$ 4,643 
29.3%
$ 4,484 
35.1%
 
Noncontrolling Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     644 
  3.5%
    513
  3.2%
      40 
  0.3%
Total Shareholders' Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,964 
 38.1%
$ 5,156
 32.6%
$ 4,524 
 35.5%
Total Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity . . . . . 
$18,302 
100.0%
$15,826
100.0%
$12,758 
100.0%
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

241
Common-Size Financial Statements
Consumers Electronics Limited
Common-Size Balance Sheets
For Years 2012, 2011, and 2010 
(amounts in thousands of US$)
Consumers Electronics Limited
Common-Size Income Statements
For Years 2012, 2011, and 2010 
(amounts in thousands of US$)
2012
2011
2010
Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   612 
5.0%
$   451 
4.2%
$  406 
4.8%
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,512 
12.5%
1,417 
13.1%
1,350 
16.0%
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,567 
29.4%
3,984 
36.9%
2,910 
34.4%
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    301 
  2.5%
    721 
  6.7%
   456
  5.4%
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,992 
49.3%
$ 6,573 
60.9%
$5,122 
60.6%
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
697 
5.7%
546 
5.1%
401 
4.7%
Buildings and Equipment, net of depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,454 
 44.9%
  3,678 
 34.1%
 2,929 
 34.7%
   Total Property and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  6,151 
 50.7%
  4,224 
 39.1%
 3,330 
 39.4%
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$12,143 
100.0%
$10,797 
100.0%
$8,452 
100.0%
Liabilities and Shareholders' Equity
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,040 
8.6%
$ 1,066 
9.9%
$  906 
10.7%
Notes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,015 
16.6%
1,814 
16.8%
1,524 
18.0%
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    584 
  4.8%
    816 
  7.6%
   410 
  4.9%
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,639 
30.0%
$ 3,696 
34.2%
$2,840 
33.6%
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,741 
14.3%
1,724 
16.0%
1,243 
14.7%
Shareholders’ Equity:
   Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    25 
0.2%
$    25 
0.2%
$   20 
0.2%
   Additional Paid-In Capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,653 
13.6%
1,750 
16.2%
1,649 
19.5%
   Retained Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,085 
 41.9%
  3,602 
 33.4%
 2,700 
 31.9%
   Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,763 
 55.7%
$ 5,377 
 49.8%
$4,369 
 51.7%
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$12,143 
100.0%
$10,797 
100.0%
$8,452 
100.0%
2012
2011
2010
Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$25,675
100.0%
$23,542
100.0%
$19,120
100.0%
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 17,765
 69.2%
 16,713
 71.0%
 13,711
 71.7%
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,910
30.8%
$ 6,829
29.0%
$ 5,409
28.3%
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . .
5,681
22.1%
5,412
23.0%
4,162
21.8%
Restructuring Charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      0
  0.0%
     13
  0.1%
      4
  0.0%
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,229
8.7%
$ 1,404
6.0%
$ 1,243
6.5%
Investment Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
0.0%
16
0.1%
8
0.0%
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (123)
    −0.5%
   (131)
    −0.6%
    (27)
    −0.1%
Income Before Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,118
8.2%
$ 1,289
5.5%
$ 1,224
6.4%
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    635
  2.5%
    387
  1.6%
    367
  1.9%
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,483
  5.8%
$   902
  3.8%
$   857
  4.5%
EXHIBIT 7.9
EXHIBIT 7.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
The first approach is called time-series analysis and involves the over-time comparison of 
the firm’s financial ratios. The second approach is called cross-section analysis and involves 
comparing the financial ratios of the firm being analyzed with the financial ratios of one or 
more other firms, for the same time period. Firms selected for comparison in a cross- section 
analysis share common business elements with the firm being analyzed. Common business 
elements that would be used to select comparison firms include: industry membership, size, 
business strategy, and degree of geographic or product diversification. We illustrate both 
a time-series analysis of financial ratios and a cross-sectional analysis of financial ratios for 
Great Deal.
Illustration of Time-Series Analysis of Financial Ratios Exhibit 7.5 shows that 
Great Deal’s gross profit percentage (= gross profit divided by sales) increased over time, from 
23.9% in 2010, to 24.4% for 2011, to 24.5% in 2012. The increasing gross profit percentage 
results from the decreasing cost of goods sold percentage (from 76.1% in 2010, to 75.6% in 
2011, to 75.5% in 2012).
Sales increased each year, 2010–2012. The year-to-year sales increase, combined with the 
decrease in cost of goods sold as a percentage of sales, suggests that Great Deal experienced 
some combination of pricing advantages, purchasing advantages, or changes in sales mix to 
higher margin products. That is, cost of goods sold did not increase proportionally with sales; 
rather, it increased at a rate smaller than the sales increase. Regardless of the underlying causes, 
sales increases coupled with less-than-proportional increases in cost of goods sold explain the 
decline in this expense percentage.
Great Deal experienced a decrease in its operating income percentage (= operating income 
divided by sales) from 5.4% to 4.2% between 2010 and 2011, and an increase between 2011 and 
2012, from 4.2% to 4.5%. The decrease between 2010 and 2011 resulted from a combination of 
three factors:
1. A decreasing cost of goods sold to sales percentage.
2. An increasing selling, general, and administrative (SG&A) expense to sales percentage.
3.  An increasing percentage of one-time charges (restructuring charges and asset impairments).
As discussed earlier in this chapter, the increase in profitability between 2011 and 2012 resulted 
from a combination of three factors:
1. A further decrease in the cost of goods sold to sales percentage.
2. A decreasing SG&A expense to sales percentage.
3. A decreasing percentage of one-time charges.
The analyst would need to identify the reasons for these changes over time when analyzing 
Great Deal’s profitability.
Illustration of Cross-Section Analysis of Financial Ratios We illustrate a 
cross-section analysis of Great Deal’s financial ratios by examining the financial ratios for a 
Great Deal competitor, Consumers Electronics Limited, or CEL. Exhibit 7.9 contains CEL’s 
common- size balance sheet, and Exhibit 7.10 contains its common-size income statement for 
fiscal years 2010–2012.
A cross-section analysis compares Great Deal to other retailers, preferably other retailers 
whose products and services are similar to those offered by Great Deal. Comparing financial 
ratios of retailers with ratios of non-retailers makes little sense. The non-comparability results 
from the different business models—different types of assets and different financial structures —
that distinguish Great Deal from companies such as Boeing, an aircraft manufacturer, McDon-
ald’s, a fast-food retailer, or Colgate Palmolive, a consumer products manufacturer. Differences 
in business models and their implementations create across-firm differences in risk and perfor-
mance, which in turn affect the results reported in financial statements. We compare Great Deal 
to a single competitor (CEL). An alternative approach would compare Great Deal to several 
similar firms. Regardless of the choice, the objective is to hold constant the effects of business 
models by identifying a competitor (or competitors), using industry classification and other fac-
tors to determine similarity.
We turn now to CEL’s and Great Deal’s common-size income statements. CEL’s profit 
margin percentage, 5.8% for 2012 (the ratio of net income to sales revenue), is about 2.2 times 
Great Deal’s profit margin ratio of 2.7% for the same fiscal year. Inspection of the components 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

243
Summary 
of the two income statements reveals that CEL’s higher profit margin percentage derives from a 
lower cost of sales percentage (69.2% in fiscal 2012 versus 75.5% for Great Deal), and a higher 
ratio of selling, general, and administrative percentage (22.1% in 2012 versus 19.9% for Great 
Deal). The higher cost of sales percentage for Great Deal is consistent with the fact that Great 
Deal is a large mass marketer; it will have a higher (compared to the smaller and local CEL) 
cost of goods sold percentage due to competition and aggressive pricing. Great Deal will, how-
ever, recognize economies of scale on its SG&A costs, as evidenced by Great Deal’s lower (rela-
tive to CEL) SG&A costs as a percentage of sales.
It is important to note that our analysis assumes Great Deal and CEL classify, label, and 
aggregate information similarly. For example, we assume Great Deal and CEL include store 
occupancy costs in the same lines of their respective income statements. This may not be the 
case. Moreover, firms do not typically disclose enough disaggregated information to adjust the 
financial statements. Usually the analyst can find a level of aggregation of the available data into 
broader categories that include similar cost items. For example, the analyst can calculate and 
compare the operating income to sales revenue percentages of the two firms. This comparison is 
appropriate as long as the analyst has identified all operating expenses of the two firms. In fiscal 
2012, Great Deal’s operating income to sales percentage is 4.5%, compared to 8.7% for CEL.
Even for otherwise similar firms, income statement formats may be so non-comparable 
as to preclude any comparisons of line items and subtotals. In such cases the only appropri-
ate comparison is based on the profit margin percentages. This is because, by definition, net 
income is comparable across all firms that report under the same accounting standards. Fur-
thermore, because net income aggregates all items on the income statement, it is unaffected by 
differences in format, presentation, labeling, and aggregation of income statement items. For 
these reasons, the profit margin percentage (the ratio of net income to sales revenue) is a widely 
used ratio in evaluating and comparing operating performance of similar firms. Profit margin 
percentages are not comparable for firms with different business models.
SUMMARY
Exhibit 7.11 summarizes the calculation of the financial statement ratios discussed in this 
chapter.
This chapter began with the question of whether to invest in a certificate of deposit or in 
the shares of Great Deal. Analysis of Great Deal’s financial statements indicates that it is a 
growing, profitable company with few indications of either short-term or long-term liquidity 
problems. An investor would need at least three additional inputs before making the investment 
decision. The first is information other than the financial statements to aid in understanding 
the firm’s future profitability and risk. Such information might include articles in the financial 
press, the firm’s statements about its spending plans for long-term assets, analysts’ beliefs about 
spending needs, and strategies of competitors. Second, the investor should understand his or 
her willingness to assume risk. Third, the investor must decide if the current price of the shares 
makes them an attractive purchase.9 Before making buy/sell recommendations to investors, 
analysts compare their assessments of the firm’s profitability and risk to the firm’s share price. 
Analysts might recommend the purchase of shares of a poorly run company whose shares they 
judge underpriced rather than recommend shares of a well-run company whose shares they 
judge overpriced. At this stage in the investment decision, the analysis requires intuition, judg-
ment, and experience.
 9 Finance texts discuss other factors in the investment decision. Perhaps the most important of these is how a 
particular investment fits in with the investor’s entire portfolio. Modern research suggests that the suitability of 
a potential investment depends more on the attributes of the other components of an investment portfolio and 
the risk attitude of the investor than it does on the attributes of the potential investment itself.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Summary of Financial Statement Ratios
Ratio
Numerator
Denominator
Profitability Ratios
Return on Equity (ROE)  . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Average Shareholders’ Equity 
During the Period
Return on Assets (ROA)  . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Average Total Assets During 
the Period
Return on Assets, adjusted 
for financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income + Interest Expense 
(net of tax effects)
Average Total Assets During 
the Period
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Net Income
Sales
Various Expense Ratios  . . . . . . . . . .
Various Expenses
Sales
Asset Ratio Turnover  . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Total Assets During 
the Period
Accounts Receivable Turnover 
Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Accounts Receivable 
During the Period
Inventory Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . .
Cost of Goods Sold
Average Inventory During 
the Period
Fixed-Asset Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . .
Sales
Average Fixed Assets During 
the Period
Financial Leverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . .
Average Total Assets During 
the Period
Average Shareholders’ Equity 
During the Period
Short-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Current Assets
Current Liabilities
Quick or Acid Test Ratio . . . . . . . . . .
Highly Liquid Assets 
(cash, marketable securities, 
and accounts receivable)a
Current Liabilities
Cash Flow from Operations to Current 
Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cash Flow from Operations
Average Current Liabilities 
During the Period
Accounts Payable Turnover Ratio . . . .
Purchasesb
Average Accounts Payable 
During the Period
Days Accounts Receivable 
Outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Accounts Receivable Turnover 
Ratio
Days Inventories Held  . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Inventory Turnover Ratio
Days Accounts Payable 
Outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
365 days
Accounts Payable Turnover 
Ratio
Long-Term Liquidity Ratios
Liabilities to Assets Ratio. . . . . . . . .
Liabilities
Assets
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-Term Debt
Assets
Debt–Equity Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Long-Term Debt
Shareholders’ Equity
Cash Flow from Operations to Total 
Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cash Flow from Operations
Average Total Liabilities 
During the Period
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . .
Income Before Interest and 
Income Taxes
Interest Expense
aThe calculation could exclude receivables for some firms and include inventories for others.
bPurchases = Cost of Goods Sold + Ending Inventories – Beginning Inventories.
EXHIBIT 7.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

245
Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements 
 PROBLEM  7.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Computing profitability and risk ratios. Using the information from Consumer Electronics 
Limited’s balance sheet (Exhibit 7.9) and income statement (Exhibit 7.10), compute the 
following ratios for fiscal 2012:
a. Return on equity (ROE).
b. Return on assets (ROA).
c. Financial leverage ratio.
d. Profit margin ratio.
e. Cost of goods sold percentage.
f. SG&A percentage.
g. Asset turnover ratio.
h. Accounts receivable turnover ratio.
i. Inventory turnover ratio.
j. Fixed-asset turnover ratio.
k. Current ratio.
l. Quick ratio.
m. Accounts payable turnover ratio.
n. Operating cycle.
o. Liabilities to assets ratio.
p. Long-term debt ratio.
q. Debt-equity ratio.
r. Interest coverage ratio.
APPENDIX 7.1: PRO FORMA 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Accountants use the term pro forma financial statements to refer to financial statements pre-
pared under a particular set of assumptions. One set of assumptions might be that some trans-
actions, actually reported in the firm’s income statement for the year, had not occurred. Such 
assumed-away transactions might include unusual or nonrecurring revenues, expenses, gains, 
and losses. In these cases, firms report pro forma earnings to indicate to financial statement 
users what the firm views as normal, recurring earnings.
The more traditional use of the term pro forma financial statements refers to projected 
financial statements based on assumptions about the future. One set of assumptions might be 
that historical patterns (for example, growth rates or rates of return) will continue. Alterna-
tively, the pro forma financial statements might reflect new assumptions about growth rates, 
debt levels, profitability, and so on. For example, a firm might project future sales, net income, 
assets, and cash flows to ascertain whether operations will generate sufficient cash flows to 
finance expenditures on long-term assets. A firm might change its product lines or pricing poli-
cies and wish to estimate the impact on rates of return. A firm might project future financial 
statement amounts for an acquisition target to ascertain the price it should pay.
This appendix describes and illustrates procedures for preparing pro forma (projected) 
financial statements and illustrates how to use them. In your exposure to managerial and cost 
accounting concepts, you will encounter the notion of a budget. A budget for an entire firm 
means the same thing as pro forma (projected) financial statements except that the statements 
projected typically have different uses and formats. Managers and analysts use pro forma finan-
cials and budgets for differing reasons, but use similar procedures to prepare them.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
PREPARING PRO FORMA FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
The preparation of pro forma financial statements requires assumptions about the future. 
The usefulness of the pro forma financial statements depends on the reasonableness of those 
assumptions. Various spreadsheet programs ease the calculations required to prepare these 
statements, but the warning “garbage-in, garbage-out” certainly applies—the results will have 
quality and validity no better than the input assumptions. Careful analysts organize a list of all 
assumptions, preferably in a single section of the spreadsheet. Well-prepared pro forma state-
ments allow the analyst to vary critical assumptions to see how the results vary.
The preparation of pro forma financial statements typically begins with the income state-
ment, followed by the balance sheet and then the statement of cash flows. The level of operat-
ing activity usually dictates the required amount of assets, which in turn affects the required 
level of financing. Amounts for the statement of cash flows come directly from the pro forma 
income statement and comparative balance sheets.
We adhere to the following steps in preparing pro forma financial statements:
 1. Project operating revenues.
 2. Project operating expenses other than the cost of financing and income taxes.
 3. Project the assets required to support the level of projected operating activity.
 4. Project the financing (liabilities and contributed capital) required to fund the level of assets 
in step 3.
 5. Project the cost of financing the debt projected in step 4, income tax expense, net income, 
dividends, and the change in retained earnings.
 6. Project the statement of cash flows from amounts on the projected balance sheet and 
income statement.
Exhibit 7.12 summarizes these six steps. To illustrate the preparation of pro forma financial 
statements, we use the data for Great Deal discussed previously in this chapter. We project its 
financial statements for fiscal 2013. Note: All discussions of percentages in the text reflect round-
ing to the first decimal point (e.g., 10.1%). The underlying calculations are not rounded.
STEP 1: PROJECT OPERATING REVENUES
The projections begin with sales revenues. The analyst studies the historical pattern of changes 
in sales and assesses whether this pattern will continue. Among the questions raised are the 
following:
 1. Does the firm plan to change product lines or pricing policies, make acquisitions of other 
companies, or take other actions that would alter the historical sales pattern?
 2. Does the firm expect competitors to alter their strategies or new competitors to enter the 
market and thereby change market shares?
 3. Will conditions in the economy affect the firm’s sales? For example, do the firm’s sales 
fluctuate with economic cycles, do they remain steady, or do they fluctuate with other 
variables, such as local population growth?
The assumption about sales revenues drives most other items in the pro forma financial 
statements, which normally makes this the most important assumption.
Exhibit 7.2 indicates that sales revenues for Great Deal increased from $40,023 to $45,015 
between 2010 and 2011, a growth rate of 12.5% [= ($45,015/ $40,023) – 1]. Sales increased from 
$40,023 to $49,694 between 2011 and 2012, a growth rate of 10.4% [= ($49,694/$45,015) – 1]. 
The decline in the growth rate occurred in a year when Great Deal made no large corporate 
acquisitions and the economy grew slowly. We assume that economic conditions will slightly 
weaken in 2013, and project Great Deal’s revenues to increase 10% between 2012 and 2013. 
Thus, projected sales for 2013 are $54,663 (= $49,694 × 1.10).
STEP 2: PROJECT OPERATING EXPENSES
Projecting operating expenses requires understanding the behavior of various operating costs. 
Among the question that an analyst raises are the following:
 1.  Does the expense item tend to vary with the level of sales, a behavior pattern characterized 
as a variable cost? Alternatively, does the expense item tend to remain relatively constant 
for a particular time period regardless of the level of sales, a behavior pattern characterized 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

247
 Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements 
as a fixed cost? When you study cost behavior in managerial accounting and economics 
courses, you will learn that nearly all costs vary in the long run, but some appear fixed in 
the short run. Deciding on whether a given cost is fixed or variable requires knowing the 
time period of the projection.
 2.  Does the expense item have both variable- and fixed-cost characteristics, a pattern described 
as a mixed cost or a step cost?
 3.  Does the firm have some discretion to change the amount of a fixed-cost item in the short 
term in response to current conditions (for example, maintenance or advertising expenditures)? 
Or, is there little discretion to change a fixed cost (for example, depreciation on equipment)?
Understanding the behavior of each expense item aids in projecting its amount.
Exhibit 7.5 presents common-size income statements for Great Deal for fiscal years 2010, 
2011, and 2012. We use these common-size percentages in projecting operating expenses.
Cost of Goods Sold Great Deal purchases merchandise for sale to customers. Thus cost of 
goods sold will vary with sales. Great Deal’s cost of goods sold percentage decreased from 76.1% 
in 2010 to 75.6% in 2011, and to 75.5% in 2012. Assume that the decrease is a result of imple-
menting inventory control systems in their retail stores, and that Great Deal will benefit even 
further from these control systems in 2013, reducing the cost of goods sold to sales percentage to 
75.2%. Projected cost of goods sold for 2013 is $41,107 (= 0.752 × $54,663) million.
Preparing Pro Forma Financial Statements
Statement of Income 
and Retained Earnings
STEP 1: Project Operating Revenues
Sales Revenue
Other Revenues
STEP 2: Project Operating Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Net Income Before Interest Expense 
and Income Taxes
STEP 5:  Project Cost of Financing, 
Income Tax Expense, and the 
Change in Retained Earnings
Interest Expense
Income Tax Expense
Net Income
Dividends
Change in Retained Earnings
Balance Sheet
STEP 3: Project Assets
Cash
Accounts Receivable
Inventories
Other Current Assets
Investments
Fixed Assets
Other Assets
STEP 4:  Project Liabilities and 
Contributed Capital
Accounts Payable
Notes Payable
Other Current Liabilities
Long-Term Debt
Other Liabilities
Contributed Capital
STEP 5: Project Retained Earnings
Retained Earnings
EXHIBIT 7.12
Statement of Cash Flows
STEP 6: Project the Statement of Cash Flows
Operations
Investing
Financing
Net Income
Acquisition of Fixed Assets
Change in Notes Payable
Depreciation
Sale of Investments
Change in Long-Term Debt
Other Adjustments
Acquisition of Investments
Change in Common Stock
Change in Receivables
Other Investing Transactions
Dividends
Change in Inventories
Other Financing Transactions
Change in Other Current Assets
Change in Accounts Payable
Change in Other Current Liabilities
CASH FLOW FROM OPERATIONS
CASH FLOW FROM INVESTING
CASH FLOW FROM FINANCING
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Selling and Administrative Expense The ratio of selling and administrative expense to sales 
increased from 18.5% in 2010 to 20.0% in 2011, and declined to 19.9% in 2013. We project that 
selling and administrative expenses will equal 19.5% of sales in 2013. Projected selling and 
administrative expenses for 2013 are $10,659 (= 0.195 × $54,663) million.
Other Operating Expenses Firms may report other operating expenses on their income 
statements, some of which are recurring, some of which are not. An example of a common 
recurring other operating expense is research and development (R&D) expense. An example 
of a common non-recurring operating expense is a restructuring charge. Great Deal does not 
have R&D expense, so we do not forecast any recurring operating expenses (other than cost of 
goods sold and SG&A). Great Deal does report restructuring charges and impairments, but not 
consistently across all years. We assume that Great Deal will have no restructuring charges and 
no asset impairments in 2013.
Non-Operating Expenses The remaining items on Great Deal’s income statement relate to 
other income and other expenses (losses). Other income typically consists of one-time gains 
from sales of assets and income earned on investments. Other expenses (losses) consist of 
one-time losses from asset sales or asset impairments, financing charges (interest expense) and 
income taxes. We assume that Great Deal will have no one-time gains or losses in 2013, and 
that it will have $50 million of investment income. Based on recent borrowings, we assume 
Great Deal pays interest charges at the rate of 6% annually. Finally, we assume Great Deal 
faces an income tax rate of 36%. We delay projecting the amounts of interest expense until we 
project the amount of debt, and we wait to project income taxes until we know Great Deal’s 
projected earnings before taxes.
The remaining items on Great Deal’s income statement relate to equity in income (loss) of 
affiliates and to the amount of earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests.10 Briefly, equity 
in income (loss) of affiliates pertains to Great Deal’s pro rata share of the earnings, or losses, of 
companies in which it has ownership interests between 20% and 50%. In fiscal 2012, these earn-
ings were $1 million. For fiscal 2013, earnings from affiliates are projected to be $3 million.
Net earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests pertains to the portion of Great Deal’s 
earnings which are attributable to the residual ownership stakes in companies where Great Deal 
has a controlling, or majority, ownership. For example, if Great Deal owns 90% of another 
company, the noncontrolling or residual ownership interest is 10%. The projected amount of 
earnings attributable to noncontrolling interests for fiscal 2013 is $100 million.
STEP 3: PROJECT ASSETS
The projection of total assets on the balance sheet requires assumptions that are consistent 
with those underlying the pro forma income statement. One approach assumes a total assets 
turnover (that is, sales/average total assets) similar to that of previous years. For example, Great 
Deal’s total assets turnover was 3.0 in 2010, 3.1 in 2011, and 2.9 in 2012. Assuming Great Deal 
targets a 2.8 total assets turnover ratio for 2013, we can calculate its projected total assets at the 
end of 2013 by solving the following equation:
Total Assets Turnover =
Sales
=
$54,663
= 2.8
Average Total Assets
0.5 × (18,302 + X)
Solving for the unknown in the equation (X, equal to total assets at the end of fiscal 2013) 
yields projected total assets at the end of 2013 of $20,743 million. The analyst can then use 
common-size balance sheet percentages to allocate this total to individual balance sheet 
accounts. We use this approach in projecting specific asset balances for Great Deal.
An alternative approach uses the historical annual growth rate in total assets of 11% during 
the last three years (= the average of –6% growth in 2010, 24% growth in 2011 and 16% growth 
in 2012). This approach yields total assets of $20,315 (= $18,302 × 1.11) million. The ana-
lyst can apply common-size balance sheet percentages to allocate $20,315 million to individual 
balance sheet items. A third approach uses a mixture of asset turnovers and growth rates for 
the various assets and then aggregates projected amounts for individual assets to compute total 
assets.
10 Chapter 14 describes equity investments in affiliates as well as noncontrolling interests.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

249
Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements 
Cash We assume Great Deal’s 2013 common-size percentage for cash (10.0% of total assets) 
reflects the amount of cash it needs to maintain for operations. Projected cash and cash equiva-
lents for 2013 is $2,070 (= $20,743 × 10.0%) million.
If other forecasts indicate that Great Deal will have more cash than $2,070 million, we 
assume Great Deal will pay the difference as dividends to its shareholders. If the forecasts 
reveal that Great Deal will need cash, we assume it will issue (sell) shares of common stock. 
These assumptions indicate how Great Deal will use extra cash if available, or generate extra 
cash if needed. Preparing pro forma financial statements requires the preparer to know how the 
firm will respond to having more cash than needed or a shortfall of cash.
Short-Term Investments Short-term investments reflect cash Great Deal has used to purchase 
debt and equity securities issued by other entities. Using the common-size percentage for 2012, 
we project an ending balance of short-term investments for 2013 of $102 (= $20,743 × 0.5%) 
million.
Accounts Receivable For most firms, accounts receivable vary with sales. Great Deal’s com-
mon-size balance sheet shows that accounts receivable as a percentage of total assets declined 
from 11.8% in 2011 to 11% in 2012. We assume accounts receivable will maintain at the 2012 
percentage of 11.0% of assets. Projected accounts receivable for 2013 are $2,002 (= $20,743 × 
11%) million.
Inventory Merchandise inventories were 36.9% of total assets in 2010 and declined to 30.0% 
in 2011 and 2012. We assume the inventory to total assets percentage will stay at 30.0% in 2013. 
Projected merchandise inventory is $5,438 (= $20,743 × 30.0%) million.
Other Current Assets Great Deal’s common-size balance sheets show that other current 
assets were 4.6%, 6.7%, and 6.3% of total assets in 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively. We 
assume other current assets will remain at 6.3% in 2013. Thus, other current assets at the end of 
2013 are $1,134 (= $20,743 × 6.3%) million.
Property, Plant, and Equipment We assume that Great Deal projects gross property, plant, 
and equipment (PPE), accumulated depreciation, and net PPE, at the 2012 common-size per-
centages of 40.7% (gross PPE), 18.5% (accumulated depreciation), and 22.2% (net PPE). 
The projected balances for these balance sheet items are $8,447 (=$20,743 × 40.7%) million 
for gross PPE, $3,834 (= $20,743 × 18.5%) million for accumulated depreciation, and $4,613 
(= $8,447 – $3,834) million for net PPE.
We further assume that Great Deal had no disposals or impairments of property and 
equipment in 2010. Thus, the only transaction affecting Great Deal’s gross property and equip-
ment will be purchases of property, plant, and equipment (capital expenditures), and the only 
transaction affecting accumulated depreciation will be its periodic depreciation charge (depreci-
ation expense). As Chapter 10 describes in detail, there are several other transactions that affect 
the property, plant, and equipment account. These transactions would be taken into account in 
preparing a more complex set of pro forma financial statements.
Intangible Assets Great Deal’s intangible assets consist of goodwill (13.4% of total assets 
in fiscal 2012), trade names (0.9% of total assets), and customer relationships (1.5% of total 
assets). We assume the amounts of these balance sheet accounts will remain at their 2012 
 common-size percentages for 2013. Thus, the projected amounts for intangible assets for 2013 
are: $2,779 (= $20,743 × 13.4%) million for goodwill, $180 (= $20,743 × 0.9%) million for 
trade names, and $316 (= $20,743 × 1.5%) million for customer relationships.
Equity and Other Investments Equity and other investments relate primarily to Great Deal’s 
ownership of the common shares of other firms. We assume Great Deal maintains equity and 
other investments at the 2012 common-size percentage of 1.8%. Thus, the projected amount for 
this balance sheet item is $367 (= $20,743 × 1.8%) million.
Other Assets Other assets likely reflects a number of assets that are aggregated for conve-
nience in one account. We assume that Great Deal maintains other assets at the 2012 common-
size percentage of 2.5% of total assets. The projected amount for other assets for 2013 is $512 
(= $20,743 × 2.5%) million.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
STEP 4: PROJECT LIABILITIES AND CONTRIBUTED CAPITAL
We project next the financing side of the balance sheet. The projection of liabilities and con-
tributed capital flows directly from the projection of the level of operating activity estimated in 
steps 1 and 2 and the projection of total assets in step 3.
Accounts Payable As a percentage of total assets, Great Deal’s accounts payable were 28.8% 
in fiscal 2012. We assume the same percentage for fiscal 2013. Projected accounts payable for 
2013 are $5,980 (= $20,743 × 28.8%) million.
Other Current Liabilities Great Deal reports a number of other current liabilities, includ-
ing unredeemed gift cards, accrued compensation, accrued liabilities, accrued income taxes, 
short-term debt, and the current portion of long-term debt. For simplicity, we assume that the 
amounts in these accounts at the end of 2013 approximate their 2012 common-size percent-
ages.11 Applying these percentages to the projected amount of total assets of $20,743 yields the 
following amounts for these items:
Current Liability
Calculation
Projected 
Amount, End 
of Fiscal 2013
Unredeemed Gift Card Liabilities 
$20,743 × 2.5%
$  525
Accrued Compensation
$20,743 × 3.0%
   617
Accrued Liabilities
$20,743 × 9.2%
  1,905
Accrued Income Taxes
$20,743 × 1.7%
   358
Short-Term Debt
$20,743 × 2.6%
   751
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt
$20,743 × 0.2%
    40
Long-Term Liabilities Great Deal’s long-term liabilities include liabilities that extend beyond 
one year and are related to operations (as opposed to financing). This account includes retire-
ment liabilities and deferred taxes. For simplicity, we project these liabilities using their 2012 
common-size percentages. For fiscal 2013, the projected amount of long-term liabilities is 
$1,424 (= $20,743 × 6.9%) million.
Long-Term Debt This account reflects Great Deal’s borrowings that are due beyond one 
year. The portion due within one year is included in the current portion of the long-term debt 
account, a current liability. Typically, the amount of long-term debt would reflect the firm’s cash 
needs and would be calculated after other cash inflows and outflows are determined. Deter-
mining the amount of debt financing in this way requires an iterative process to “solving” the 
pro forma financial statements. Given the complexity of the iterative process, we use a simpler 
approach to illustrate the creation of projected financial statements. Specifically, we follow the 
prior assumption of using the common-size percentage from 2012 to project long-term debt for 
fiscal 2013. Projected long-term debt at the end of 2013 is $1,251 (= $20,743 × 6.0%) million.
Preferred Stock Great Deal has no preferred stock in its capital structure in 2010–2012. We 
assume the same for 2013. The projected amount of preferred stock at the end of 2013 is, there-
fore, zero.
Common Stock and Additional Paid-In Capital The assumptions for the cash account indi-
cated that Great Deal would issue common equity if the amount of cash generated during the 
year was insufficient to meet the projected balance in the cash account of $2,070 million. The 
amount of cash generated or consumed by Great Deal in 2013 is not yet known because we 
have not projected its statement of cash flows. For now, we will assume that Great Deal will not 
issue common equity during 2013. We will revisit this assumption if the statement of cash flows 
11 In more complex pro forma calculations, the projected amounts of current operating liabilities (unredeemed gift 
card liabilities and accrued compensation) might be tied to sales, because sales is an indicator of the level of 
operating activity. The projected amount of short-term debt would be linked to financing needs. In addition, the 
projected current portion of long-term debt is disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. This amount 
would typically be known from debt contracts that specify how much of the debt is due in the coming year.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

251
Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements 
indicates that cash is needed. The projected amounts for common stock and additional paid-in 
capital at the end of fiscal 2013 are, therefore, equal to their 2012 balances of $42 million and 
$441 million, respectively.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income We assume Accumulated Other Comprehensive 
Income grows in proportion to total assets. The projected amount in Accumulated Other Com-
prehensive Income at the end of 2013 is $45 (= $20,743 × 0.2%) million.
Noncontrolling Interests We assume noncontrolling interests maintain at the same common-
size percentage as in fiscal 2012. Projected noncontrolling interests for 2013 is $730 (= $20,743 
× 3.5%) million.
STEP 5: PROJECT INTEREST EXPENSE, INCOME TAX EXPENSE, NET INCOME, 
DIVIDENDS, AND THE CHANGE IN RETAINED EARNINGS
Interest Expense Interest expense usually has a fairly stable relation to the level of borrowing. 
Our projection of non-operating liabilities assumed an interest rate of 6% on debt outstanding 
during 2013. The average projected amount of debt outstanding for 2013 equals $1,922 [= 0.5 
× ($663 + $35 + $1,104 + $751 + $40 + $1,251)] million. Projected interest expense is $115 
[= 0.06 × $1,922] million.
Income Tax Expense Projections of sales, operating expenses, and interest expense yield 
income before income taxes of $2,962 (= $54,663 × $41,107 – $10,659 + $50 – $115) million. 
We assume a 2013 income tax rate of 36%. Projected income tax expense is $1,066 (= 0.36 × 
$2,962) million.
Retained Earnings Retained earnings increase by the projected net income for 2013 and 
decrease by the amount of dividends declared. The amount of net income projected for 2013 
is $1,899 million, as indicated by the pro forma income statement shown in Exhibit 7.13. There 
are two approaches to calculating the amount of dividends declared. Under the first approach, 
we apply the balance sheet equation to determine the total amount of retained earnings pro-
jected for 2013, and then apply the retained earnings equation to infer the amount of dividends 
declared:
Assets  
= $20,743 million
Liabilities = $5,980 + $525 + $617 + $1,905 + $358 + $751 + $40 + $1,424 + $1,251
 
= $12,850 million
Shareholders’ Equity = $42 + $441 + Retained Earnings + $45 + $730
 
= $1,258 + Retained Earnings
Balance Sheet equation:
Assets = Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
$20,743 = $12,850 + $1,258 + Retained Earnings
Solving for Retained Earnings yields:
Retained Earnings, end of 2013 = $6,635 million
Next, we apply the retained earnings equation and solve for the amount of dividends:
Retained Earnings, Ending = Retained Earnings, Beginning + Net Income – Dividends
$6,635 
= $5,797 + $1,899 – Dividends
Dividends 
= $1,061 million
Under the second approach, we project Great Deal’s statement of cash flows and determine 
the amount of excess cash (if any) that the firm generates in fiscal 2013. According to our cash 
assumptions, any cash in excess of $2,070 million will be paid as dividends. We will revisit this sec-
ond approach after we have calculated Great Deal’s pro forma statement of cash flows for 2013.
The preparation of pro forma financial statements through the first five steps results in a 
projected income statement (Exhibit 7.13) and a projected balance sheet (Exhibit 7.14). Note: 
Some balance sheet items do not sum to amounts shown due to rounding.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
STEP 6: PROJECT THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The analyst can prepare a pro forma statement of cash flows directly from the pro forma 
income statement and pro forma balance sheet. Exhibit 7.15 presents the pro forma statement 
of cash flows for Great Deal for fiscal 2013. Note: Some statement of cash flow items do not sum 
to amounts shown due to rounding.
Note the following about the projected statement of cash flows:
■ 
We calculate the amount of property, plant, and equipment purchased (capital expen-
ditures) during 2013 from the change in the ending balances in this account. That 
amount is $994 (= $8,447 – $7,453) million. The amount of depreciation expense 
equals the change in the accumulated depreciation account. Depreciation expense for 
2013 is $451 (= $3,834 – $3,383) million. As described in Chapter 10, these calcula-
tions are more complex if there are disposals of fixed assets during the year.
■ 
The increase in cash during 2013 of $244 (= $2,486 – $1,945 – $735) million on the 
statement of cash flows reconciles to the change in cash on the pro forma balance 
sheet.
■ 
If we had not calculated dividends using the first approach described under step 5, we 
could calculate dividends from the statement of cash flows using the second approach 
described in step 5. The cash assumptions imply the cash balance at the end of 2013 is 
$2,070 million. Given the non-dividend cash flows projected by the statement of cash 
flows, we can infer the dividends needed to reach this ending cash balance:
Cash flows from operations
  $2,468
 – Cash flows used in investing
($1,495)
 + Cash flows from financing
  $240 + $86 – Dividends 
 = Change in cash
  $244
 
We can solve for the amount of dividends as follows:
$2,468 – $1,495 + 240 + 86 – Dividends = $244 million
Dividends = $1,061 million
Great Deal, Inc.
Pro Forma Statement of Earnings
(amounts in millions of US$)
2013
Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$54,663
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 41,107
Gross Profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$13,557
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,659
Restructuring Charges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0
Goodwill and Trade Name Impairment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      0
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,897
Other Income (Expense). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Investment Income and Other. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
 
Investment Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0
 
Interest Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (115)
Earnings Before Income Tax Expense and Equity in Income (Loss) of Affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,962
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,066
Equity in Income (Loss) of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      3
Net Earnings Including Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,899
Net Earnings Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (100)
Net Earnings Attributable to Great Deal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,799
EXHIBIT 7.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

253
 Appendix 7.1: Pro Forma Financial Statements 
Great Deal, Inc.
Pro Forma Balance Sheet
(amounts in millions of US$)
2013
Assets
Current Assets
Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,070
Short-Term Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
102
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,289
Merchandise Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,218
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,297
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,975
Property and Equipment
Land and Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   858
Leasehold Improvements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,441
Fixtures and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,040
Property Under Capital Lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    108
8,447
Less: Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  3,834
Net Property and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,613
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,779
Trade Names. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180
Customer Relationships  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
316
Equity and Other Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
367
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    512
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$20,743
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,980
Unredeemed Gift Card Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
525
Accrued Compensation and Related Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
617
Accrued Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,905
Accrued Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
358
Short-Term Debt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
751
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     40
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,176
Long-Term Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,424
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,251
Commitments and Contingencies
Shareholders’ Equity
Great Deal Shareholders’ Equity
 
Preferred Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0
 
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42
 
Additional Paid-In Capital. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
441
 
Retained Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,635
 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     45
 
Total Great Deal Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,163
 
Noncontrolling Interests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    730
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,893
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$20,743
EXHIBIT 7.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Great Deal, Inc.
Pro Forma Statement of Cash Flows
(amounts in millions of US$)
2013
Operating Activities
Net Earnings Including Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,899
Adjustments to Reconcile Net Earnings to Total Cash Provided by Operating Activities:
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
451
Changes in Operating Assets, Net of Acquired Assets and Liabilities:
 
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(269)
 
Merchandise Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(732)
 
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(153)
 
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
704
 
Other Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
359
 
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
 
Long-Term Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    168
Total Cash Provided By Operating Activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,468
Investing Activities
Additions to PPE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (994)
Purchases of Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(385)
Purchases of Short-Term Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(12)
Purchases of Equity Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(43)
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (60)
Total Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(1,495)
Financing Activities
Issuance of Common Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$     0
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1,061)
Debt Issuances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240
Increase in Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     86
Total Cash (Used in) Provided by Financing Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (735)
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes in Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
244
Cash and Cash Equivalents at Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,826
Cash and Cash Equivalents at End of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,070
EXHIBIT 7.15
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 7.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Markum Corporation; analyzing return on equity.)
a.
Return on equity
Net Income
=
$4,800
= 9.3%
Average Shareholders’ Equity
$51,600 
b.
Return on assets, unadjusted 
for financing
Net Income
=
$4,800
= 4.3%
Average Total Assets
$112,000
c. 
Markum’s ROE exceeds its ROA because its financial leverage exceeds 1.0. As shown 
below, Markum’s financial leverage is 2.2:
Average Total Assets
=
$112,000
= 2.2
Average Shareholders’ Equity
$51,600
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

255
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 7.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Markum Corporation; analyzing the return on assets.)
Return on Assets
Net Income
=
$4,800
= 4.3%
Average Total Assets
$112,000
Profit Margin
Net Income
=
$4,800
= 5.2%
Sales
$92,000
Cost of Sales Percentage Cost of Goods Sold
=
$67,000
= 72.8%
Sales
$92,000
SG&A Percentage
SG&A Expense
=
$8,000
= 8.7%
Sales
$92,000
R&D Percentage
R&D Expense
=
$7,000
= 7.6%
Sales
$92,000
Asset Turnover Ratio
Sales
=
$92,000
= 0.8 time per year
Average Total Assets
$112,000
Accounts Receivable 
Turnover
Sales
=
$92,000
= 6.8 times per year
Average Accounts Receivable
$13,500
Inventory Turnover
Cost of Goods Sold
=
$67,000
= 2.8 times per year
Average Inventory
$24,000
Fixed-Asset Turnover
Sales
=
$92,000
= 1.3 times per year
Average Fixed Assets
$69,500
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 7.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Markum Corporation; analyzing short-term liquidity risk.)
a.
Current Ratio
Current Assets
=
$67,000
= 72.8%
Current Liabilities
$92,000
Quick Ratio
Cash + Receivables
=
$21,000
= 42.0%
Current Liabilities
$50,000
b. Accounts Receivable 
Turnover
Sales
=
$92,000
= 6.8 times per year
Average Accounts Receivable
$13,500
Inventory Turnover
Cost of Goods Sold
=
$67,000
= 2.8 times per year
Average Inventory
$24,000
Accounts Payable 
Turnover
Purchases
=
$75,000
= 2.7 times per year
Average Accounts Payable
$27,900
c. Days Accounts 
Receivable
365
=
365
= 54 days
Accounts Receivable Turnover
6.8
Days Inventory
365
=
365
= 131 days
Inventory Turnover
2.8
Days Payables
365
=
365
= 136 days
Accounts Payable Turnover
2.7
Operating Cycle
Days A/R + Days Inventory  
– Days Payables
= 49 days
d. Markum’s short-term liquidity risk seems somewhat high at the end of 2013. Its current ratio 
of 72.8% is below 1.0. Markum’s quick ratio (of 42.0%) is in the benchmark range of roughly 
half its current ratio. Its operating cycle is 49 days, indicating that Markum would require 49 
days of financing to cover the net period when its cash outflows exceed its cash inflows.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 7.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Markum Corporation; analyzing long-term liquidity risk.)
 
2012 
2013
a. Liabilities to 
Assets Ratio
Total Liabilities
=
$52,800
= 52.8%
$68,000
=
54.8%
Total Assets
$100,000
$124,000
Long-Term 
Debt Ratio
Total Long-Term Debt
=
$12,000
= 12.0%
$18,000
=
14.5%
Total Assets
$100,000
$124,000
Debt-Equity 
Ratio
  Total Long-Term Debt   =
$12,000
= 25.4%
$18,000
=
32.1%
Total Shareholders' Equity
$47,200
$56,000
b.
Interest 
 Coverage 
Ratio
=
Net Income  
+ Income Tax Expense 
+ Interest Expense
Interest Expense
= $4,800 + $3,200 + $2,400
$2,000
=
5.0
$1,800 + $1,200 + $1,000
$1,000
=
4.0
c. 
Markum’s long-term liquidity risk increased between 2012 and 2013, as evidenced by 
increasing debt ratios and a declining interest coverage ratio. The interest coverage ratio 
remains acceptable (albeit somewhat low) at the end of 2013, and the debt ratios are also 
well within reason. Overall, Markum’s long-term solvency position is strong at the end of 
fiscal 2013.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 7.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Consumer Electronics Limited; computing profitability and risk ratios.)
a. Return on Equity (ROE)
=
$1,483
= 24.4%
0.5 × ($5,377 + $6,763)
b. Return on Assets (ROA)
=
$1,483
= 12.9%
0.5 × ($10,797 + $12,143)
c. Financial  Leverage Ratio
= 0.5 × ($10,797 + $12,143) = 1.9
0.5 × ($5,377 + $6,763)
d. Profit Margin Ratio
=
$1,483
= 5.8%
$25,675
e. Cost of Goods Sold 
Percentage
=
$17,765
= 69.2%
$25,675
f.
SG&A Percentage
=
$5,681
= 22.1%
$25,675
g. Asset Turnover Ratio
=
$25,675
= 2.2 times per year
0.5 × ($10,797 + $12,143)
h. Accounts Receivable 
Turnover Ratio
=
$25,675
= 17.5 times per year
0.5 × ($1,417 + $1,512)
i.
Inventory Turnover 
Ratio
=
$17,765
= 4.7 times per year
0.5 × ($3,984 + $3,567)
j.
Fixed-Asset Turnover 
Ratio
=
$25,675
= 4.9 times per year
0.5 × ($4,224 + $6,151)
k. Current Ratio
=
$5,992
= 1.6
$3,639
l.
Quick Ratio
=
$612 + $1,512
= 0.58
$3,639
m. Accounts Payable 
Turnover Ratio
= $17,765 + $3,567 – $3,984 = 16.5 times per year
0.5 × ($1,066 + $1,040)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

257
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Return and risk
Profitability
Return on equity (ROE)
Return on assets (ROA)
Financial leverage
DuPont Decomposition Analysis
Profit margin ratio
Asset turnover, asset turnover ratio
Accounts receivable turnover ratio
Inventory turnover ratio
Fixed-asset turnover ratio
Liquidity
Short-term liquidity risk
Current ratio
Quick ratio or acid test ratio
Cash flow from operations to current 
liabilities ratio
n. Operating Cycle
= (365/17.5) + (365/4.7) − (365/16.5) = 76 days
o. Liabilities to Assets Ratio
=
$3,639 + $1,741
= 44.3%
$12,143
p. Long-Term Debt Ratio
=
$1,741
= 14.3%
$12,143
q. Debt-Equity Ratio
=
$1,741
= 25.7%
$6,763
r.
Interest Coverage Ratio
=
$1,483 + $635 + $123
= 18.2 times
$123
Operating cycle, cash cycle, earnings cycle
Accounts payable turnover ratio
Long-term liquidity risk
Liabilities to assets ratio
Long-term debt ratio
Debt-equity ratio
Cash flow from operations to total 
liabilities ratio
Interest coverage ratio
Common-size balance sheet
Common-size income statement
Time-series analysis
Cross-section analysis
Pro forma financial statements
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. “Financial ratios are useful metrics for relating two items in the financial statements. Inter-
preting changes in a particular financial ratio is difficult, however, because the explanation 
might relate to changes in the numerator, the denominator, or both.” Explain this state-
ment using a change in the cost of goods sold to sales percentage from 65% to 68%.
 3. In calculating return on assets, the simple ROA formula does not adjust for interest expense. 
Explain why is it technically more correct to make an adjustment for interest expense in 
calculating this ratio, and explain the form of the adjustment.
 4. A firm’s total assets turnover decreased, but its accounts receivable, inventory, and fixed-
asset turnover increased. Suggest possible explanations.
 5. Explain why the return on equity of a company that has no preferred stock will be smaller 
than the return on equity of an otherwise similar firm that has preferred stock.
 6. One company president stated, “The operations of our company are such that we must 
turn our assets over once every four weeks.” A company president in another industry 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
stated, “The operations of our company are such that we can live comfortably with asset 
turnover of four times each year.” Explain what these two company presidents probably 
had in mind.
 7. Some have argued that for any given firm at a particular time, there is an optimal inventory 
turnover ratio. Explain.
 8. Under what circumstances will the rate of return on equity exceed the rate of return on 
assets? Under what circumstances will it be less?
 9. An entrepreneur claimed that her new company had generated both superior profit margin 
performance and superior asset turnover performance. Explain whether such an outcome 
is likely to happen.
10. Given how financial leverage affects ROE, why does a firm not borrow as much as pos-
sible? That is, why doesn’t a firm increase borrowing to as close to 100% of financing as it 
can?
EXERCISES
11. Calculating and disaggregating the rate of return on assets. Recent annual reports of two res-
taurant chains (Calem Incorporated and Garter Company) reveal the following (amounts 
in millions of US$):
Calem
Garter
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,352
$22,787
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
76
2,335
Average Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,473
29,183
 
Calem operates a chain of restaurants featuring value-priced meals and owns all of its res-
taurants. Garter also sells value-priced meals but operates through both company-owned 
and franchised restaurants. Garter owns the land and buildings of most of its franchised 
restaurants and leases the space to the franchisees.
a. Calculate the rate of return on assets for each company.
b. Disaggregate the rate of return on assets in part a into profit margin and total assets 
turnover components.
c. Comment on the relative profitability of the two companies.
12. Profitability analysis for two types of retailers. Information taken from recent annual reports 
of two retailers appears as follows (amounts in millions of US$). One of these companies 
is a discount store chain, and the other is a specialty retailer of apparel. Indicate which of 
these companies is the discount store chain and which is the specialty retailer. Explain your 
reasoning using appropriate financial ratios.
Company A
Company B
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,750
$6,834
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
476
243
Average Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,458
2,574
13. Calculating and disaggregating rate of return on shareholders’ equity. Information taken 
from the annual reports of Mobilex, a petroleum company, for three recent years appears 
below (amounts in millions of US$):
2013
2012
2011
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$404,552
$377,635
$370,680
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  40,610
  39,500
  36,130
Average Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 230,549
 213,675
 201,796
Average Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 117,803
 112,515
 106,471
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

259
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a.  Compute the rate of return on equity for each year.
b. Disaggregate the rate of return on equity into profit margin, total assets turnover, and 
financial leverage ratio components.
c. How has the profitability of Mobilex changed over the three years?
14. Profitability analysis for two companies. The following data show four items from the finan-
cial statements of two companies for a recent year (amounts in millions of US$):
Company A
Company B
For Year
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,750
$6,143
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
476
934
Average During Year
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,458
5,594
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,256
2,566
a. Compute the rate of return on assets for each company. Disaggregate the rate of return 
on assets into profit margin and total assets turnover components.
b. Compute the rate of return on equity for each company. Disaggregate the rate of 
return on equity into profit margin, total assets turnover, and financial leverage ratio 
components.
c. The two companies are a manufacturer of brand-name motorcycles and an operator of 
specialty retail coffee shops, primarily in rented facilities. Which of the companies cor-
responds to A and B? What clues did you use in reaching your conclusions?
15. Profitability analysis for two companies. The following data show four items from the finan-
cial statements of two companies for a recent year (amounts in millions of US$):
Company A
Company B
For Year
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$38,334
$93,469
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,986
6,999
Average During Year
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52,010
187,882
Common Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39,757
49,558
a. Compute the rate of return on assets for each company and disaggregate ROA into 
profit margin and total assets turnover components.
b. Compute the rate of return on equity for each company and disaggregate ROE into 
profit margin, total assets turnover, and capital structure leverage components.
c. The two companies are a developer and manufacturer of semiconductors and a tele-
communication service company. Which of the companies corresponds to A and B? 
What clues did you use in reaching your conclusions?
16. Analyzing accounts receivable for two companies. The annual reports of Delta, Inc. and 
SunnyDay Company, two manufacturers of computers, reveal the information below for 
the current year (amounts in millions). Delta sells custom-order personal computers, pri-
marily to individuals. SunnyDay sells higher-end computers and Internet software, primar-
ily to businesses.
Delta
SunnyDay
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$61,133
$13,873
Accounts Receivable, January 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,152
  2,702
Accounts Receivable, December 31  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,693
  2,964
a. Compute the accounts receivable turnover for each company.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
b. Compute the average number of days that accounts receivable are outstanding for each 
company.
c. Why do the accounts receivable turnovers of these two companies differ?
17. Analyzing inventories over three years. The following information relates to the activities of 
Funtime, Inc., a manufacturer of toys (amounts in millions of euros):
2013
2012
2011
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€5,970
€5,650
€5,179
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,193
3,038
2,806
Average Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
406
380
415
a. Compute the inventory turnover for each year.
b. Compute the average number of days that inventories are held each year.
c. Compute the cost of goods sold to sales percentage for each year.
d. How well has Funtime managed its inventories over the three years?
18. Analyzing fixed-asset turnover over three years. The following information relates to Mickey 
Group, an entertainment company (amounts in millions of pounds sterling):
2013
2012
2011
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£35,510
£33,747
£31,374
Average Fixed Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,270
16,174
15,362
Expenditures on Fixed Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,566
1,299
1,823
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,491
1,436
1,339
a. Compute the fixed-asset turnover for each year.
b. How well has Mickey Group managed its investment in fixed assets over the three years?
19. Calculating and interpreting short-term liquidity ratios. Data taken from the financial state-
ments of FleetSneak, a designer and manufacturer of athletic footwear and apparel, appear 
as follows (amounts in millions of US$):
For the Year
2013
2012
2011
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,326
$14,955
$13,740
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9,165
8,368
7,624
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,492
1,392
1,212
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,879
1,668
1,571
On May 31
2013
2012
2011
2010
Cash and Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,847
$ 2,303
$ 1,825
$ 1,229
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,495
2,383
2,262
2,120
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,122
2,077
1,811
1,650
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    613
    583
    453
    529
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 8,077
$ 7,346
$ 6,351
$ 5,528
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,040
$   952
$   775
$   780
Bank Loans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
299
76
153
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,413
  1,362
  1,148
  1,098
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,584
$ 2,613
$ 1,999
$ 2,031
a. Compute the current and quick ratios on May 31 of each year.
b. Compute the cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratio and the accounts 
receivable, inventory, and accounts payable turnover ratios for 2011, 2012, and 2013.
c. How has the short-term liquidity risk of FleetSneak changed during the three-year 
period?
20. Calculating and interpreting short-term liquidity ratios. Data taken from the financial state-
ments of Geneva S.A., a consumer foods company headquartered in Switzerland, appear 
as follows (amounts in millions of euros):
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

261
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
For the Year
2013
2012
2011
Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€89,625
€78,533
€73,135
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37,530
32,474
30,435
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,874
7,277
6,498
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11,030
9,197
8,461
On December 31
2013
2012
2011
2010
Cash and Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 5,737
€ 7,129
€11,188
€ 9,887
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9,316
9,056
9,193
7,640
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,602
4,988
5,250
4,545
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    955
    760
  1,234
    756
 
Total Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€21,610
€21,933
€26,865
€22,828
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 8,566
€ 7,810
€ 7,151
€ 5,871
Bank Loans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14,826
9,626
12,120
9,525
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,783
  2,742
  3,792
  3,415
 
Total Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€26,175
€20,178
€23,063
€18,811
a. Compute the current and quick ratios on December 31 of each year.
b. Compute the cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratio and the accounts 
receivable, inventory, and accounts payable turnover ratios for 2011, 2012, and 2013.
c. How has the short-term liquidity risk of Geneva changed during the three-year period?
21. Calculating and interpreting long-term liquidity ratios. Data taken from the financial state-
ments of Kyoto Electric, a Japanese generator and provider of electric services, appear 
below (amounts in billions of Japanese yen).
For the Year
2013
2012
2011
Net Income Before Interest and Income Taxes . . . . . . . 
¥   651
¥   635
¥   538
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,074
936
1,411
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
155
161
165
On December 31
2013
2012
2011
2010
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
¥ 5,871
¥ 6,278
¥ 7,150
¥ 7,391
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,488
10,814
11,247
11,540
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,034
2,780
2,502
2,360
a. Compute the long-term debt ratio and the debt-equity ratio at the end of 2010, 2011, 
2012, and 2013.
b. Compute the cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio and the interest coverage 
ratio for 2011 through 2013.
c. How has the long-term liquidity risk of Kyoto Electric changed over this three-year 
period?
22. Calculating and interpreting long-term liquidity ratios. Data taken from the financial state-
ments of Arctagon, a steel manufacturer headquartered in the Netherlands, appear below 
(amounts in millions of euros). Arctagon acquired other steel companies during the three-
year period.
For the Year
2013
2012
2011
Net Income Before Interest Expense and Income Taxes . .
€11,538
€ 6,624
€ 4,160
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,539
6,828
6,034
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
676
895
404
On December 31
2013
2012
2011
2010
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€15,106
€16,416
€ 6,760
€1,206
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52,749
53,114
17,448
7,760
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38,662
31,947
11,264
4,301
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

262
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
a. Compute the long-term debt ratio and the debt–equity ratio at the end of each year.
b. Compute the cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio and the interest coverage 
ratio for 2011 through 2013.
c. How has the long-term liquidity risk of Arctagon changed over this three-year period?
23. Effect of various transactions on financial statement ratios. Indicate the immediate effects 
(increase, decrease, no effect) of each of the following independent transactions on (1) the 
rate of return on shareholders’ equity, (2) the current ratio, and (3) the liabilities to assets 
ratio. State any necessary assumptions.
a. A firm purchases, on account, merchandise inventory costing $205,000.
b. A firm sells for $150,000, on account, merchandise inventory costing $120,000.
c. A firm collects $100,000 from customers on accounts receivable.
d. A firm pays $160,000 to suppliers on accounts payable.
e. A firm sells for $10,000 a machine costing $40,000 and with accumulated depreciation 
of $30,000.
f. A firm declares dividends of $80,000. It will pay the dividends during the next account-
ing period.
g. A firm issues common stock for $75,000.
h. A firm acquires a machine costing $60,000. It gives $10,000 cash and signs a note for 
$50,000 payable five years from now for the balance of the purchase price.
24. Effect of various transactions on financial statement ratios. Indicate the effects (increase, 
decrease, no effect) of the following independent transactions on (1) working capital 
(= current assets – current liabilities) and (2) the quick ratio, where accounts receivable 
are included but merchandise inventory is excluded from quick assets. State any necessary 
assumptions.
a. A firm sells for €300,000, on account, merchandise inventory costing €240,000.
b. A firm declares dividends of €160,000. It will pay the dividends during the next account-
ing period.
c. A firm purchases, on account, merchandise inventory costing €410,000.
d. A firm sells for €20,000 a machine costing €80,000 and with accumulated depreciation 
of €60,000.
e. Because of defects, a firm returns to the supplier merchandise inventory purchased for 
€7,000 cash. The firm receives a cash reimbursement.
f. A firm issues 10,000 shares of €10 par value common stock on the last day of the 
accounting period for €15 per share. It uses the proceeds to acquire the assets of another 
firm composed of the following: accounts receivable, €30,000; merchandise inventory, 
€60,000; plant and equipment, €100,000. The acquiring firm also agrees to pay current 
liabilities of €40,000 of the acquired company. The quick ratio of the acquired company 
is at least 0.75.
PROBLEMS
25.  Calculating and interpreting profitability and risk ratios in a time-series setting. Bullseye 
Corporation, headquartered in the United States, operates retail stores that offer clothing, 
household products, electronic products, sports products, toys, and entertainment prod-
ucts at discount prices. Bullseye differentiates itself from competitors by pushing trend 
merchandising with more brand name products, by emphasizing customer service, and by 
providing a comfortable and attractive shopping experience. Bullseye also offers its own 
credit card to customers. Bullseye increased its number of stores from 1,397 on Decem-
ber 31, 2010, to 1,591 on December 31, 2013. The growth rate in sales of stores open at 
least two full years was 5.6% for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2011, 4.8% for the 
fiscal year ended December 31, 2012, and 3.0% for the fiscal year ended December 31, 
2013. The financial statements for Bullseye for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2011, 
2012, and 2013 appear in Exhibit 7.16 (income statement), Exhibit 7.17 (balance sheet), 
and Exhibit 7.18 (statement of cash flows). Exhibit 7.19 presents financial statement ratios 
for Bullseye for its fiscal years ended December 31, 2011 and 2012.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

263
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Bullseye Corporation
Comparative Income Statement
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 25)
For the Year Ended December 31
2013
2012
2011
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$61,471
$57,878
$51,271
Other Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,918
  1,637
  1,376
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 63,389
 59,515
 52,647
Less Expenses:
 
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 41,895
 39,399
 34,927
 
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 16,200
 15,022
 13,370
 
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    669
    597
    490
 
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 58,764
 55,018
 48,787
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  4,625
  4,497
  3,860
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,776
  1,710
  1,452
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,849
$ 2,787
$ 2,408
EXHIBIT 7.16
Bullseye Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheet
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 25)
December 31
2013
2012
2011
2010
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,450
$   813
$ 1,648
$ 2,245
Accounts Receivable (net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,054
6,194
5,666
5,069
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,780
6,254
5,838
5,384
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,622
  1,445
  1,253
  1,224
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$18,906
$14,706
$14,405
$13,922
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . .
25,908
22,681
20,501
18,042
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,559
  1,212
  1,552
  1,511
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$46,373
$38,599
$36,458
$33,475
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,721
$ 6,575
$ 6,268
$ 5,779
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . .
1,964
1,362
753
504
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  3,097
  3,180
  2,567
  1,937
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$11,782
$11,117
$ 9,588
$ 8,220
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,939
9,925
10,582
10,216
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,345
  1,924
  2,083
  2,010
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$31,066
$22,966
$22,253
$20,446
Common Stock ($0.10 par value). . . . . . . . . . . .
$    68
$    72
$    73
$    74
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,656
2,387
2,121
1,810
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,761
13,417
12,013
11,148
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . .
    (178)
    (243)
      (2)
      (3)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$15,307
$15,633
$14,205
$13,029
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . .
$46,373
$38,599
$36,458
$33,475
EXHIBIT 7.17
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Bullseye Corporation
Comparative Statement of Cash Flows
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 25)
For the Year Ended December 31
2013
2012
2011
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,849
$ 2,787
$ 2,408
Additions and Subtractions:
 
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,659
1,496
1,409
 
Other Addbacks and Subtractions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
485
296
474
 
(Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(602)
(226)
(244)
 
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(525)
(431)
(454)
 
(Increase) Decrease in Prepayments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(38)
(25)
(52)
 
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
111
435
489
 
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . 
    186
    530
    421
 
 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 4,125
$ 4,862
$ 4,451
INVESTING
Acquisitions of Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (4,369)
$ (3,928)
$ (3,388)
Other Investing Transactions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1,826)
    (765)
    (761)
 
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (6,195)
$ (4,693)
$ (4,149)
FINANCING
Increase (Decrease) in Short-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   500
$    —
$    —
Increase in Long-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,617
1,256
913
Issue of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
210
181
231
Decrease in Long-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(1,326)
(1,155)
(527)
Acquisition of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(2,808)
(901)
(1,197)
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(442)
(380)
(318)
Other Financing Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     (44)
      (5)
      (1)
 
Cash Flow from Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,707
$ (1,004)
$  (899)
Net Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,637
$  (835)
$  (597)
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    813
  1,648
  2,245
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,450
$   813
$ 1,648
EXHIBIT 7.18
a. Compute the amounts of the ratios listed in Exhibit 7.19 for the fiscal year ended 
December 31, 2013.
b. What are the likely reasons for the changes in Bullseye’s rate of return on assets during 
the three-year period? Analyze the financial ratios to the maximum depth possible.
c. What are the likely reasons for the changes in Bullseye’s rate of return on equity during 
the three-year period?
d. How has the short-term liquidity risk of Bullseye changed during the three-year period?
e. How has the long-term liquidity risk of Bullseye changed during the three-year period?
26. Profitability and risk analysis in a cross-section setting. This problem compares the profit-
ability and risk ratios of three leading discount chains: Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet. Car-
too is headquartered in Spain, and Taggle and Wilmet are headquartered in the United 
States. Exhibits 7.20 and 7.21 present profitability ratios for Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet 
for fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013. Exhibit 7.22 presents risk ratios for the three firms. 
Exhibit  7.23 presents selected other data for these firms. All amounts are expressed in 
U.S. dollars to permit comparability across the firms. The first item in Exhibit 7.23 shows 
both the increase in total sales and, in brackets, the increase in sales of stores that have 
been open for at least two full years (same store sales). The increase in total sales equals 
the sum of increases in same store sales and increases in sales due to opening new stores 
and acquiring new stores through corporate acquisitions. Study these financial ratios and 
respond to the following questions:
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

265
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Bullseye Corporation
Financial Ratio Analysis
(Problem 25)
For Fiscal Year:
2012
2011
Return on Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7.4%
6.9%
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.8%
4.7%
Total Assets Turnover. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.5
1.5
Other Revenues/Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.8%
2.7%
Cost of Goods Sold/Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
68.1%
68.1%
Selling and Administrative Expenses/Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25.9%
26.1%
Interest Expense/Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.0%
1.0%
Income Tax Expense/Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.3%
2.9%
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9.8
9.6
Inventory Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.5
6.2
Fixed-Assets Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.7
2.7
Return on Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18.7%
17.7%
Financial Leverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.5
2.6
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.3
1.5
Quick Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.6
0.8
Accounts Payable Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.2
5.9
Cash Flow from Operations to Current Liabilities Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
47.0%
50.0%
Liabilities to Assets Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
59.5%
61.0%
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25.7%
29.0%
Debt-Equity Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
63.5%
74.5%
Cash Flow from Operations to Total Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
21.5%
20.8%
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8.5
8.9
EXHIBIT 7.19
a. Wilmet and Taggle follow different strategies. Wilmet consistently has a higher rate of 
return on assets (ROA) than Taggle. Using information in the exhibits, suggest reasons 
for these differences in operating profitability.
b. Wilmet and Cartoo follow similar strategies. Wilmet consistently outperforms Cartoo 
on ROA. Using information in the exhibits, suggest reasons for these differences in oper-
ating profitability.
c. Do any of these firms appear unduly risky as of the end of 2013?
27. Calculating and interpreting profitability and risk ratios. Gappo Group and Limito Brands 
maintain leading market positions in the specialty apparel retailing market. The products 
of Gappo (jeans, blouses, shirts) are more standardized than those of Limito. The products 
of Limito are more fashion-oriented and glitzy. Exhibit 7.24 presents comparative income 
statements for fiscal year 2013, and Exhibit 7.25 presents comparative balance sheets for 
Gappo and Limito at the ends of their 2012 and 2013 fiscal years. Cash flows from opera-
tions for fiscal year 2013 were $2,081 million for Gappo and $765 million for Limito. The 
income tax rate is 35%. On the basis of this information and appropriate financial state-
ment ratios, which company is
a. More profitable in fiscal year 2013?
b. Less risky in terms of short-term liquidity in fiscal year 2013?
c. Less risky in terms of long-term liquidity in fiscal year 2013?
28. Interpreting profitability and risk ratios. Depkline plc is a pharmaceutical company head-
quartered in the United Kingdom. Exhibit 7.26 presents financial statement ratios for Dep-
kline for 2011, 2012, and 2013. Respond to each of the following questions.
a. What are the likely reasons for the increase in the profit margin during the three-year 
period from 2011 to 2013?
b. What are the likely reasons for the decrease in the total asset turnover from 0.88 in 2012 
to 0.81 in 2013?
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet
Cross-Section ROA Profitability Analysis
(Problem 26)
ROA
2011
2012
2013
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . .
3.8%
3.4%
3.4%
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . .
7.0%
7.2%
6.4%
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . .
8.5%
8.0%
7.8%
Profit Margin
Total Assets Turnover
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . 
2.5%
2.4%
2.3%
1.5
1.4
1.5
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . 
4.7%
4.8%
4.6%
1.5
1.5
1.4
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . 
3.7%
3.5%
3.4%
2.3
2.3
2.3
Cartoo
Taggle
Wilmet
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Other Revenues. . . . . . 
1.5
1.4
1.5
2.7
2.8
3.1
1.1
1.2
1.2
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . 
(80.4)
(80.6)
(80.7)
(68.1)
(68.1)
(68.2)
(76.9)
(76.6)
(76.5)
Advertising  . . . . . . . . 
(1.5)
(1.4)
(1.5)
(2.0)
(2.0)
(1.9)
(0.5)
(0.6)
(0.5)
Selling and 
Administrative  . . . . 
(15.2)
(15.1)
(15.1)
(24.1)
(23.9)
(24.4)
(17.7)
(18.1)
(18.4)
Income Taxes . . . . . . . 
(1.3)
(1.3)
(1.2)
(3.2)
(3.3)
(3.3)
(2.0)
(2.0)
(2.0)
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . 
2.5%
2.4%
2.3%
4.7%
4.8%
4.6%
3.7%
3.5%
3.4%
Receivable Turnover  . . 
13.8
12.8
13.3
9.6
9.8
8.6
141.2
125.4
115.3
Inventory Turnover  . . . 
10.0
10.2
10.3
6.2
6.5
6.4
7.7
8.0
8.3
Fixed-Asset Turnover . . 
3.8
3.9
3.9
2.7
2.7
2.5
3.9
3.8
3.7
Percentage of Total 
Assets:
Receivables  . . . . . . . . 
11%
12%
10%
16%
16%
17%
2%
2%
2%
Inventory  . . . . . . . . . 
12
11
12
16
16
15
22
22
20
Fixed Assets. . . . . . . . 
37
37
37
56
59
56
59
60
61
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 40  
 40  
 41  
 12  
  9  
 12  
 17  
 16  
 17  
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
EXHIBIT 7.20
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

267
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet
Cross-Section ROE Profitability Analysis
(Problem 26)
Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet
Cross-Section Risk Analysis
(Problem 26)
ROE
2011
2012
2013
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . .
23.6%
20.8%
18.6%
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . .
17.7%
18.7%
18.4%
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . .
22.2%
21.2%
20.4%
Profit Margin
Total Assets Turnover
Financial Leverage
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . 
2.5%
2.4%
2.3%
1.5
1.4
1.5
6.5
6.0
5.6
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . 
4.7%
4.8%
4.6%
1.5
1.5
1.4
2.6
2.5
2.7
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . 
3.7%
3.5%
3.4%
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.6
2.6
2.6
Cartoo
Taggle
Wilmet
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
2011
2012
2013
Short-Term Liquidity 
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.65
0.66
0.67
1.50
1.32
1.60
0.90
0.90
0.81
Quick Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.36
0.37
0.36
0.76
0.63
0.89
0.19
0.20
0.16
Cash Flow from Operations to 
Current Liabilities Ratio  . . . . 
19.4%
16.4%
19.4%
50.0%
47.0%
36.0%
38.3%
40.1%
36.9%
Days Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . 
26
29
27
38
37
42
3
3
3
Days Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36
36
36
59
56
57
48
46
44
Days Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
95
96
91
62
59
57
36
37
37
Long-Term Liquidity
Liabilities to Assets Ratio. . . . . 
82.1%
80.6%
80.0%
61.0%
59.5%
67.0%
63.2%
60.8%
62.5%
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . 
26.3%
25.9%
25.7%
29.0%
25.7%
36.5%
25.3%
23.4%
24.5%
Debt-Equity Ratio . . . . . . . . . . 
146.8%
133.4%
128.6%
74.5%
63.5%
110.7%
68.7%
59.8%
65.5%
Cash Flow from Operations to 
Total Liabilities Ratio. . . . . . 
11.2%
10.1%
11.8%
20.8%
21.5%
15.3%
21.0%
21.6%
20.0%
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . 
6.6
6.5
6.0
8.9
8.5
7.9
13.1
11.3
10.4
EXHIBIT 7.21
EXHIBIT 7.22
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
c. What are the likely reasons for the decrease in the current ratio from 1.5 in 2012 to 1.3 
in 2013?
d. What are the likely reasons for the pattern of changes in the two cash flow ratios during 
the three-year period from 2012 to 2013?
29. Interpreting profitability and risk ratios. Scantania is a Swedish company that manufac-
tures trucks and other heavy vehicles and provides financing for its customers’ purchases. 
Exhibit 7.27 presents financial statement ratios for Scantania for 2011, 2012, and 2013. The 
amount on the common-size income statement for Net Financing Income is the difference 
between interest earned on receivables from customers and interest expense on amounts 
borrowed to finance those receivables.
Cartoo, Taggle, and Wilmet
Selected Other Financial Data
(Problem 26)
2011
2012
2013
Growth Rate in Sales [same store]
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1.0% [0.9%]
 5.2% [1.2%]
6.8% [1.8%]
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12.2% [5.6%]
12.9% [4.8%]
6.3% [3.0%]
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 9.8% [3.4%]
11.7% [2.0%]
8.6% [1.6%]
Number of Stores
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,003
7,358
7,906
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,397
1,488
1,591
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,141
6,779
7,262
Square Footage (000s)
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
156,216
164,354
181,899
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178,260
192,064
207,945
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
741,897
806,988
869,341
Sales per Square Foot
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$582
$587
$618
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$288
$301
$296
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$416
$428
$431
Sales per Store
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,988,587
$13,103,550
$14,224,804
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$36,700,787
$38,896,505
$38,636,706
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$50,308,582
$50,891,282
$51,573,396
Square Feet per Store
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22,307
22,337
23,008
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127,602
129,075
130,701
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120,810
119,042
119,711
Inventory per Square Foot
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$49
$46
$52
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$33
$33
$33
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$43
$42
$40
Fixed Assets per Square Foot
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$156
$154
$163
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$115
$118
$125
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$115
$117
$122
Sales per Employee
 
Cartoo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$242,942
$248,590
$269,992
 
Taggle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$178,458
$193,443
$197,592
 
Wilmet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$201,925
$213,617
$209,818
EXHIBIT 7.23
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

269
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Gappo Group and Limito Brands
Comparative Income Statements
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 27)
For the Year Ended August 31, 2013:
Gappo 
Group
Limito 
Brands
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$15,763
$10,134
Interest Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
117
146
Net Gains from Divestments of Retail Stores  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     —
    230
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$15,880
$10,510
Expenses:
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,071
$ 6,592
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,377
2,640
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
26
149
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    539
    411
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$15,013
$ 9,792
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   867
$   718
EXHIBIT 7.24
Gappo Group and Limito Brands
Comparative Balance Sheets
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 27)
Gappo Group
Limito Brands
For the Year Ended August 31:
2013
2012
2013
2012
ASSETS
Cash and Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,939
$2,644
$1,018
$  500
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
355
176
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,575
1,796
1,251
1,770
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   572
   589
   295
   325
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,086
$5,029
$2,919
$2,771
Property, Plant, and Equipment (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,267
3,197
1,862
1,862
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   485
   318
 2,656
 2,460
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$7,838
$8,544
$7,437
$7,093
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,006
$  772
$  517
$  593
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
138
325
7
8
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,289
 1,175
   850
 1,108
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,433
$2,272
$1,374
$1,709
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
188
2,905
1,665
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,081
   910
   939
   764
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,564
$3,370
$5,218
$4,138
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   55
$   55
$  262
$  262
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,783
2,631
1,550
1,565
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,223
8,646
4,758
4,277
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . 
125
77
31
(17)
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(7,912)
 (6,235)
 (4,382)
 (3,132)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,274
$5,174
$2,219
$2,955
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . 
$7,838
$8,544
$7,437
$7,093
EXHIBIT 7.25
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Depkline plc
Financial Statement Ratios
(Problem 28)
2011
2012
2013
Growth Rate in Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7.6%
8.5%
6.3%
Profitability Ratios
Return on Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18.8%
20.4%
18.6%
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
21.6%
23.2%
23.0%
Total Assets Turnover Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.87
0.88
0.81
Return on Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
72.5%
64.3%
55.8%
Financial Leverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.9
3.1
3.0
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.2
5.3
5.1
Inventory Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.2
2.2
2.0
Fixed-Asset Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.4
3.4
3.1
Common-Size Income Statement
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Investment Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.6
1.7
2.2
Other Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.7
1.2
1.9
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(22.0)
(21.6)
(23.4)
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(33.5)
(31.2)
(30.6)
Research and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(14.5)
(14.9)
(14.6)
Other Operating Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(0.2)
 (0.1)
(0.1)
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(9.5)
(10.4)
(10.2)
Interest Expense (net of tax effect) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(1.5)
(1.1)
(1.7)
Short-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.4
1.5
1.3
Quick Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.0
1.0
0.9
Cash Flow from Operations to Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
66.1%
52.5%
70.9%
Days Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70
69
72
Days Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
167
168
186
Days Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120
105
100
Long-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Liabilities to Assets Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
72.2%
62.2%
68.0%
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
19.4%
18.7%
22.8%
Debt–Equity Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
69.6%
49.5%
71.3%
Cash Flow from Operations to Total Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32.6%
24.7%
33.7%
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15.6
22.6
14.0
EXHIBIT 7.26
a. What are the likely reasons for the increase in the profit margin during the three-year 
period from 2011 to 2013?
b. What are the likely reasons for the decreasing cost of goods sold to sales percentage 
combined with the increasing inventory turnover ratio during the three-year period?
c. What are the likely reasons for the increase in the fixed-asset turnover between 2012 and 
2013?
d. The total assets turnover remained at 0.85 between 2011 and 2012, yet the accounts 
receivable, inventory, and fixed-asset turnovers increased. What is the likely explanation 
for the stable total assets turnover?
e. What are the likely explanations for the increase in the two cash flow ratios between 
2011 and 2012?
f. What are the likely reasons for the decrease in the current and quick ratios between 2012 
and 2013?
30. Detective analysis—identify company. Effective financial statement analysis requires an 
understanding of a firm’s economic characteristics. The relations among various financial 
statement items provide evidence of many of these economic characteristics. Exhibit 7.28
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

271
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Scantania AB
Financial Statement Ratios
(Problem 29)
2011
2012
2013
Growth Rate in Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11.5%
11.7%
19.4%
Profitability Ratios
Return on Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.3%
7.1%
9.5%
Profit Margin  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7.4%
8.4%
10.1%
Total Assets Turnover Ratio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.85
0.85
0.94
Return on Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20.7%
23.8%
33.6%
Financial Leverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.3
3.3
3.5
Accounts Receivable Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.97
2.03
2.16
Inventory Turnover Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.92
5.21
5.79
Fixed-Asset Turnover Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.51
2.65
3.02
Common-Size Income Statement
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Investment Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.2
1.0
0.5
Net Financing Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.6
1.4
1.3
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(75.5)
(73.9)
(73.2)
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(11.3)
(10.9)
(9.8)
Research and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(3.9)
(4.3)
(4.0)
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(3.7)
(4.1)
(4.2)
Interest Expense (net of tax effect) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(1.0)
(0.9)
(0.6)
Short-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Current Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.2
1.2
1.0
Quick Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.8
0.9
0.7
Cash Flow from Operations to Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35.1%
37.5%
37.7%
Days Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
186
179
169
Days Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
74
70
63
Days Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34
38
38
Long-Term Liquidity Risk Ratios
Liabilities to Assets Ratios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
69.7%
70.3%
72.9%
Long-Term Debt Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
24.7%
20.3%
21.7%
Debt-Equity Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
81.4%
68.6%
80.1%
Cash Flow from Operations to Total Liabilities Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15.5%
19.1%
20.7%
Interest Coverage Ratio  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8.8
11.0
18.2
EXHIBIT 7.27
presents common-size condensed balance sheets and income statements for 12 firms in dif-
ferent industries. These common-size balance sheets and income statements express various 
items as a percentage of operating revenues (that is, the statement divides all amounts by 
operating revenues for the year). A dash for a particular financial statement item does not 
necessarily mean that the amount is zero. It merely indicates that the amount is not suf-
ficiently large for the firm to disclose it. The 12 companies, the country of their headquar-
ters, and a brief description of their activities are as follows.
 (1) Accor (France): World’s largest hotel group, operating hotels under the names of 
Sofitel, Novotel, Motel 6, and others. Accor has grown in recent years by acquiring 
established hotel chains.
 (2) Arbed-Acier (Luxembourg): Offers flat-rolled steel products, primarily to the Euro-
pean automobile industry.
 (3) Carrefour (France): Operates grocery supermarkets and hypermarkets in Europe, 
Latin America, and Asia.
 (4) Deutsche Telekon (Germany): Europe’s largest provider of wired and wireless tele-
communication services. The telecommunications industry has experienced increased 
deregulation in recent years.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
Data for Ratio Detective Exercise
(Problem 30)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
BALANCE SHEET AT END OF YEAR
Cash and Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . .
4.7%
16.4%
8.9%
8.4%
16.7%
7.4%
16.1%
21.3%
72.0%
8.3%
1.4%
338.8%
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.5
15.9
16.5
27.6
35.9
17.7
81.1
29.6
24.0
10.5
5.9
533.4
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9.9
2.8
9.9
5.8
6.4
25.7
—
1.3
20.0
2.9
—
—
Property, Plant, and Equipment Cost  . . . . . . .
40.8
20.9
59.0
69.6
88.3
130.9
23.0
110.3
83.3
278.9
535.4
15.3
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (15.0)
 (9.1)
     (33.2)
  (17.8)
     (50.5)
     (67.7)
     (11.8)
     (35.5)
     (35.2)
(112.5)
(284.9)
     (12.9)
Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net  . . . . . . .
25.8
11.8
25.8
51.8
37.8
63.2
11.2
74.8
48.1
166.4
250.5
2.4
Intercorporate Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.0
14.3
3.0
0.6
18.8
10.3
1.3
10.7
7.7
22.4
16.9
41.9
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 15.0
 10.9
 11.7
  3.6
  7.1
  1.9
 63.5
 42.1
 69.1
      56.3
     5.4
 61.9
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 67.9%
 72.1%
 75.8%
 97.8%
122.7%
126.2%
173.2%
179.8%
240.9%
     266.8%
   280.1%
978.4%
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37.3%
25.5%
29.7%
26.4%
42.7%
34.5%
106.0%
65.1%
48.3%
42.6%
51.3%
820.8%
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12.0
6.1
6.6
9.1
22.2
23.3
22.7
49.6
56.4
95.8
167.7
76.9
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1
1.8
5.9
2.3
4.2
17.2
10.6
10.9
24.5
27.8
24.7
42.2
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 16.5
 38.7
 33.6
 60.0
 53.6
 51.2
 33.9
 54.2
111.7
    100.6
    36.4
 38.5
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . .
 67.9%
 72.1%
 75.8%
 97.8%
122.7%
126.2%
173.2%
179.8%
240.9%
    266.8%
   280.1%
978.4%
INCOME STATEMENT FOR YEAR
Operating Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Other Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.1%
2.7%
1.0%
0.2%
0.7%
2.3%
1.9%
0.3%
13.8%
0.7%
—
—
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87.8
45.2
44.5
64.6
68.0
81.0
55.3
75.5
27.2
45.0
57.3
32.6
Depreciation and Amortization Expense  . . . . .
3.0
4.9
4.1
3.2
5.9
5.3
2.0
7.1
9.9
23.9
19.9
—
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . .
6.3
24.8
38.9
24.3
16.4
13.6
27.8
8.1
40.0
15.2
7.3
22.5
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4
0.4
2.0
1.3
0.4
3.5
1.9
3.0
5.2
8.6
8.6
35.4
Research and Development Expense . . . . . . . .
—
9.8
1.3
—
3.7
—
—
—
13.8
—
—
—
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3
5.8
3.1
2.4
2.5
0.3
5.9
3.7
4.4
3.9
2.8
2.2
All Other Items (net). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (0.8)
   —
  0.8
  0.3
  0.6
  (2.1)
  0.7
 (1.1)
   —
      0.6
        —
  1.7
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 99.0%
 90.9%
 94.7%
 96.1%
 97.5%
101.6%
 93.7%
 95.8%
100.5%
     97.2%
    95.9%
 94.4%
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2.1%
 11.8%
  6.3%
  4.1%
  3.2%
  0.7%
  8.2%
  4.5%
 13.3%
      3.5%
     4.1%
  5.6%
EXHIBIT 7.28
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

273
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 (5) Fortis (Netherlands): Offers both insurance and banking services. Operating revenues 
include insurance premiums received, investment income, and interest revenue on 
loans. Operating expenses include amounts actually paid or amounts it expects to 
pay in the future on insurance coverage outstanding during the year.
 (6) Interpublic Group (United States): Creates advertising copy for clients. Purchases 
advertising time and space from various media and sells it to clients. Operating rev-
enues represent the commission or fee earned by Interpublic for advertising copy cre-
ated and media time and space sold. Operating expenses include compensation paid 
to employees. Interpublic acquired other marketing services firms in recent years.
 (7) Marks & Spencer (United Kingdom): Operates department stores in England and 
other retail stores in Europe and the United States. It offers its own credit card for 
customers’ purchases.
 (8) Nestlé (Switzerland): World’s largest food processor, offering prepared foods, coffees, 
milk-based products, and mineral waters.
 (9) Roche Holding (Switzerland): Creates, manufactures, and distributes a wide variety 
of prescription drugs.
(10) Sun Microsystems (United States): Designs, manufactures, and sells engineering work-
stations and servers used to maintain integrated computer networks. Sun outsources 
the manufacture of many of its computer components.
(11) Tokyo Electric Power (Japan): Provides electric power services, primarily to the Tokyo 
community. It maintains almost a monopoly position in its service area.
(12) Toyota Motor (Japan): Manufactures automobiles and offers financing services to its 
customers.
 
Use whatever clues you can to match the companies in Exhibit 7.28 with the companies 
and industries listed above.
31. Preparing pro forma financial statements (requires Appendix 7.1). Problem 25 presents 
financial statements for Bullseye Corporation for its fiscal years ending December 31, 
2011, 2012, and 2013, as well as financial statement ratios.
a. Prepare a set of pro forma financial statements for Bullseye Corporation for fiscal years 
2014 through 2018 using the assumptions detailed below.
b. Describe actions that Bullseye might take to deal with the shortage of cash projected in 
part a.
c. What are the likely reasons for the projected changes in the return on equity?
INCOME STATEMENT ASSUMPTIONS
 1. Sales grew 12.2% in 2011 and 12.9% in 2012, primarily as a result of increases in the num-
ber of new stores and increases in sales of stores open more than one year. Sales grew only 
6.3% in 2013 because of recession conditions. Although Bullseye Corporation will continue 
to increase the number of stores, economic conditions and competition will likely constrain 
increases in sales. Thus, assume that sales will grow 9% each year between 2014 and 2018.
 2. Other revenues, representing interest on outstanding accounts receivable, have been approx-
imately 3% of sales during the last three years. Assume that other revenues will continue at 
this historical rate.
 3. The cost of goods sold to sales percentage increased slightly from 66.1% in 2011 to 68.2% 
in 2013. Assume that the cost of goods sold to sales percentage will be 68.1% for 2014 to 
2018.
 4. The selling and administrative expense percentage has increased slightly from 26.1% of 
sales in 2011 to 26.2% of sales in 2013. Bullseye will realize economies of scale as its 
growth rate in sales increases to 9% annually. Assume that the selling and administrative 
expense to sales percentage will be 26.0% for 2014 to 2018.
 5. Bullseye Corporation has borrowed using long-term debt to construct new stores. The 
average interest rate on interest-bearing debt was approximately 4.4% during 2013. Assume 
this interest rate for all borrowing outstanding (long-term debt, and current portion of 
long-term debt) for Bullseye Corporation will be 5% for 2014 to 2018. Compute interest 
expense on the average amount of interest-bearing debt outstanding each year.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274
Chapter 7 
Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis
 6. Bullseye Corporation’s average income tax rate as a percentage of income before income 
taxes has varied around 38% during the last three years. Assume an income tax rate of 38% 
of income before income taxes for 2014 to 2018.
 7. Bullseye Corporation’s dividends increased at an average annual rate of 17.9% between 
2011 and 2013. Assume that dividends will grow 16% each year between 2014 and 2018.
BALANCE SHEET ASSUMPTIONS
 8. Cash will be the amount necessary to equate total assets with total liabilities plus share-
holders’ equity.
 9. Accounts receivable will increase at the growth rate in sales.
10. Inventory will increase at the growth rate in sales.
11. Prepayments relate to ongoing operating costs, such as rent and insurance. Assume that 
prepayments will grow at the growth rate in sales.
12. Property, plant, and equipment grew 12.4% annually during the most recent three years. 
The construction of new stores will require additional investments in property, plant, and 
equipment, but not at the growth rate experienced in recent years. Assume that property, 
plant, and equipment will grow 10% each year between 2014 and 2018.
13. Other assets changed by only a small amount during the last three years. Assume that 
other assets will remain the same amount for 2014 to 2018 as the amount at the end of 
2013.
14. The accounts payable turnover ratio increased from 5.9 in 2011 to 6.4 during 2013. Assume 
that Bullseye Corporation will increase its accounts payable turnover to 6.5 times per year 
for 2014 to 2018.
15. The notes to Bullseye Corporation’s financial statements indicate that current maturities 
of long-term debt on December 31 of each year are as follows: 2013, $1,964 (amount 
already appears on the December 31, 2013, balance sheet); 2014, $1,951; 2015, $1,251; 
2016, $2,236; 2017, $107; 2018, $2,251.
16. Other current liabilities relate to ongoing operating activities and are expected to grow at 
the growth rate in sales.
17. Bullseye Corporation uses long-term debt to finance acquisitions of property, plant, and 
equipment. Assume that long-term debt will decrease by the amount of long-term debt 
reclassified as a current liability each year and then the remaining amount will increase at 
the growth rate in property, plant, and equipment. For example, the December 31, 2013, 
balance sheet of Bullseye Corporation shows the current portion of long-term debt to be 
$1,964. Bullseye Corporation will repay this amount during 2014. During 2014, Bullseye 
will reclassify $1,951 from long-term debt to current portion of long-term debt (see item 
15 above). This will leave a preliminary balance in long-term debt of $14,988 (= $16,939 
– $1,951). Bullseye Corporation will increase this amount of long-term debt by the 10% 
growth rate in property, plant, and equipment. The projected amount for long-term debt 
on the December 31, 2014, balance sheet is $16,487 (= $14,988 × 1.1).
18. Other noncurrent liabilities include an amount related to retirement benefits and taxes 
due after more than one year. Assume that other noncurrent liabilities will increase at the 
growth rate in sales.
19. Assume that common stock and additional paid-in capital will not change.
20.  Assume that accumulated other comprehensive income will grow at the growth rate in 
sales.
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOW ASSUMPTIONS
21. Assume that depreciation expense will increase at the growth rate in property, plant, and 
equipment.
22. Assume that changes in other noncurrent liabilities and in accumulated other comprehen-
sive income on the balance sheet are operating activities.
23. Assume that the amount for Other Financing Transactions is zero for 2014 to 2018.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FACMU14
P a r t
3
Measuring and Reporting 
Assets and Equities Using 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REVIEW AND APPLICATION OF INCOME 
RECOGNITION PRINCIPLES
C
hapter 5 describes the accrual basis of accounting for income recognition. Under accrual 
accounting, revenue increases income and the related expenses decrease income. Authoritative 
guidance contains specific criteria for recognizing revenues and expenses. This chapter expands the 
criteria for revenue recognition and revenue measurement that Chapter 5 introduces. Revenue recog-
nition refers to both whether and when an item is a revenue item. Revenue measurement refers to 
its amount. U.S. GAAP and IFRS have broadly similar criteria.1 We begin with a general descrip-
tion of revenue recognition criteria and then present several examples that illustrate the timing and 
measurement of revenue recognition.
Revenue Recognition Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide conditions that arrangements 
with customers must meet in order for firms to recognize revenue. Although the specifics of these 
conditions differ (as Appendix 8.1 discusses), the two general conceptual criteria for revenue recog-
nition are as follows:
1. The seller must have substantially performed its obligations to the customer, for example, by 
transferring ownership of goods to the customer.2
2. The seller must have obtained an asset from the customer that it can reliably measure. If the 
asset is not cash, the seller must be reasonably certain of converting it into cash.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Revenue Recognition, 
Receivables, and Advances 
from Customers
C h a p t e r 
8
 1 Appendix 8.1 describes differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS guidance for revenue recognition that exist as this 
book goes to press. The IASB and FASB are working on a joint project to converge the authoritative guidance for 
revenue recognition. Appendix 8.2 describes revenue recognition proposals that are part of this project.
 2 As discussed in Appendix 8.1, U.S. GAAP refers to the selling entity having earned the revenues by having com-
pleted the earnings process. IFRS refers to transferring the risks and rewards of ownership to customers (in the case 
of revenues involving goods) and to having rendered services (in the case of revenues involving services).
1. Understand and apply the criteria 
for recognizing revenue, including 
the  timing of the recognition and the 
 measurement of revenue.
2. Understand the relation between 
 revenues (an income statement 
account) and both accounts receivable 
(an asset) and advances from custom-
ers (a liability).
3. Understand the measurement of 
accounts receivable, including the 
allowance for uncollectible accounts 
and the allowance for sales returns.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Expense Recognition The firm recognizes expenses when it consumes assets (expense 
 recognition). If an event or transaction leads to the recognition of revenue, firms match the con-
sumption of assets (the expense), in time, with the revenue recognized. For example, the seller 
recognizes cost of goods sold when it recognizes revenue from selling those goods.
APPLICATION OF INCOME 
RECOGNITION PRINCIPLES
Example 1 Costco Wholesale Corporation (Costco) operates retail stores. To shop in a 
Costco store, customers must pay a nonrefundable, annual membership fee in advance, using 
either cash or an American Express card. A customer purchases an annual membership from 
Costco for $50, a 20-pack of paper towels for $12.85, and four new tires for $440. The tire pur-
chase includes mounting and aligning by a Costco tire technician, plus alignment and tire rota-
tion services for three years afterward. The customer pays with an American Express card.3
When Should Costco Recognize the $50 Membership Fee as Revenue? Costco can reliably 
measure the revenue from sales of membership fees, and it has an obligation to stand ready to 
provide shopping services at Costco stores for one year. Costco should recognize 1/12th of the 
$50 membership fee, or $4.17, each month during the annual membership period.
When Should Costco Recognize Revenue from Selling the Paper Towels? Because Costco 
has no further obligations related to the customer’s purchase of the paper towels, it will recog-
nize revenue at the time of sale.
When Should Costco Recognize Revenue from Selling the Tires Plus Mounting, Align-
ment, and Rotation Services? At the time of initial installation, Costco performs its obli-
gation to provide tires and initial mounting and alignment services. Costco should recognize 
revenue for the portion of the $440 selling price applicable to the sale of tires and installation 
services at the time of installation. Costco should delay recognition of revenue for the portion 
of the $440 selling price applicable to the subsequent alignment and rotation services until it 
performs the required services over the next three years.
Example 2 Pol Roget Vineyards processes grapes into champagne, which it bottles, corks, and 
then ages in underground caverns. During the aging process, the winemakers hand-turn the bot-
tles a quarter rotation every few months; also, at fixed intervals, the winemakers release yeast 
gases to prevent unwanted fermentation. Assume that Pol Roget contracts to sell champagne 
to a customer for €15 million. Under the terms of the contract, Pol Roget will store the cham-
pagne in its caverns and perform all necessary functions associated with the aging process. The 
selling price includes the costs of producing the champagne and providing services during the 
aging process. The customer pays Pol Roget €7.5 million at the beginning of the aging and stor-
age process and agrees to pay the remainder upon delivery of the champagne.
When Should Pol Roget Recognize Revenue from Selling the Champagne? Pol Roget 
should recognize revenue when it delivers the champagne to the customer because Pol Roget 
has not performed its obligations until the customer takes possession of the champagne. In 
addition, Pol Roget cannot reliably measure the amount of revenue. This is because the qual-
ity of the champagne might turn out to be poor, in which case the customer might return the 
champagne (or never take delivery) and refuse to pay the remaining €7.5 million.
 3 When the customer pays with a credit card, the retailer promptly receives payment, typically a few percent-
age points less than the amount the customer promises to pay, from the credit card issuer, typically within a 
few days. From the retailer’s perspective, this is like a cash sale at a small discount from the cash price. The 
credit card issuer bears the risk of nonpayment by the customer, who compensates the issuer by paying finance 
charges and other fees.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

279
Application of Income Recognition Principles
Example 3 Among other items, Apple, Inc., sells Mac computers to customers, who receive 
the physical computer (possibly with software installed). Customers also have access to post-
delivery non-software services and the right to receive certain software upgrades if and when 
Apple develops them. Apple sells Macs for various prices, including one model for approxi-
mately $2,500. Customers pay cash or with a credit card.
When Should Apple Recognize Revenue from Macs? Apple can reliably measure the total 
amount of revenue because customers pay cash, or Apple receives cash soon thereafter from 
the credit card company. Apple separates the total revenues ($2,500 in this example) into the 
portion that represents obligations it has performed (delivery of the computer) and future obli-
gations (providing non-software services and possible software upgrades). It recognizes reve-
nue from the sale of the computer at the time of delivery. It recognizes revenue associated with 
future obligations over the estimated useful life of the computer. We revisit this example later in 
this chapter.
Example 4 Bombardier Incorporated is a Canadian manufacturer of aircraft and trains. In 
this industry, the manufacturing process usually exceeds one year. Assume that Bombardier 
recently signed a €2 billion contract to provide 25 new high-speed trains to a customer in the 
European Union. The customer paid a deposit of €250 million and will pay the remainder in 
equal installments over the next four years.
When Should Bombardier Recognize Revenue from This Contract? At the time Bombar-
dier signs the contract and receives €250 million cash from the customer, it has not performed 
to fulfill any obligations, so it may not recognize revenue. Although application of the first rev-
enue recognition condition might seem to imply that Bombardier should recognize the entire €2 
billion as revenue when it delivers the trains, special revenue recognition policies apply to long-
term contracts. If Bombardier can reliably estimate both the revenue from the contract and the 
costs to complete the contract, it will recognize revenue, and the costs associated with delivering 
on the contract, over the contract life. We discuss the revenue recognition guidance for long-
term contracts like this one later in this chapter.
Example 5 Mitchells & Butlers Plc. is a leading operator of pubs and pub restaurants in the 
United Kingdom. Among other activities, it operates and franchises about 40 wine restaurants 
under the name All Bar One. Suppose that in contracting with a franchisee of an All Bar One 
wine restaurant, Mitchells & Butlers agrees to provide services, including site selection, décor 
design, marketing, advertising, and recruiting; and the franchisee agrees to pay Mitchells & 
Butlers £30,000. It is common in the industry to permit the franchisee to pay in equal install-
ments over several years.
When Should Mitchells & Butlers Recognize Revenue from the Franchisee Contract? At 
the time it signs the contract with the franchisee, Mitchells & Butlers will likely not have per-
formed all of the promised services. Even if it has done so, the amount of cash that Mitchells 
& Butlers will collect may not be reliably measurable because of uncertainty that the franchi-
see will pay the entire £30,000. Failure to meet the second revenue recognition criterion (which 
refers to reliable measurement of the asset received by the seller) will delay revenue recognition 
until the seller can resolve uncertainty about the amount it will collect.
These examples illustrate variations of two issues about the timing and measurement of 
revenues: whether the seller has performed, or substantially completed, all obligations, and 
whether the seller has received a reliably measurable asset. We list several topics here that this 
chapter discusses in more detail:
■ 
Accounting for customers’ promises to pay cash later. The seller records these promises as 
accounts receivable.
■ 
Accounting for arrangements where collectibility is highly uncertain. Accounting requires 
that sellers recognize revenue as cash is received.
■ 
Accounting for customers’ cash payments to the seller before the seller delivers goods and 
services. The seller records these payments as advances from customers.
■ 
Accounting for customers’ rights to return goods, that is, sales returns.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
■ 
Accounting for contracts that contain several components, that is, arrangements with mul-
tiple deliverables.
■ 
Accounting for long-term contracts, using the percentage-of-completion method and the 
completed contract method.
Accrual accounting separates the recognition of revenue from the receipt of cash. Revenue rec-
ognition criteria require that the seller must have (1) performed its obligations to the customer 
and (2) received assets that are cash or that it can convert to cash. The seller may recognize 
revenue before, or after, or at the point of cash collection. A buyer may exchange a promise of 
future payment for goods and services. The seller recognizes such promises as accounts receiv-
able, classified as a current asset on the seller’s balance sheet. (The same amount is an account 
payable on the buyer’s balance sheet.) The fact that some customers will not pay the amounts 
they owe means that the balance sheet carrying value of Accounts Receivable should show the 
amount the seller expects to collect, not the amount the seller is owed. This chapter describes 
the accounting procedures for these estimated uncollectible amounts.
Sometimes the customer pays the seller cash before receiving the goods or services; exam-
ples include the €7.5 million cash payment in Example 2 and the €250 million cash payment 
in Example 4. The seller has increased both its assets (its cash) and its obligations. The seller 
recognizes a liability, advances from customers, for products and services in the amount of cash 
received.4 When the seller has performed its obligations, it will recognize revenue and reduce its 
liability.
Some arrangements permit the customer to return goods. These arrangements could create 
so much uncertainty that the seller must delay revenue recognition until the returns period has 
expired. In other transactions the seller recognizes revenue at the time of the sale and accounts 
for expected sales returns at that time.5 Arrangements that permit the customer to return 
goods raise issues of both performance (has the seller performed all its obligations?) and asset 
measurement.
Firms sometimes sell bundles of products and services in a multiple deliverable contract. 
For example, Apple’s sale of a Mac (Example 3) includes the computer plus non-software 
services plus possible software upgrades. In some cases, the seller separates the contract into 
components or elements for accounting purposes, analyzing each component separately for 
revenue recognition.6 The seller allocates the total contract revenue among the contract com-
ponents and determines when it has performed each component. Applying U.S. GAAP, the 
seller assigns revenue to each component based on relative selling prices, meaning the price for 
which the seller would separately sell an individual deliverable component (the separate selling 
price). The allocated revenue for a component is the total contract price times the ratio of the 
separate selling price of that component to the sum of the separate selling prices of all of the 
components.
Special revenue-recognition guidance applies to long-term contracts such as the Bombar-
dier train contract (Example 4). When the seller can reliably estimate both the costs of such 
contracts and the amounts it will collect, the seller will use the percentage-of-completion method 
to recognize the revenue and costs associated with the contract. One implementation of this 
method measures revenue for a period as a function of the cost incurred that period, relative to 
the total estimated contract cost. The percentage of the contract completed this period equals 
the percentage of total cost incurred this period and that percentage determines the revenue 
recognized. To illustrate, if in 2013 Bombardier incurred 20% of the total cost of supplying the 
25 trains, it would recognize as 2013 revenue 20% of the total contract price, or €400 million 
 4 If the seller performs its obligations within a year, Advances from Customers is a current liability. If the arrange-
ment extends beyond one year, the seller apportions the cash advance from the customer into the portion it 
will discharge over the next year (current liability) and the portion it will discharge after one year (noncurrent 
liability).
 5 IFRS does not contain explicit guidance for the seller to determine whether it should delay revenue recognition 
until the returns period has ended. U.S. GAAP provides six conditions that the transaction must meet for the 
seller to recognize revenue at the time of sale if the customer has a right of return (FASB, Statement of Finan-
cial Accounting Standards No. 48, “Revenue Recognition When Right of Return Exists,” 1981) (Codification 
Topic 605).
 6 U.S. GAAP provides criteria for the seller to use in deciding when it must separate a multiple deliverable contract 
into its elements for accounting purposes (Emerging Issues Task Force Issue No. 08-1, “Revenue Arrangements 
with Multiple Deliverables,” 2010) (Codification Topic 605). (U.S. GAAP provides special rules for software.) 
IFRS refers to the need, in certain circumstances, to apply revenue recognition criteria to the separately identifi-
able components of a single transaction but does not provide criteria for making this separation. The mechanics 
of separating a contract into multiple elements are beyond the scope of this textbook.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

281
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
(= 20% × €2 billion). Bombardier would also recognize as 2013 expense 20% of total costs. 
Under this approach, Bombardier does not recognize income as it delivers the trains to the cus-
tomer. Instead, it recognizes income as it incurs costs.
 PROBLEM  8.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Revenue recognition at time of sale, or after sale, or before sale. Assume Sony Corporation 
(the seller) ships 5,000 42-inch LCD flat-screen televisions to Great Deal (the buyer). 
For each of the following independent contractual arrangements, apply the two general 
revenue recognition criteria to decide when Sony should recognize revenue.
a. The contract requires that Great Deal pay Sony $2,000 for each television within 30 
days of receiving the televisions. Great Deal may return damaged or defective televi-
sions to Sony for full refund at any time.
b. The contract requires that Great Deal pay Sony $2,000 per television within 30 days 
after receiving the televisions. Great Deal may return to Sony any of the televisions, 
for any reason, within six months of the receipt of the televisions.
c. The contract requires that Great Deal sell the televisions, acting on behalf of Sony. 
Great Deal is responsible for storing and insuring the televisions, marketing them, 
and setting the selling price, within an agreed upon range of selling prices. The 
expected selling price is $3,400 per television. In return for performing these services, 
Sony pays Great Deal $400 per television. At any time it chooses, Great Deal will 
return unsold televisions to Sony.
INCOME RECOGNITION AT THE TIME OF SALE
Many transactions satisfy the criteria for revenue recognition at the time of sale (that is, at the 
time of delivery of goods and services). For example, some firms manufacture (or purchase) a 
product or create a service, identify a customer, deliver the product or service to the customer, 
and receive cash or some other asset at the time of delivery. To justify recognizing revenue at 
the time of sale, firms must account for the effects of certain events that occur after the time of 
sale, including:
■ 
Some customers’ not paying the amounts they owe. This event gives rise to the accounting 
issue of uncollectible customer accounts. This issue affects the measurement of accounts 
receivable.
■ 
Some customers’ returning products. This event gives rise to the accounting issue of esti-
mating sales returns.
■ 
Customers’ receiving promised warranty services. This event gives rise to the accounting 
issue of warranty costs.
We consider the first two accounting issues in this chapter and defer the discussion of the 
accounting for warranties to Chapter 9.
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
Accounts receivable (or trade receivables) is the amount on the seller’s balance sheet owed by 
customers who have purchased goods and services on credit. Because the seller expects to col-
lect cash within a reasonably short time, such as 30 days, an account receivable is usually a cur-
rent asset. Receivables allowing customer payments more than one year from the balance sheet 
date are noncurrent assets.
Not all customers ultimately pay the amounts owed. An account receivable that the seller 
never collects is an uncollectible account. A firm does not want to sell products and services to 
customers who will fail to pay, but the cost of identifying such customers (assuming this is pos-
sible) often exceeds the benefits of doing so. For example, a retailer that wanted to ensure that 
every credit customer will pay would need to, at the time of sales,
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
■ 
Gather information about the customer’s credit worthiness, for example his or her credit 
history, and
■ 
Assess the customer’s likely ability and willingness to pay the amount owed.
Gathering and analyzing these data would take time, resulting in lost sales if some customers 
take their business elsewhere. Further, if the retailer wanted to avoid bad debts completely, it 
would most likely deny credit to many customers who would pay their bills, even though those 
customers could not pass a stringent credit check designed to eliminate every uncollectible 
credit sale. The seller would be better off accepting some uncollectible accounts to increase 
overall sales. As long as the amount collected from credit sales exceeds the cost of goods sold 
and the other costs of serving those customers, the retailer will be better off.
The fact that most firms find it optimal to bear the cost of some uncollectible receivables 
does not imply that a firm should grant credit indiscriminately or not engage in collection 
efforts. A cost-benefit analysis of credit policy should dictate a strategy that results in uncollect-
ible accounts of an amount that is reasonably predictable before the firm makes any sales.
ALLOWANCE METHOD FOR UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS
The two accounting issues for accounts receivable are (1) measurement of the amount on the 
balance sheet and (2) timing of recognition of the reduction in income caused by the uncollect-
ibility of some accounts. Authoritative guidance requires that sellers report accounts receivable 
net of the estimated uncollectible amount. This is the amount the firm expects to collect from 
customers, which will be less than the amount that customers have agreed to pay. With regard 
to timing, the seller must recognize a reduction in income for estimated uncollectible accounts 
receivable when available information indicates accounts will not be collectible, not when the 
customer actually defaults at some later time. The following example illustrates these account-
ing requirements.
Example 6 Turf Maintenance Company started a lawn services business on January 1, 2013. 
It sends invoices to its customers for lawn maintenance services at the end of each month 
and expects payment within 30 days. During 2013, Turf Maintenance billed its customers 
$2,000,000 for services rendered during the year. It made journal entries at the end of each 
month debiting Accounts Receivable at the gross amount billed and crediting Sales Revenue. 
The aggregate effect of these entries during 2013 is as follows:
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000,000
To recognize credit sales for 2013.
If a customer does not pay within 30 days, Turf Maintenance takes steps to collect, such as 
sending another bill and calling the customer. Both actions will yield some payments from cus-
tomers, but some customer accounts will remain uncollected. As a business policy, Turf Main-
tenance treats accounts not collected in cash within six months of billing as uncollectible.
Recognizing revenue before the seller collects cash requires estimating the amount of uncol-
lectible accounts with reasonable reliability.7 Authoritative guidance requires the allowance  method 
for uncollectible accounts. The allowance method involves estimating the amount of uncollect-
ible accounts receivable associated with credit sales. The firm recognizes this estimated amount, 
which reduces income, as an adjusting entry at the end of each accounting period. The credit is to 
a contra-asset account, Allowance for Uncollectibles. This contra asset account is partnered with 
the asset account Accounts Receivable, Gross. Accounts Receivable, Gross is the amount owed by 
customers. The amount of cash the firm expects to collect from customers (Accounts Receivable, 
Net) equals the asset account (Accounts Receivable, Gross) netted with its contra account (Allow-
ance for Uncollectibles):
 7 The second criterion for revenue recognition states that the firm must have received cash or some other asset that 
it can measure with reasonable reliability. If the firm has received a promise of payment but cannot measure this 
promise with reasonable reliability, then the arrangement fails the second criterion, and neither U.S. GAAP nor 
IFRS would permit the firm to recognize revenue.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

283
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
Accounts Receivable, Gross
Less: Allowance for Uncollectibles
= Accounts Receivable, Net
Most firms show the reduction in income as Bad Debt Expense, which they include among gen-
eral or administrative or marketing expenses.8
We next illustrate the accounting procedures of the allowance method, followed by a discus-
sion of how management estimates uncollectible accounts.
Assume Turf Maintenance estimates that it will not collect 2% of total credit sales in 
a given month. At the end of each month, it makes an adjusting entry debiting Bad Debt 
Expense and crediting Allowance for Uncollectibles. The aggregate effect of these entries dur-
ing 2013 is as follows:
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
To provide for estimated uncollectible accounts relating to 2013 credit sales 
($40,000 = 2% × $2,000,000).
Bad Debt Expense is also called the Provision for Bad Debts and the Provision for  Uncollectible 
Accounts.9 Recognizing bad debt expense of $40,000 records the amount Turf Maintenance 
does not expect to collect in cash as a reduction of 2013 income. Turf Maintenance is not writ-
ing off specific customers’ accounts as uncollectible. Rather, it is measuring accounts receivable 
at the amount it expects to collect. It does not yet know which accounts it will need to write off 
because they have not yet proved to be uncollectible.
The Allowance for Uncollectibles is a contra-asset account, introduced in Chapter 2, which 
appears as a subtraction among the assets on a firm’s balance sheet. A contra-asset account 
typically has a credit balance, which, netted against the debit balance in the asset account, 
reduces asset totals. A credit to the Allowance for Uncollectibles contra account increases the 
amount subtracted from Accounts Receivable, Gross, reducing the debit balance in Accounts 
Receivable, Net.10
Accounts Receivable, Gross, is a control account. A control account (sometimes called a 
controlling account) aggregates a group of like accounts.11 The firm keeps a separate account 
for each customer, including that customer’s name. The sum of the balances in the individual 
customers’ accounts is the balance in the control account, Accounts Receivable, Gross. When 
the firm receives cash from a customer, it debits Cash and credits the account receivable of that 
specific customer. The sum of the balances in the individual customers’ accounts is the bal-
ance in the control account, Accounts Receivable, Gross. If Turf Maintenance’s customers paid 
$1,900,000 in cash during 2013, it would make the following journal entry with the following 
aggregated amounts:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,900,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross—specific accounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,900,000 
To recognize cash payments by customers in 2013 on credit sales made in 
2013.
After this entry, Accounts Receivable, Gross, reflects the sum of the individual amounts 
owed by customers who have not yet paid, a total of $100,000 (= $2,000,000 − $1,900,000). 
Accounts Receivable, Net, is $60,000 (= $100,000 balance in Accounts Receivable, Gross − 
$40,000 balance in Allowance for Uncollectibles).
 8 Practice differs as to whether the debit in the journal entry is to an expense account (Bad Debt Expense) or to 
a revenue contra account. We use an expense account in this textbook. Recording the debit as a revenue contra 
account results in measuring net sales at the amount of cash the firm expects to collect.
 9 Provision in this context refers to an expense in U.S. GAAP, not a liability. Provision in IFRS refers to a liability 
whose timing or amount, or both, are uncertain.
10 Conventional terminology often drops the word Gross from this account title. Accounts Receivable, Net, mea-
sures the amount the firm expects to collect.
11 Another example of a control account is Property, Plant, and Equipment. Most firms keep separate accounts 
for each group of machines or for each machine and for each building.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Turf Maintenance does not know, at the time it provides services and sends invoices, which 
customers will not pay. If it did, it would not sell to those customers on credit. To account for 
the estimated expense associated with its portfolio of individual accounts receivable, the firm 
creates a separate account, Allowance for Uncollectibles, that is contra to Accounts Receivable, 
Gross. The gross amount less the allowance yields Accounts Receivable, Net, which reflects the 
amount of cash the firm expects to collect.12
When a firm determines that a particular customer account is uncollectible, it removes that 
specific account, by debiting the Allowance for Uncollectibles and crediting Accounts Receiv-
able, Gross.13 This process is called writing off the customer’s account. Turf Maintenance deems 
uncollectible any customer account not paid after six months. Every accounting period, Turf 
Maintenance ascertains which accounts have remained uncollected for six months, and treats 
these customer accounts as uncollectible by writing them off. If, during 2013, Turf Mainte-
nance identified accounts of specific customers totaling $15,000 with unpaid balances for six 
months and wrote them off, the journal entry would be as follows:
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Accounts Receivable—specific accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
To write off customers’ accounts totaling $15,000 during 2013.
The write-off of specific customers’ accounts using the allowance method has no effect 
on the income statement. The income effect occurs when the firm records Bad Debt Expense. 
The write-off of specific customers’ accounts also has no effect on Accounts Receivable, Net, 
because the write-off amount decreases Accounts Receivable, Gross, and its contra account, the 
Allowance for Uncollectibles, by exactly the same amount. To see this, note that after the write-
off of uncollectible customers’ accounts, the balance in Accounts Receivable, Gross, declined 
by $15,000, as did the balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles.
The allowance method results in reporting Accounts Receivable, Net, on the balance sheet 
at the amount the firm expects to collect in cash. At the end of 2013, Turf Maintenance expects 
to collect $60,000, measured as follows:
Accounts Receivable, Gross ($2,000,000 – $1,900,000 – $15,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 85,000
Less Allowance for Uncollectibles ($40,000 – $15,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (25,000)
Accounts Receivable, Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 60,000
PROCEDURAL NOTE ON THE ALLOWANCE METHOD
Firms typically write off specific customers’ accounts during the reporting period as they iden-
tify specific customers whose accounts have become uncollectible. Firms typically recognize 
bad debt expense as an adjusting entry at the end of the period. As a result, before it makes this 
adjusting entry, the firm may have a debit balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles. After 
the adjusting entry to recognize bad debt expense, this account always has a credit balance. 
Because adjusting entries precede balance sheet preparation, a debit balance in the Allowance 
for Uncollectibles never appears on the balance sheet.
Exhibit 8.1 summarizes the accounting procedures associated with credit sales. The arrows 
illustrate the four required journal entries:
1. Blue arrow shows the sale of goods and services on credit (a debit to Accounts Receivable, 
Gross, and a credit to Sales Revenue).
2. Red arrow shows cash received from customers (a debit to Cash and a credit to Accounts 
Receivable, Gross).
12 U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms disclose sufficient information to allow the reader of financial state-
ments to calculate Accounts Receivable, Gross, Allowance for Uncollectibles, and Accounts Receivable, Net.
13 Some taxing authorities do not permit firms to use the allowance method to calculate the tax deduction for 
bad debts, but instead require that firms recognize bad debt expense only when they conclude an account is not 
collectible. This approach is often called the direct write-off method. It is not permitted by U.S. GAAP or IFRS.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

285
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
3. Green arrow shows the charge for the estimated amount of uncollectibles (a debit to Bad 
Debt Expense and a credit to Allowance for Uncollectibles).
4. Orange arrow shows the write-off of a particular customer account the firm has classi-
fied as uncollectible (a debit to the Allowance for Uncollectibles and a credit to Accounts 
Receivable, Gross).
ESTIMATING THE AMOUNT OF UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS
In Example 6 we assumed that 2% of credit sales would prove to be uncollectible. We now 
illustrate two approaches management might use to make this estimate: the percentage-of-
sales procedure and the aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure. Over time, the two methods, 
correctly used, will give the same cumulative income and asset totals. U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
do not require firms to use one or the other, and some firms use both methods. For example, 
Exhibit 8.2 reproduces a retailing firm’s accounting policy for uncollectible accounts. This firm 
estimates uncollectibles using several factors including historical data based on aging of the 
accounts, past experience with write-offs, and forecasts of future credit losses, and uses a 151-
day cutoff for declaring accounts delinquent, or an earlier date if circumstances, such as a cus-
tomer bankruptcy, warrant.
PERCENTAGE-OF-SALES PROCEDURE
The percentage-of-sales procedure arises from the idea that uncollectible amounts will vary with 
the volume of credit sales. The firm estimates the appropriate percentage by studying its own 
Summary of Accounts Affected by Credit Sales
EXHIBIT 8.1
Accounts Receivable, Gross
 Beg. Balance 
 New credit sales 
 Cash received
  
 
 from customers
 
  
 
Write-Offs
 End. Balance 
Allowance for Uncollectibles
  
 
Beg. Balance
  
 
New charges
 Write-Offs 
  
 
End. Balance
Cash
 Beg. Balance 
 Cash received 
 from customers 
  
 
 End. Balance 
Bad Debt Expense
 
 
 New charges 
 
Revenues
 
   
 
New credit sales
 
 
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Accounting Policy Description of the Allowance 
for Doubtful Accounts
Our allowance for doubtful accounts represents our best estimate of the losses inherent in our accounts 
receivable as of the balance sheet date. We evaluate the collectibility of our accounts receivable based on 
several factors, including historical trends of aging of accounts, write-off experience and expectations of 
future performance. We recognize finance charges on delinquent accounts until the account is written off. 
Delinquent accounts are written off when they are determined to be uncollectible, usually after the passage of 
151 days without receiving a full scheduled monthly payment. Accounts are written off sooner in the event of 
customer bankruptcy or other circumstances that make further collection unlikely.
EXHIBIT 8.2
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
experience or by inquiring into the experience of similar firms. After the firm estimates the 
amount of uncollectible accounts associated with the credit sales of each period, it makes an 
adjusting entry to debit Bad Debt Expense and credit Allowance for Uncollectibles. Example 6
uses this approach.
AGING-OF-ACCOUNTS-RECEIVABLE PROCEDURE
The aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure involves two steps:
1. Estimating the amount that the firm does not expect to collect from existing accounts 
receivable, and
2. Adjusting the balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles so that the balance in this 
account, when subtracted from Accounts Receivable, Gross, reflects the amount of cash 
the firm expects to collect.
Estimating the amount owed by customers that the firm does not expect to collect relies on 
information about the ages of accounts receivable (the number of days they have been uncol-
lected). Exhibit 8.3 illustrates a possible classification of individual accounts receivable by age; 
a firm estimates these amounts from experience. To illustrate the aging method, assume that 
the 2013 year-end balance in Accounts Receivable, Gross, for Turf Maintenance is $85,000 
(= $2,000,000 from 2013 sales on account − $1,900,000 of cash collections − $15,000 of 
accounts written off as uncollectible during 2013). Exhibit 8.3 presents an aging of these 
accounts receivable and shows that the estimated uncollectible amount is $24,200.
The amount debited to bad debt expense and credited to the allowance is the amount 
required to adjust the balance to the amount of uncollectibles estimated by the aging analy-
sis. Before aging the accounts, the Allowance for Uncollectibles has a debit balance of $15,000 
from writing off specific customers’ accounts. Turf Maintenance would record the following 
adjusting entry at the end of 2013 to obtain a credit balance in the Allowance for Uncollect-
ibles of $24,200:
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,200
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
39,200
To adjust the balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles to $24,200 
(= –$15,000 + $39,200).
COMPARING PERCENTAGE-OF-SALES AND AGING PROCEDURES
Exhibit 8.4 summarizes the differences between the percentage-of-sales procedure and the 
aging-of-accounts procedure. The amount estimated by the firm appears in red, and the amount 
calculated (plugged) based on that estimate appears in blue. Under the percentage-of-sales pro-
cedure, the firm estimates and recognizes its bad debt expense; the offsetting credit increases the 
balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles. Under the aging procedure, the firm estimates the 
Illustration of Aging Accounts Receivable
Classification of Accounts
Amount
Estimated 
Uncollectible 
Percentage
Estimated 
Uncollectible 
Amounts
Not yet due  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$35,000
8.0%
$ 2,800
1–30 days past due . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18,000
20.0
3,600
31–60 days past due . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
40.0
6,000
61–180 days past due  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,000
60.0
7,800
More than 180 days past due  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  4,000
100.0
  4,000
$85,000
$24,200
EXHIBIT 8.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

287
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles account and makes a credit entry to bring 
the balance to this amount; the offsetting debit is to Bad Debt Expense. If the percentage used 
under the percentage-of-sales method reasonably reflects collection experience, the balance in 
the allowance account should be approximately the same at the end of each period under both 
procedures.
Applying the percentage-of-sales method, the firm estimates Bad Debt Expense, and uses 
this expense, the beginning balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles, and the amount of 
write-offs to calculate the ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles. Applying the 
aging-of-accounts method, the firm estimates the Allowance for Uncollectibles at the end of the 
year (the ending balance in this account), and uses this ending balance, the beginning balance 
and the amount of write-offs to calculate Bad Debt Expense for the period.
DEALING WITH CHANGES IN ESTIMATES OF UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS
Changes in economic conditions, in credit-granting policies, in collection efforts, and other fac-
tors cause differences between estimated and actual uncollectible amounts. These differences 
necessitate revising the estimates every accounting period to reflect up-to-date information. 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to reflect these changes in estimates prospectively. 
That is, firms make no retroactive adjustment to the income statements and balance sheets of 
previous periods to reflect differences between estimated and actual uncollectible accounts. 
Rather, the firm adjusts the balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles going forward.
The prospective application of changes in estimates is based on the view that estimates are 
an essential component of accrual accounting. If firms make conscientious estimates, adjust-
ments for differences between estimated outcomes and actual outcomes will be recurring and 
small, absent a sudden and substantial change in economic conditions. Retroactive adjustment 
of previously reported amounts because of differences between estimates and outcomes would 
lead to continual restatements of prior financial statements, likely confusing users of those 
financial statements and undermining their credibility.
Examples 7, 8, and 9 illustrate the accounting for uncollectible accounts. In these exam-
ples, we compute the ending balance of the Allowance for Uncollectibles using the aging-of-
accounts method. Next, we derive the Bad Debt Expense implied by the ending balance and 
compare this Bad Debt Expense to the amount derived from the percentage-of-sales method.
Example 7 At the start of 2013, Coral Designs’s Allowance for Uncollectibles balance is 
€120,000. During 2013, Coral Designs’s credit sales were €5,000,000; of this amount, it esti-
mates 2% will be uncollectible. During 2013, Coral Designs wrote off €60,000 of accounts 
receivable. At the end of 2013, Coral Designs estimates, based on an aging of accounts, that the 
ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles should be €130,000. A T-account represen-
tation of this information appears below:
Allowance for Uncollectibles
120,000
Beg. Bal.
Write-Offs
60,000
?
Bad Debt Expense
130,000
End. Bal.
Comparison of Methods for Estimating the Provision 
for Bad Debts
EXHIBIT 8.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Percentage-of-Sales Method 
Allowance for Uncollectibles
Aging-of-Accounts Method
Allowance for Uncollectibles
Beg. Balance
Beg. Balance
New provision
New provision
(estimated)
(plug)
Write-Offs
Write-Offs
End. Balance (plug)
End. Balance (estimated)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Under the aging-of-accounts method, Coral Designs solves for Bad Debt Expense: 
€120,000 – €60,000 + Bad Debt Expense = €130,000. The expense is €70,000:
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70,000
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
70,000
To record the amount of Bad Debt Expense that ensures the ending balance 
in the Allowance for Uncollectibles is €130,000.
Under the percentage-of-sales method, Bad Debt Expense would be €100,000 (= 2% × 
€5,000,000), and the ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles would be €160,000, or 
€30,000 more than the aging-of-accounts method suggests.
Example 8 Assume the same information as in Example 7 except that management estimates 
the ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles is €200,000. A T-account representation 
of this information appears below:
Allowance for Uncollectibles
120,000
Beg. Bal.
Write-Offs
60,000
?
Bad Debt Expense
200,000
End. Bal.
Under the aging-of-accounts method, Coral Designs solves for Bad Debt Expense: 
€120,000 – €60,000 + Bad Debt Expense = €200,000. The expense is €140,000:
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
140,000
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
140,000
To record the amount of Bad Debt Expense that ensures the ending balance 
in the Allowance for Uncollectibles is €200,000.
The Bad Debt Expense of €140,000 estimated under the aging-of-accounts method is 
€40,000 more than the amount the percentage-of-sales method would compute.
Example 9 Assume the same information as provided in Example 7 except that management 
estimates the ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles is €45,000. A T-account repre-
sentation of this information follows:
Allowance for Uncollectibles
120,000
Beg. Bal.
Write-Offs
60,000
?
Bad Debt Expense
45,000
End. Bal.
When we solve for the expense, we see that in order for the ending balance in the Allowance 
for Uncollectibles to be €45,000, Coral Designs must record a €15,000 debit to this account and 
an offsetting credit to Bad Debt Expense.
Allowance for Uncollectibles
120,000
Beg. Bal.
Write-Offs
60,000
Bad Debt Expense
?
45,000
End. Bal.
Coral Designs would record the following journal entry:
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
To record the credit to Bad Debt Expense that ensures the ending balance in 
the Allowance for Uncollectibles is €45,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

289
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
Example 9 illustrates a setting in which current information indicates that previous esti-
mates of uncollectible accounts were too large. Coral Designs will not recognize any bad debt 
expense for 2013 and, in addition, it will reverse €15,000 previously recognized as bad debt 
expense. Therefore, Coral Designs’s total expenses (of which bad debt expense is a component) 
are €15,000 less in 2013, and its net assets at year-end are €15,000 larger.
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS
The accounting for uncollectible accounts using the allowance method involves four steps:
(1) 
Sale of Goods on Credit
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Selling Price
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 Selling Price
(2) 
Collection of Cash from Customers
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Amount 
 
 
Collected
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Amount
 
 
 
 
Collected
(3) 
Estimate of Expected Uncollectible Accounts14
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estimated 
 
 
 
Uncollectible 
 
 
 
Amount
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Estimated 
 
 
 
 Uncollectible
 
 
 
 
Amount
(4) 
Write-Off of Uncollectible Amounts Using the Allowance Method15
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Actual 
 
 
 
Uncollectible 
 
 
 
Amount
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
Actual 
 
 
 
 Uncollectible 
 
 
 
 
Amount
ANALYZING ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
This section considers financial statement presentation of accounts receivable, common financial 
ratios involving accounts receivable, and transfers of accounts receivable in exchange for cash.
Financial Statement Presentation Accounts receivable appear on the balance sheet at 
the amount the firm expects to collect. This net amount is the gross amount of receivables less 
the amount in the Allowance for Uncollectibles. Exhibit 1.1  shows Great Deal, Inc.’s balance 
sheets for the years ending February 27, 2013 (fiscal 2012) and February 28, 2012 (fiscal 2011), 
with ending balances in Receivables of $2,020 million and $1,868 million, respectively.
Exhibit 8.5 shows changes to Great Deal’s Allowance for Doubtful Accounts (an alternative 
name for the Allowance for Uncollectibles) during fiscal years 2012 and 2011.
Using the information in Great Deal’s balance sheet (Exhibit 1.1) and in Exhibit 8.5, we can 
calculate the ending balance in Accounts Receivable, Gross, as of February 27, 2013, and Feb-
ruary 28, 2012:
14 The percentage-of-sales method estimates Bad Debt Expense directly and the aging-of-accounts method esti-
mates the ending balance in the Allowance for Uncollectibles directly. Firms revise their estimates every report-
ing period and apply the new estimates prospectively.
15 A firm writes off a specific customer’s account when it determines that the account is uncollectible.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
February 27, 2013, Accounts Receivable, Gross = Accounts Receivable, Net
 
+ Allowance for Uncollectibles
= $2,020 million + $101 million
= $2,121 million
February 28, 2012, Accounts Receivable, Gross = Accounts Receivable, Net
 
+ Allowance for Uncollectibles
= $1,868 million + $97 million
= $1,965 million
We can derive the adjusting entry Great Deal made in the year ended February 27, 2013, 
to record bad debt expense. Exhibit 8.5 shows an addition to the Allowance for Doubtful 
Accounts of $48 million; this amount is bad debt expense. The adjusting entry would be as 
follows:
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
48
 
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
48
Great Deal uses the account title Allowance for Doubtful Accounts instead of 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts.
Exhibit 8.5 shows deductions to the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts of $44 million dur-
ing fiscal 2012, reflecting write-offs of specific customer accounts:
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
44
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
44
We can also analyze Great Deal’s cash collections from all of its customers, both cash sales 
and credit sales where the customer has paid. From Exhibit 1.2 Great Deal’s revenues for fis-
cal 2012 are $49,694 million. For simplicity, we assume that all sales are credit sales. The cash 
collected from credit customers reduces Accounts Receivable, Gross. We calculate this amount 
using a T-account showing beginning and ending balances in Accounts Receivable, Gross, and 
other transactions that affected this account:
Great Deal, Inc., Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
(amounts in millions of US$)
Column A
Column B
Column C
Column D
Column E
Additions
Description
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
Charged to 
Costs and 
Expenses
Deductions
Balance 
at End of 
Period
Allowance for doubtful accounts:
Year ended:
 February 27, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 97
$48
$(44)a
$101
 February 28, 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . 
$114
$   (5)
$(12)a
$ 97
aDeductions consist of write-offs of uncollectible accounts, net of recoveries.
EXHIBIT 8.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

291
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
Accounts Receivable, Gross
Beg. Bal.
1,965
New Credit Sales
49,694
44
Write-Off
49,494
Cash Collected
from Credit 
Customers
End. Bal.
2,121
By assumption credit sales are $49,694 million; we previously analyzed write-offs of $44 
million. We solve for the Cash Collected from Credit Customers as follows:
Ending Balance = Beginning Balance + New Credit Sales
  − Write-Offs − Cash Collected from Credit Customers
$2,121 = $1,965 + $49,694 − $44 − Cash Collected from Credit Customers
Cash Collected from Credit Customers in the year ended February 27, 2013, was $49,494 
million. You can also see that assumptions about the portion of total sales made on credit 
are not crucial to this analysis of how much cash Great Deal collected from its customers. 
The entries in the T-account illustrate that for every dollar of assumed cash sales, new credit 
sales assumed declines by one dollar and the amount of Cash Collected from Customers also 
declines by one dollar.
Financial Ratios Involving Accounts Receivable The financial statements con-
tain information for analyzing the collectibility of accounts receivable and the adequacy of 
the expense for uncollectible accounts. Typical ratios used for this analysis include the accounts 
receivable turnover ratio and days receivables outstanding, both described in Chapter 7. Next, 
we describe the write-off percentage, which analyzes uncollectible accounts specifically. Using 
information in Exhibit 1.1 and Exhibit 8.5, we can calculate the amount written off in fiscal 
2012 compared to the average amount owed by customers (average gross accounts receivable):
Year Ended
Accounts Written 
Off as Uncollectible
Accounts 
Receivable Net
Allowance for 
Doubtful Accounts
Accounts 
Receivable Gross
Write-Offs/Average 
Gross Accounts 
Receivable
February 27, 2013. . . . .
$44
$2,020
$101
$2,121
1.08%
February 28, 2012. . . . .
$12
$1,868
$ 97
$1,965
In fiscal 2012, Great Deal’s write-offs of uncollectible accounts receivable were 1.08% of 
gross accounts receivable.
Two ratios used to evaluate the allowance for uncollectibles are the ratio of Bad Debt 
Expense to Sales Revenue and the ratio of the Allowance for Uncollectibles to Accounts 
Receivable, Gross. Exhibit 1.2 shows that Great Deal’s sales revenues are $49,694 million and 
$45,015 million for the years ending February 27, 2013 and February 28, 2012, respectively. 
Combining this information with information in Exhibit 8.5 we can calculate these ratios as 
follows:
Year Ended
Bad Debt Expense 
(Credit) 
(1)
Sales 
(2)
Bad Debt Expense 
(Credit) as a % 
of Sales 
(1)/(2) = (3)
Balance in 
Allowance 
Account (4)
Accounts 
Receivable, 
Gross (5)
Allowance Account 
as a % of Accounts 
Receivable 
(4)/(5) = (6)
February 27, 2013. . . . .
$48
$49,694
0.097%
$101
$2,121
4.76%
February 28, 2012. . . . .
$ (5)
$45,015
(0.011%)
$ 97
$1,965
4.94%
The ratio of bad debt expense to sales was 0.097% in fiscal 2012. Because Great Deal cred-
ited bad debt expense in fiscal 2011, this ratio was (0.011%) in 2011. The allowance account as 
a percentage of gross accounts receivable declined between fiscal 2011 and fiscal 2012, from 
4.94% to 4.76%.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Transfers of Accounts Receivable in Exchange for Cash A firm converts accounts 
receivable into cash by collecting cash from its customers or by transferring to others the receiv-
ables (the right to collect cash from customers) in exchange for cash. A firm that transfers its 
receivables in exchange for cash may show smaller (or no) accounts receivable, depending on 
the form of the transfer and the related accounting treatment. At least three forms of transfer 
are possible.
1. A firm may use its accounts receivable as collateral for a loan from a bank or other finan-
cial institution. The firm physically maintains control of the accounts receivable, collects 
cash from customers, and repays the loan. If the firm fails to repay the loan, the lender can 
claim the receivables. If the firm has used its accounts receivable as collateral for a loan, 
the firm will continue to show those receivables as an asset, and there will also be a loan 
payable liability. The firm should disclose the lending arrangement in its financial reports.
2. A firm may factor (sell) its accounts receivable to a bank or other financial institution in 
exchange for cash. In this case, the lender physically controls the receivables and collects 
cash from customers. Accounts receivable that the firm has factored do not appear on its 
balance sheet because the firm has sold them.
3. A firm may transfer the accounts receivable to a legally separate entity that issues debt 
securities to investors; the firm remits to investors the cash received from customers as 
those cash receipts occur. The firm may be obligated to pay the investors if the customers 
fail to make sufficient cash payments to pay the principal and interest on the debt secu-
rities. This arrangement is a securitization, a process that transforms an asset (accounts 
receivable) into debt securities held by investors.
While a detailed discussion of transfers of accounts receivable in exchange for cash is beyond 
the scope of this introductory book, we raise the issue here because of its importance in com-
paring accounts receivable across firms. In particular, if one firm transfers its receivables and a 
comparison firm does not, the accounts receivable balances and related ratios of the two firms 
will not be comparable, despite similarities between the two firms in product markets. Chapter 
12 discusses transfers of receivables in more detail.
 PROBLEM  8.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Revenue recognition at time of sale. Prepare journal entries for each of the following 
hypothetical transactions and events during the year ending December 31, 2013. Scania is 
a large Swedish manufacturer of heavy trucks and buses, engines, and related equipment 
and services.
a. February: Scania sells four truck engines for SEK20,000 per engine. The customer 
agrees to pay Scania within 60 days.
b. March: Scania signs a contract with a customer for 50 transport containers, with a 
total selling price of SEK250,000. Scania expects to deliver the containers in June. 
The customer agrees to pay on delivery.
c. April: The customer pays in full for the four truck engines in part a.
d. May: Scania sells a truck to a customer for SEK725,000, which it delivers immedi-
ately. The customer pays Scania 20% of the price upon delivery and agrees to pay the 
remainder in 120 days.
e. June: Scania delivers the containers (from part b), and the customer pays as promised.
f. July: The customer in part d enters bankruptcy proceedings. Scania does not expect to 
collect any portion of the remaining receivable from this customer.
g. December: Scania estimates that 2% of its credit sales of SEK70 billion during the 
year will be uncollectible.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

293
Income Recognition at the Time of Sale
SALES RETURNS: AN APPLICATION OF THE ALLOWANCE METHOD
We introduced the allowance method in the context of uncollectible accounts receivable. More 
generally, accountants use the allowance method when, at the time of sale, they can estimate 
with reasonable reliability the effects of events that will affect future cash flows, such as sales 
returns. A sales return occurs when a customer returns a product for a refund. When a cus-
tomer has the right to return a product for a refund, and the firm can reasonably estimate 
the amount of returns at the time of sale, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that the firm use the 
allowance method to estimate and recognize the effects of returns.16 Specifically, the selling firm 
debits a revenue contra account for expected returns to reduce current period revenues to the 
estimated amount that will not be refunded to customers who return sold items. By reducing 
current period revenues, the firm measures revenues based on the amount of cash it expects to 
collect from current period sales, including the effects of estimated returns. Both U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS forbid revenue recognition when customers have the right to return goods unless the 
firm can reasonably estimate the amount of returns and it uses an allowance method to incor-
porate those estimates into income computations. Exhibit 8.6 shows a schedule for Great Deal, 
Inc., that is similar to Exhibit 8.5, except that it shows the activity in the Allowance for Sales 
Returns account.
At the start of fiscal 2012, the balance in Great Deal’s Allowance for Sales Returns was $18 
million. This amount increased during the year by $14 million. The journal entry to record this 
increase is
Sales Returns. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14
 
Allowance for Sales Returns. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14
The Sales Returns account is a revenue contra account, accumulating subtractions from 
gross revenue. The debit to Sales Returns reduces Sales Revenue, Net, and therefore reduces 
income.17 The Allowance for Sales Returns account is also a contra account; it accumulates 
subtractions from Accounts Receivable, Gross. The balance in the Allowance for Sales Returns 
16 Not all sales with a right of return qualify for revenue recognition. U.S. GAAP provides explicit criteria for a 
sale with a right of return to qualify for revenue recognition (FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Stan-
dards No. 48, “Revenue Recognition When Right of Return Exists,” 1981) (Codification Topic 605). IFRS does 
not provide explicit criteria. Determining whether a sale with a right of return qualifies for revenue recognition 
is beyond the scope of this book.
17 The debit to Sales Returns increases the amount in that account, a contra to revenue. Subtracting the balance 
in Sales Returns from Sales Revenues reduces total revenues and net income.
Great Deal, Inc., Allowance for Sales Returns
(amounts in millions of US$)
Column A
Column B
Column C
Column D
Column E
Additions
Description
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
Charged to 
Costs and 
Expenses
Deductions
Balance 
at End of 
Period
Allowance for sales return, net:
Year ended:
 February 3, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$18
$14
$15a
$17
 January 28, 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16
$11
$ 9a
$18
 a Deductions consist of actual returns offset by the value of the merchandise returned and the sales commission 
reversed.
EXHIBIT 8.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

294
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
is the firm’s estimate of the receivables that it will cancel or the cash that it will pay to satisfy 
customers who return their merchandise. Exhibit 8.6 shows that Great Deal’s customer returns 
(including the effects of sales commissions) were $15 in fiscal 2012. Thus, the ending balance in 
the Allowance for Sales Returns is $17 (= $18 + $14 − $15).
Sellers also use the allowance method to account for product warranties. A warranty 
promises the customer the right to repair or replacement if the purchased product is defective. 
The firm must be able to reasonably estimate expected warranty costs at the time of sale. If it 
cannot, it must delay revenue recognition until it can estimate the costs or learns their actual 
amount. We discuss the accounting for warranties in Chapter 9. More generally, variants of the 
allowance method appear in arrangements in which the selling firm recognizes revenue before it 
has resolved all uncertainty about future cash flows related to the sale.
INCOME RECOGNITION AFTER THE SALE
Some businesses provide substantial services after the time of sale. Other businesses face con-
siderable uncertainty about cash collections. Both conditions introduce uncertainty that might 
preclude revenue recognition at the time of sale. The conditions relate to the two criteria for 
revenue recognition, repeated here:
Criterion 1.  The seller must have substantially performed its obligations to the customer.
Criterion 2.  The seller must have obtained an asset from the customer that it can reliably mea-
sure. If the asset is not cash, the seller must be reasonably certain of converting 
the asset into cash.
SUBSTANTIAL PERFORMANCE REMAINS
In Examples 1–4 the seller receives cash from customers before it completes all, or substantially 
all, of its performance obligations. Example 1 is Costco’s receipt of $50 for an annual member-
ship; Example 2 is Pol Roget’s receipt of half the €15 million contract price for champagne; 
Example 3 is Apple’s receipt of $2,500 before it supplies future non-software services and soft-
ware upgrades; and Example 4 is Bombardier’s receipt of €250 million before it supplies 25 
high-speed trains. Although the seller has received cash (criterion 2), it has not earned all of 
the revenues represented by the cash by providing goods and services (criterion 1). Instead, the 
seller has incurred an obligation to provide goods or services. The generic term for these liabili-
ties is deferred performance obligations, and a common account title is Advances from Custom-
ers. Other common names for this account include Deferred Revenues and Unearned Revenues.18 
Unlike other liabilities, such as accounts payable, which the firm typically settles by paying 
cash, the firm settles these performance obligations by delivering the promised goods or ser-
vices. The firm recognizes revenue when it settles its obligation to the customer by performing 
as promised.
To illustrate the firm’s accounting for cash received from customers before it has earned 
revenue by delivering goods or services, consider the sale of the $50.00 annual membership. 
If Costco sold one membership one month before its reporting year’s end, it would record the 
receipt of cash from the customer and the related performance obligation (to stand ready to 
provide access to shopping) as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50.00
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50.00
Costco earns revenue by performing its obligations under the membership arrangement. 
This obligation entails allowing the membership-bearing customer to shop at any Costco store 
18 There is no standard terminology for this account, and some firms use names that are specific to their indus-
tries. For example, airlines commonly use the account title Air Traffic Liability. The account title Deferred 
Revenues sometimes confuses students who interpret it as an income statement account. We try to avoid using 
the word revenues in balance sheet account titles.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

295
Income Recognition After the Sale
over the next 12 months. Costco recognizes as revenue $4.17, or 1/12th of the $50.00 fee, each 
month as it performs this obligation:
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.17
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4.17
After this journal entry, the Advances from Customers account has a balance of $45.83 at 
the reporting period’s year-end.
Apple’s sale of a Mac computer follows similar procedures, with two complicating factors. 
First, the $2,500 sales price includes three elements: (1) computer; (2) non-software services; 
and (3) software upgrades. Apple has earned the revenue from the computer when the customer 
takes delivery. It will earn the other revenue over the product’s life. Apple will allocate the total 
sales revenue to the three elements of the sales arrangement, according to the relative selling 
prices of the elements. In this context selling price refers to the price for which the firm (or 
another firm selling a similar product or service) separately sells a deliverable component; in 
some case, the firm must estimate the selling price. The allocated revenue for a component is 
total revenue times the ratio of the separate selling price of that component to the sum of the 
separate selling prices of all of the components. For example, assume the following separate 
selling prices for the three components of this arrangement: computer $2,200; non- software 
services $300; software upgrades $200. The sum of these separate selling prices is $2,700. 
Therefore, Apple allocates the $2,500 total revenue as follows (amounts are rounded to the 
nearest dollar):
■ 
$2,037 (= $2,500 × [$2,200/$2,700]) to the computer,
■ 
$  278 (= $2,500 × [$300/$2,700]) to non-software services, and
■ 
$  185 (= $2,500 × [$200/$2,700]) to software upgrades
■ 
$2,500 (= $2,037 + $278 + $185) total.
The second issue concerns the timing of revenue recognition for the separate components of 
the contract. Apple has performed its obligation to deliver a computer at the time of sale. 
Therefore, it will recognize $2,037 of revenue when the customer takes delivery.19 The non-
software services and the software upgrades are, at the time of sale, undelivered elements. 
Apple’s footnote disclosures in its financial reports state that it recognizes revenue on undeliv-
ered elements on a straight-line basis over the device’s estimated service life, ranging from 24 
to 48 months. We will assume a service life of 48 months in this example. The following jour-
nal entries summarize Apple’s accounting for the sale of one Mac computer. For simplicity, we 
assume the sale occurs on the first day of Apple’s fiscal year.
At the Time of Sale
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,037
 
Advances from Customers20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
463
To record the sale of one Mac and related non-software services and 
software upgrades for $2,500.
At the End of One Year
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
115.75
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
115.75
At the end of the year, to recognize revenues associated with non-software 
services and software upgrades of $115.75 (= $463/48 months × 12 
months).
19 Apple will also record cost of goods sold, not considered in this example.
20 Apple uses the account title “Deferred Revenue.”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
 PROBLEM  8.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Revenue recognition after sale when substantial performance remains. Prepare journal 
entries for each of the following hypothetical transactions and events affecting Scania 
during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013.
a. March: Scania signs a contract to deliver 50 transport containers for a total price of 
SEK250,000. The customer pays Scania the entire amount at the date both parties 
sign the contract. Scania expects to deliver the containers in June.
b. May: Scania sells a truck to a customer for SEK725,000, which it delivers immedi-
ately. The customer pays Scania 20% at delivery and agrees to pay the rest in 60 days. 
The contract price includes a two-day training session that Scania will design and 
deliver in June, as well as customer support for three years following delivery of the 
truck. Separate selling prices are truck, SEK690,000; training session, SEK40,000; 
customer support, SEK50,000.
c. June: Scania delivers the containers (part a) and the training session (part b).
d. September: Scania and a customer promise to sign a contract in January 2014 for the 
delivery of 10 buses in exchange for SEK7 million. The customer agrees to pay Sca-
nia, in October, a deposit of SEK200,000.
e. October: The customer in part d pays SEK200,000 to Scania.
f. December: Scania recognizes eight months (May through December) of customer 
support provided in connection with the sale of the truck in part b.
SUBSTANTIAL UNCERTAINTY ABOUT CASH COLLECTIONS REMAINS
In some sales transactions the seller cannot reliably estimate the timing and amounts of cash 
that it will collect. An example is a franchise arrangement (Example 5) that obligates the fran-
chisee to make substantial cash payments over an extended time period in exchange for goods 
and services that the seller typically provides long before it collects cash. The failure rate among 
franchises (and other small businesses) is high, and therefore the seller cannot reliably estimate 
the portion of the initial franchise fee that it will ultimately collect.
When substantial uncertainty exists at the time of sale regarding the amount or timing of 
cash collections, both U.S. GAAP and IFRS link revenue recognition to the receipt of cash. 
Two common accounting methods with this characteristic are the installment method and the 
cost recovery method.21 We describe these methods and the guidance that determines when a 
seller uses them.
Installment Method The installment method recognizes revenue as the seller collects cash 
from the customer. The seller applies the gross margin percentage on the transaction to calcu-
late the portion of the total gross margin recognized in each accounting period. The gross mar-
gin equals sales revenue minus cost of goods sold. The gross margin percentage equals gross 
margin divided by sales revenue.
To illustrate, assume a customer agrees to pay £20,000 over the next three years in three 
installments of £7,500, £8,750, and £3,750.22 The retailer’s cost of the item purchased is 
£14,000. Thus, the gross margin is £6,000 (= £20,000 − £14,000). The gross margin percentage 
is 30% (= £6,000/£20,000) of the total revenue. Immediately after the sale, the customer has 
physical possession of the inventory, and the seller has a receivable with substantial uncertainty 
of collection. At the time of sale, the seller recognizes an account receivable, credits inventory, 
and defers the gross margin on the sale until it collects cash.23 In the example given, the journal 
entry at the time of sale is:
21 U.S. GAAP describes these methods in paragraph 12 and related note 8 of Accounting Principles Board, Opin-
ion No. 10, “Omnibus Opinion—1966,” 1966 (Codification Topic 605). IFRS does not use these terms.
22 This example (and others in this chapter) ignores interest on the customer’s delayed payments.
23 Deferred gross margin (or deferred gross profit) is not a liability because the seller has performed its obligation 
to the customer. Conceptually, deferred gross margin is a contra-asset account (FASB, Statement of Financial 
Accounting Concepts No. 6, “Elements of Financial Statements,” 1985, par. 232–234); however, many firms 
display it among the current liabilities or between liabilities and shareholders’ equity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

297
Income Recognition After the Sale
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14,000
 
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To credit the balance sheet Inventory account for inventory that the firm 
has sold, to recognize accounts receivable and to recognize the deferred 
gross margin.24
The seller recognizes cash received as revenue. The gross margin percentage (30% in this 
example) times the cash received equals the gross margin recognized. Cost of goods sold is 
a plug figure (the amount required to make the journal entry balance). The journal entry to 
record the customer’s first £7,500 installment payment, recognize revenue, and recognize cost of 
goods sold expense is
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,250
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,250
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,500
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,500
To record the first installment collection of £7,500, recognize revenue equal 
to cash received, reduce the Deferred Gross Margin account in an amount 
equal to the gross margin on the cash collected of £2,250 (= 0.30 × 
£7,500), and recognize cost of goods sold (a plug figure). The contribution 
to income is £2,250 (= £7,500 revenue − £5,250 cost of goods sold).
The journal entry to record the second installment payment of £8,750 is
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,750
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,625
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,125
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,750
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,750
To record the second installment collection of £8,750, recognize revenue 
equal to cash received, recognize gross margin of £2,625 (= 0.30 × 
£8,750), and recognize cost of goods sold (a plug figure). The contribution 
to income is £2,625 (= £8,750 revenue − £6,125 cost of goods sold).
The journal entry for the third installment payment of £3,750 is
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,750
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,125
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,625
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,750
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,750
To record the third installment collection of £3,750, recognize revenue equal 
to cash received, recognize gross margin of £1,125 (= 0.30 × £3,750), and 
recognize cost of goods sold (a plug figure). The contribution to income is 
£1,125 (= £3,750 revenue − £2,625 cost of goods sold).
After the customer makes the third installment payment, the balance in Accounts Receiv-
able, Gross, on the seller’s balance sheet is zero, the seller’s cumulative revenue is £20,000 (= 
£7,500 + £8,750 + £3,750), and cumulative cost of goods sold is £14,000 (= £5,250 + £6,125 
+ £2,625). The cumulative gross margin is £6,000 (= £20,000 − £14,000 = £2,250 + £2,625 + 
£1,125).
24 We include the deferred gross margin as a reduction of assets following Concepts Statement 6.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
If the customer fails to make all the promised payments, the seller can repossess the sold 
item and include that item in its inventory at its net realizable value. The seller would also write 
off the remaining balances in the Accounts Receivable, Gross account, and in the Deferred 
Gross Margin account, recognizing a gain or loss on repossession. In this example, if the cus-
tomer failed to make the third installment payment and the seller repossessed inventory with 
net realizable value of £2,600, the seller would make the following journal entry:
 
Inventory—Repossessed Items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,600
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,125
Loss on Repossession (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,750
To write off an uncollectible installment account receivable (£3,750) and 
the related gross margin (£1,125), recognize repossessed inventory at its 
net realizable value (£2,600), and recognize a loss (£25).
Cost Recovery Method The cost recovery method matches the costs of generating revenue 
with cash receipts until the seller recovers all its costs. That is, the seller sets expenses equal 
to revenue in each period until it recovers all its costs, and does not recognize gross margin in 
income until it has recovered all of the costs of the sale. After cumulative cash receipts equal 
total costs, the seller reports revenue without any matching expenses in its income statement. 
The seller makes the same journal entry at the time of sale under the cost recovery method as 
under the installment method. The difference between the two methods arises later when the 
customer makes installment payments. Instead of applying the gross margin percentage to each 
cash collection from the customer, the seller sets cost of goods sold equal to revenue until it 
recovers the entire cost. We illustrate these differences using journal entries, assuming the same 
transaction terms as in the preceding example. We do not repeat the journal entry at the time of 
sale, which is the same for the cost recovery method as for the installment method.
The seller’s journal entry to record the first cash collection of £7,500 is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,500
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,500
To record the first collection of £7,500, recognize revenue equal to cash 
received, and recognize cost of goods sold equal to revenue. The seller has 
recovered £7,500 of its total costs of £14,000. The contribution to income 
is £0 (= £7,500 revenue − £7,500 cost of goods sold).
The seller’s journal entry to record the second cash collection of £8,750 is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,750
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,250
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,500
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,750
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,750
To record the second collection of £8,750, recognize revenue equal to 
cash received, and recognize cost of goods sold = £6,500. This amount, 
combined with the previously recognized £7,500 expense, indicates that 
the seller has recovered its costs of £14,000. The contribution to income is 
£2,250 (= £8,750 revenue − £6,500 cost of goods sold).
The seller’s journal entry to record the third cash collection of £3,750 is as follows:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

299
Income Recognition Before Delivery
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,750
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,750
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,750
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,750
To record the third collection of £3,750 and recognize revenue equal to cash 
received. The seller has recovered its costs of £14,000, so it recognizes the 
entire amount of cash received as income. The contribution to income is 
£3,750 (= £3,750 revenue − £0 cost of goods sold).
If the customer fails to make all the promised payments, the seller can repossess the sold item. 
The accounting for repossession parallels that previously illustrated for the installment method.
Installment Method Compared to Cost Recovery Method The installment 
method reports income sooner than does the cost recovery method. This pattern holds indepen-
dent of whether the customer makes all the promised payments. The differences arise from the 
differing logic supporting the two methods. The logic of the installment method assumes that 
the seller will receive all the promised cash.25 The logic of the cost recovery method assumes 
that cash collection is highly uncertain. As a result, the cost recovery method defers the recog-
nition of any income until the seller has recovered all costs.
U.S. GAAP permits firms to use the installment method or the cost recovery method only 
when receivables are both collectible over an extended period and the seller has no reasonable 
basis for estimating the amount of cash that it will collect.26 IFRS does not contain this level of 
detail; however, its general guidance implies a qualitatively similar criterion.
 PROBLEM  8.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Income recognition when collectibility is uncertain. On January 1, 2013, suppose that 
Scania agrees to sell two trucks for SEK1,080,000, which cost Scania SEK980,000, 
to Project Hope, a not-for-profit organization, that plans to open a transportation 
business. Project Hope has received partial funding for this venture, and its business 
plan, including forecasted cash flows, indicates significant uncertainty about its financial 
viability. Scania agrees to deliver the trucks in January and to permit Project Hope to 
pay in equal installments over 12 months, with the first payment due on June 30, 2013. 
Assume that Project Hope makes the first three payments and fails to make any other 
payments; also assume that Scania repossesses the two trucks in December 2013 when 
their net realizable value is SEK690,000. Prepare journal entries for this transaction 
assuming the following:
a. Scania uses the installment method.
b. Scania uses the cost recovery method.
INCOME RECOGNITION BEFORE DELIVERY
A firm sometimes recognizes revenue and expenses before it delivers the promised items to the 
customer, over the accounting periods during which it performs under a long-term contract. An 
example is Bombardier’s sale of trains (Example 4). Long-term contracts (for example, produc-
ing or constructing airplanes, trains, ships, or buildings) often have three characteristics:
1. The period of construction (production) spans several accounting periods.
2. The seller identifies a customer, agrees on a contract price in advance, and has little doubt 
about the ability of the customer to make the agreed-on payments.
3. The buyer makes periodic payments of the contract price as work progresses. These are 
sometimes called progress payments.
25 Or that when collections from the customer cease, the seller can repossess the goods to cover the seller’s as-yet-
uncollected costs.
26 Note 8 to Accounting Principles Board, Opinion No. 10, “Omnibus Opinion—1966” (Codification Topic 605).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Long-term contracts with these characteristics may meet the criteria for recognizing revenue 
during the period of construction or production. These criteria include the following:
■ 
The existence of an arrangement that specifies a buyer, a product to be delivered, and an 
agreed-on price.
■ 
The seller reasonably expects the customer will pay the contract price in cash as construc-
tion progresses or when the seller completes the work.
■ 
The seller can reliably estimate the costs it will incur in providing these future services.
When the arrangement meets these criteria, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to recognize 
income using the percentage-of-completion method. When the arrangement does not meet the 
criteria, U.S. GAAP requires firms to recognize income using the completed contract method. 
IFRS does not permit the completed contract method and instead specifies a variant of the 
cost recovery method.27 We discuss the percentage-of-completion and completed contract meth-
ods next.
PERCENTAGE-OF-COMPLETION METHOD
The percentage-of-completion method recognizes a portion of the contract price as revenue dur-
ing each period of construction or production. The portion of revenue recognized is based 
on the proportion of total work performed during the period.28 One commonly used measure 
of the proportion of total work performed is the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total 
estimated contract costs.29 The firm typically accumulates these costs in an inventory account 
called Construction in Progress or Construction in Process. As the firm recognizes revenue for 
portions of the contract price, it also recognizes equal portions of the total estimated con-
tract cost as expenses by debiting Cost of Goods Sold and crediting Construction in Progress. 
The percentage-of-completion method follows the accrual basis of accounting and matches 
expenses with related revenue. The schedule of cash collections (that is, progress payments) 
from the customer does not affect revenue recognition. Even if the contract specifies that the 
customer will pay the entire contract price when the seller delivers the product, the seller may 
use the percentage-of-completion method so long as the seller can reliably estimate the amount 
of cash it will receive and the costs it expects to incur in completing the job.
To illustrate the percentage-of-completion method, we revisit Example 4, in which Bombar-
dier agrees to provide 25 trains over the next four years for a total contract price of €2 billion. 
The customer pays €250 million on signing the contract and will pay the remaining contract 
price in four equal installments of €437.5 million at the end of each year for four years. Bom-
bardier estimates the total cost to fulfill this contract is €1.6 billion, to be incurred as fol-
lows: first year, €400 million; second year, €600 million; third year, €400 million; and fourth 
year, €200 million. It expects a gross margin of €400 million (= €2.0 billion − €1.6 billion) 
on this contract. Bombardier measures the percentage-of-completion as the ratio of total costs 
incurred to total costs anticipated, so it will recognize revenue and expense from the contract as 
follows (currency numbers are in millions of euros):30
Year
Degree of Completion
Revenue
–
Expense
=
Profit
1
€400/€1,600 = 25.0%
€  500
€  400
€100
2
€600/€1,600 = 37.5%
   750
   600
 150
3
€400/€1,600 = 25.0%
   500
   400
 100
4
€200/€1,600 = 12.5%
   250
   200
  50
€2,000
–
€1,600
=
€400
27 U.S. GAAP guidance is Accounting Research Bulletin No. 45, “Long-Term Construction-Type Contracts,” 1955 
(Codification Topic 605). IFRS guidance is International Accounting Standard 11, “Construction Contracts,” 
1993.
28 In more complex situations, where cost estimates change as time passes, the amount of revenue per period 
depends on the cumulative work percentage done by the end of the period compared to the cumulative total at 
the end of the preceding period.
29 Another method, which we do not discuss or illustrate, is the engineering estimate method. In that method, 
experts estimate the fraction of the work done in any period by physical examination of the construction in 
progress.
30 In this example, Bombardier’s actual costs are identical to its expected costs each year and in total.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

301
Income Recognition Before Delivery
Bombardier’s journal entry when it receives the initial cash payment is as follows:
Beginning of First Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250.0
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250.0
To record the collection of €250 million at the time of contract signing.
At the end of the first year, Bombardier will recognize the receipt of the first installment 
and the appropriate portion (25%, year 1 degree of completion) of revenue and expenses under 
the percentage-of-completion method:
End of First Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
437.5
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
437.5
To record the first installment of the remaining contract price, €437.5 
million (= 25% × [€2,000 − €250]).
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500.0
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400.0
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500.0
 
Construction in Progress31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400.0
At the end of the first year, the balance in Advances from Customers is 
€187.5 million (= €250.0 million + €437.5 million − €500.0 million).
At the end of the second year, Bombardier will recognize the receipt of the second install-
ment payment and the appropriate portion (37.5%, year 2 degree of completion) of total rev-
enue and expenses under the percentage-of-completion method:
End of Second Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
437.5
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
437.5
To record the second installment of the remaining contract price, €437.5 
million (= 25% × [€2,000 – €250]).
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
125.0
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
625.0
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600.0
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
750.0
 
Construction in Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600.0
Before Bombardier recognizes revenue in the second year, the balance 
in Advances from Customers is €625 million (= Beginning balance of 
€187.5 + €437.5). Bombardier first reduces the balance in Advances from 
Customers to zero (by debiting it for €625 million) and then records the 
remaining recognized revenue of €125 million (= €750 – €625) as a debit 
to Accounts Receivable, Gross.32
At the end of the third year, Bombardier will recognize the receipt of the third installment 
payment and the appropriate portion (25.0%, year 3 degree of completion) of revenue and 
expenses under the percentage-of-completion method:
31 For simplicity, we do not show the journal entries that debit the inventory account Construction in Progress and 
credit various asset and liability accounts as Bombardier accumulates contract costs.
32Bombardier will also apply the allowance method for estimating uncollectible accounts receivable described 
earlier in this chapter.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
End of Third Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
437.5
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
125.0
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
312.5
To record the third installment of the remaining contract price, €437.5 
million (= 25% × [€2,000 – €250]). First Bombardier applies the cash 
collection to the amounts owed by the customer (Accounts Receivable, 
Gross) and then records any remainder as Advances from Customers.
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
187.5
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
312.5
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400.0
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500.0
 
Construction in Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400.0
Before Bombardier recognizes revenue in the third year, the balance in 
Advances from Customers is €312.5 million. In recording revenue for the 
third year, Bombardier first reduces the balance in Advances from Customers 
to zero (by debiting it for €312.5) and then records the remaining recognized 
revenue, €187.5 million (= €500 – €312.5), as Accounts Receivable, Gross.
At the end of the fourth year, Bombardier will recognize the receipt of the final installment 
payment and the appropriate portion (12.5%, year 4 degree of completion) of revenues and 
expenses under the percentage-of-completion method:
End of Fourth Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
437.5
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
187.5
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250.0
To record the final installment of the remaining contract price, €437.5 
million (= 25% × [€2,000 – €250]). The seller first applies the cash 
collection to the amounts owed by the customer (Accounts Receivable, 
Gross) and then records any remainder as Advances from Customers.
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250.0
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200.0
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250.0
 
Construction in Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200.0
COMPLETED CONTRACT METHOD
The completed contract method also applies to long-term construction contracts and similar 
contracts. This method postpones revenue recognition until the seller completes all construc-
tion or production and transfers the finished item to the customer. U.S. GAAP specifies the 
completed contract method when the outcome of the contract is in doubt because of a lack of 
reliable estimates—of either costs or cash to be collected. Continuing the preceding example, 
if Bombardier used the completed contract method, it would recognize no revenue or expense 
from the train contract during the first three years. In the fourth year, upon delivery of the 25 
trains, it would recognize revenue of €2.0 billion and cost of goods sold of €1.6 billion. Total 
gross profit is €400 million under both the percentage-of-completion and the completed con-
tract methods, but the latter defers all revenue recognition until Bombardier completes the 
project. Applying the completed contract method while it is producing the trains, Bombardier 
would recognize cash collections from the customer (progress payments) as debits to Cash and 
credits to Advances from Customers, and would accumulate contract costs in a Construction in 
Process account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

303
 
Summary
PERCENTAGE-OF-COMPLETION METHOD COMPARED 
TO COMPLETED CONTRACT METHOD
The percentage-of-completion method provides information about the seller’s performance dur-
ing the contract period and the completed contract method reports all profit only when seller 
completes the contract. The percentage-of-completion method reflects current performance on 
a more timely basis than the completed contract method. The shorter the contract length, the 
smaller are the accounting differences between the two approaches.
Because persuasive evidence of an arrangement is a condition for recognizing revenue, firms 
would use the completed contract method if there is no contract with a specific customer. An 
example is the construction of residential housing on speculation. These situations require 
future marketing effort. Also, substantial uncertainty may exist regarding the selling price and 
therefore the amount of cash the seller will collect. In addition, if there is sufficient uncertainty 
about the total contract costs, the seller may not use the percentage-of-completion method—
even when it has a contract with a specified price.
IFRS REQUIREMENTS FOR RECOGNIZING CONTRACT REVENUE 
WHEN THE SELLER CANNOT RELIABLY ESTIMATE THE OUTCOME
IFRS specifies the percentage-of-completion method when the seller can reliably estimate the 
outcome of the contract. If the seller cannot reliably estimate costs and revenues, then IFRS 
requires that the seller recognize revenues equal to recoverable costs incurred and expensed. 
This approach is a variant of the cost recovery method described earlier.
 PROBLEM  8.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Income recognition for a long-term construction contract. Suppose that General 
Construction Company (GC) contracts with a Chinese customer in June 2013 to construct 
a building at a contract price of 145 million yuan (¥). GC plans to begin construction 
January 1, 2014, and to finish September 2016. GC estimates that its total construction 
cost will be ¥100 million. GC incurred ¥30 million in construction costs during 2014, ¥60 
million during 2015, and ¥10 million during 2016. The customer agrees to make equal 
progress payments on the first day of each year. GC completed the building in September 
2016. Calculate GC’s gross profit (= revenue less expenses) on this contract during 2014, 
2015, and 2016, assuming the following:
a. GC uses the percentage-of-completion method.
b. GC uses the completed contract method.
c. GC uses the method specified by IFRS when it cannot reliably estimate the outcome 
of the contract. Assume that all costs incurred are recoverable.
SUMMARY
Revenue is the single largest recurring financial statement item for most firms and a key deter-
minant of operating profitability. Revenue represents inflows of assets from transactions with 
customers. The timing and measurement of revenue and the associated expenses are subject 
to detailed guidance in U.S. GAAP and general guidance in IFRS. The guidance specifies the 
conditions for recognizing revenue before, at, and after the time of sale. The seller must have 
earned revenues in the sense that it has performed, or substantially performed, its obligations 
to the customer, and it can reliably estimate the cash or cash equivalent value of assets received 
from the customer. When either requirement fails, the seller must defer revenue recognition. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
Accounting guidance also provides special procedures for contracts that contain multiple deliv-
erables and for long-term contracts.
A firm’s gross accounts receivable reflects the amounts customers have promised to pay. The 
balance sheet displays these receivables net of estimated uncollectible accounts. When the seller 
determines that a receivable has become uncollectible, it writes off the receivable.
APPENDIX 8.1: COMPARISON OF 
REVENUE RECOGNITION CRITERIA 
BETWEEN U.S. GAAP AND IFRS
REVENUE RECOGNITION UNDER U.S. GAAP
Conceptual guidance states that the seller recognizes revenue when the transaction meets both 
of the following conditions:33
1. The seller has earned the revenue, meaning that the seller has substantially accomplished 
what it has promised the customer (the “earned” condition).
2. The revenue is realized or realizable, meaning that the seller has received cash or some 
other asset that it can convert to cash (the “realized or realizable” condition).
In addition, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) of the United States has issued 
Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104 (SAB 104), which summarizes the following four conditions 
for revenue recognition:34
1. Persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists.
2. Delivery has occurred or services have been performed.
3. The seller’s price to the buyer is fixed or determinable.
4. Collectibility is reasonably assured; that is, the seller can measure the amount of revenue 
and is reasonably certain to collect it.
Conditions 2, 3, and 4 of SAB 104 are similar to the two conditions stated in Concepts State-
ment 5. SAB 104 also requires persuasive evidence that the seller has an arrangement with a 
customer in the form of a contract, or prior business dealings, or customary business practices. 
The arrangement states the responsibilities of the seller and its customers with respect to the 
nature and delivery of goods or services, the risks assumed by buyer and seller, the timing of 
cash payments, and similar factors.
REVENUE RECOGNITION UNDER IFRS
IFRS distinguishes between revenue from sales of goods and revenue from sales of services.35 
IFRS specifies five general conditions for recognizing revenue, all of which apply to the sale of 
goods; conditions 1 and 2 apply only to the sale of goods:
1. The seller has transferred to the buyer the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the 
goods.
2. The seller has not retained either effective control or the kind of involvement that is associ-
ated with ownership.
3. The amount of revenue can be measured reliably.
4. It is probable that the seller will obtain the economic benefits associated with the transaction.
5. The costs incurred or to be incurred can be measured reliably.
33 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 5, “Recognition and Measurement in Financial State-
ments of Business Enterprises,” 1984, par. 83–84.
34 SEC, Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, 17 CFR Part 211, December 2003.
35 International Accounting Standards Committee, International Accounting Standard 18, “Revenue,” 1993.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

305
Appendix 8.2
With regard to services, IFRS specifies conditions 3, 4, and 5, plus one additional condi-
tion: The stage of completion of the transaction at the end of the reporting period can be mea-
sured reliably.
COMPARISON OF U.S. GAAP WITH IFRS
Within IFRS, conditions 1 and 2 are analogous to the “earned” condition of U.S. GAAP—they 
specify that the seller has performed its obligations. Conditions 3 and 4 are analogous to the 
“realized or realizable” condition of U.S. GAAP—they specify that the seller has obtained a 
reliably measurable asset that will result in benefits. Condition 5 in IFRS pertains to the mea-
surement of cost or expense recognition.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS are consistent in that both rely on the idea of an earnings process 
(which IFRS describes in terms of the transfer of risk and reward of ownership) and the real-
ization principle (which IFRS describes in terms of reliable measurement and the ability to 
obtain economic benefits). This does not mean, however, that revenue recognition is the same 
under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. U.S. GAAP provides over 200 specific pieces of detailed guid-
ance, much of which is industry-specific or transaction-specific. IFRS contains one general 
standard and a handful of more specific standards. So, for example, U.S. GAAP contains spe-
cific guidance for revenue recognition for franchise fees, for sales of software, and for sales of 
real estate, whereas the general IFRS standard for revenue recognition does not address these 
industry-specific arrangements.36
APPENDIX 8.2: SUMMARY OF JOINT FASB-IASB
REVENUE RECOGNITION PROJECT
HISTORY AND OBJECTIVE OF THE PROJECT
The FASB and IASB issued a joint Discussion Paper in 2008 describing their initial proposals to 
improve and converge the guidance for recognizing revenue. The objectives of the project are to
■ 
Issue a single accounting standard that would apply to most revenue arrangements 
and that would not differ substantially between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
■ 
Remove inconsistencies and weaknesses in the existing guidance.
■ 
Reduce the number of different approaches to revenue recognition.
■ 
Improve comparability and provide more useful information to users of financial 
reports.
The FASB and IASB issued a joint exposure draft in June 2010 and a revised exposure draft in 
January 2012. These exposure drafts describe the proposed revenue recognition requirements 
and seek input from financial statement preparers, users, auditors, and others. As this textbook 
goes to press, the FASB and IASB are considering that input. This Appendix summarizes cer-
tain features of the FASB–IASB proposals for revenue recognition.
PROPOSED GUIDANCE
Appendix 8.1 describes the conceptual guidance for revenue recognition under U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS that exists as this textbook goes to press. The guidance being developed by the FASB and 
IASB would replace that existing conceptual guidance with a single core principle:
The transfer of a good or service to a customer determines the timing of revenue recog-
nition. The transfer occurs when the customer obtains control over the transferred item, 
which can occur at a point in time or over time. 
36 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 45, “Accounting for Franchise Fee Revenue,” 1981 
(Codification Topic 952) and Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 66, “Accounting for Sales of Real 
Estate,” 1982 (Codification Topic 360).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
The application of this core principle involves five steps, beginning with the requirement 
that an implicit or explicit contract exists between the seller and buyer:
1.  Identify the contract with the customer.
2.  Identify the separate performance obligations in the contract (this step could involve iden-
tifying separate components of a multiple deliverable arrangement).
3.  Determine the transaction price.
4.  Allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations.
5.  Recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied (that is, at the point when 
the customer obtains control of the good or service by, for example, taking legal title and 
physical possession). The proposals also clarify that a firm can satisfy a performance obli-
gation over time, under certain conditions.
In many cases, the proposals would not affect current accounting practice. For example, the 
proposal does not affect revenue recognition for cash transactions at the point of sale. As 
another example, the proposed guidance does not rule out the percentage-of-completion 
method. Also, many of the current accounting practices that would be affected by the propos-
als apply to arrangements that are beyond the scope of this introductory textbook. There are, 
however, four proposed differences that would affect the accounting approaches covered in 
Chapter 8:
1.  The proposals focus on the existence of a contract with a customer, not the receipt of an 
asset. The proposals would not require a collectibility threshold for revenue recognition, so 
the installment method and the cost recovery method could be affected. If, however, col-
lectibility is sufficiently in doubt, a contract may not exist, precluding revenue recognition.
2.  The proposals focus on a transaction price and not a fixed or determinable amount, as is 
currently required under SAB 104. The transaction price could include variable elements 
whose effect on the transaction amount would have to be estimated.
3.  The proposed treatment of multiple-deliverable or multiple-element contracts requires the 
seller to evaluate the contract to determine which components are distinct. Distinct is a 
newly proposed term that refers to whether the seller regularly sells the good or service 
separately or whether the customer can benefit from the good or service on its own or with 
other items it can easily obtain. The proposals for allocating total sales revenues to separate 
elements, however, are similar to the procedures described for Apple in the chapter that are 
based on stand-alone selling prices for separate contract components, including estimates 
of those prices.
4.  The proposals would require that the reduction in income associated with expected uncol-
lectible receivables appear as a reduction in revenue, not as an expense, for example, Bad 
Debt Expense. This change would not affect income but would affect the line items on the 
income statement.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 8.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Sony Corporation; revenue recognition at time of sale, or after sale, or before sale.)
a. At the time of shipment to Great Deal, Sony has incurred most of its costs. Experience 
should provide Sony with sufficient evidence to estimate the cost of damaged and defective 
televisions. Thus, the arrangement appears to meet the first criterion for revenue recogni-
tion, substantial performance. The second criterion is also met because there is an agreed-
on price (of $2,000 per television), and Great Deal agrees to pay within 30 days. Sony 
may recognize the revenue from this transaction when Great Deal takes possession of the 
televisions, normally either when Great Deal receives the televisions or when Sony ships the 
televisions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

307
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
b. This arrangement is similar to a. At the time of shipment, Sony has met the first crite-
rion for revenue recognition. There may be substantial uncertainty, however, about whether 
Great Deal will return the televisions for a refund. Sony can recognize revenues on this 
transaction at the earlier of two dates: (1) when Great Deal notifies Sony that it has sold all 
televisions, or (2) six months after Great Deal’s receipt of the televisions. At both of these 
times, there is no uncertainty about the return of televisions to Sony. Great Deal has com-
mitted to pay Sony within 30 days. If Sony can reliably estimate the number of televisions 
it expects Great Deal to return, then U.S. GAAP might allow Sony to recognize revenue 
the same way as in part a, depending on other factors not discussed here.
c. In this setting, Great Deal acts as a consignee for Sony’s televisions; Sony is the consignor. 
In a consignment arrangement, the consignor (Sony) sends goods (televisions) to a con-
signee (Great Deal) for sale, with Sony holding title until Great Deal makes a sale. Sony 
should not recognize revenue when it ships the televisions because the amount that Sony 
ultimately receives depends on whether and at what price Great Deal sells the televisions. 
Therefore, the amount of cash that Sony will collect is uncertain with regard to both 
amount and timing. Thus, Sony should recognize revenue only when it receives the cash 
from Great Deal or when Great Deal notifies Sony of the amounts it will remit for sales 
made this period.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 8.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Scania; revenue recognition at time of sale.)
a. To record sale of four truck engines at SEK20,000 per engine, with payment from the cus-
tomer to be received in 60 days.
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80,000
b. Scania makes no journal entry at the time it signs the SEK250,000 contract for the 50 
transport containers because there has been no performance and the customer has not 
made any payments.
c. Customer makes payment in full for four engines from part a.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80,000
d. To record sale of a truck for SEK725,000.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
145,000
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
580,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
725,000
e. To record revenue, delivery of containers, and receipt of customer payment.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250,000
f. To write off an uncollectible account, for SEK580,000.
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
580,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
580,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
g. To record bad debt expense for the year.
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.4 billion
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1.4 billion
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 8.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Scania; revenue recognition after sale when substantial performance remains.)
a. To record the receipt of SEK250,000 as a customer advance on the contract to deliver 50 
containers. Scania has not performed its obligation to deliver containers.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250,000
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250,000
b. To record the sale of the truck, training session, and customer support.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
145,000
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
580,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
641,347
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
83,653
The sum of the separate selling prices of the three contract elements is 
SEK780,000 (= SEK690,000 + SEK40,000 + SEK50,000). The portion of 
the contract price allocated to the truck is SEK641,347 (= SEK725,000 × 
[SEK690,000/SEK780,000]). The portion attributable to the training session 
is SEK37,179 (= SEK725,000 × [SEK40,000/SEK780,000]), and the portion 
attributable to the customer support is SEK46,474 (= SEK725,000 × 
[SEK50,000/SEK780,000]).
c. To record delivery of the containers (part a) and delivery of the training session (part b).
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250,000
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
37,179
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
37,179
d. No journal entry because there has been only an exchange of promises.
e. To record the payment made by the customer pursuant to the contract in part d.
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200,000
f. The adjusting entry for eight months of customer support, May–December (part b).
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,328
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,328
From part b, the portion of total contract revenue allocated to customer 
support is SEK46,474 (= SEK725,000 × [SEK50,000/SEK780,000]). Scania 
will recognize this amount as revenue ratably (equally) over the three-year 
(36-months) term of the customer support. 2013 revenue is SEK10,328 (= 
SEK46,474 × [8 months/36 months]) for support during May–December.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

309
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 8.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Scania; income recognition when collectibility is uncertain.)
a. Analysis and journal entries under the installment method. At the time of sale, Scania derec-
ognizes the two trucks, recognizes a receivable, and recognizes a deferred gross margin of 
SEK100,000 (= SEK1,080,000 – SEK980,000). The gross margin percentage is approxi-
mately 9.26% (= SEK100,000/SEK1,080,000). The journal entry at time of sale is
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,080,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
980,000
 
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
 
By convention, Scania might display the deferred gross margin among its liabilities; we 
classify it as a reduction of assets following Concepts Statement 6.
 
 
June–August: Project Hope makes three monthly payments. The journal entry to 
record each of the three payments is
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,000
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,334
Cost of Goods Sold (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
81,666
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
Scania collects 1/12th of the total contract price, or SEK90,000 (= 
SEK1,080,000/12 months) and recognizes this amount as revenue. Under 
the installment method, Scania also recognizes gross margin = gross margin 
percentage (0.0926) × cash received (SEK90,000) or SEK8,334. After Project 
Hope has made three payments of SEK90,000 each, the balance in Accounts 
Receivable is SEK810,000 (= SEK1,080,000 – [3 × SEK90,000]). The balance 
in Deferred Gross Margin is SEK74,998 (= SEK100,000 – [3 × SEK8,334]).
 
After Project Hope fails to make the promised payments, in December 2013 Scania repos-
sesses the two trucks when their net realizable value is SEK690,000:
 
Inventory—Repossessed Items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
690,000
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
74,998
Loss on Repossession (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,002
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
810,000
Scania writes off the remaining balances in Accounts Receivable and 
Deferred Gross Margin, recognizes the repossessed inventory at its net 
realizable value, and recognizes a loss.
b. Analysis and journal entries using the cost recovery method. At the time of sale, Scania 
makes the same journal entries under both the installment method and the cost recovery 
method.
 
 
June–August: Project Hope makes three monthly payments. The journal to record 
each of the three payments is
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,000
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
Scania collects 1/12th of the total contract price, or SEK90,000 (= 
SEK1,080,000/12 months). Under the cost recovery method, Scania 
recognizes cost of goods sold equal to revenue until it recovers the entire 
cost of SEK980,000. Gross margin each month during June–August is zero. 
After Project Hope has made three payments, the balance in Accounts 
Receivable is SEK810,000 (= SEK1,080,000 – [3 × SEK90,000]). The 
balance in Deferred Gross Margin is SEK100,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
 
After Project Hope fails to make the promised payments, in December 2013 Scania repos-
sesses the two trucks when their net realizable value is SEK690,000:
 
Inventory—Repossessed Items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
690,000
Deferred Gross Margin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
Loss on Repossession (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Accounts Receivable, Gross  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
810,000
Scania writes off the remaining balances in Accounts Receivable and 
Deferred Gross Margin, recognizes the repossessed inventory at its net 
realizable value and recognizes a loss.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 8.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(General Construction Company; income recognition for a long-term construction contract.)
a. Percentage-of-completion method:
Year
Incremental 
Percentage 
Complete
Revenue 
Recognized
Expenses 
Recognized
Net Income
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 30/100 (= 0.30)
¥ 43.5 million
¥ 30.0 million
¥13.5 million
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 60/100 (= 0.60)
87.0 million
60.0 million
27.0 million
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 10/100 (= 0.10)
  14.5 million
  10.0 million
  4.5 million
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100/100 (= 1.00)
¥145.0 million
¥100.0 million
¥45.0 million
b. Completed contract method:
Year
Revenue 
Recognized
Expenses 
Recognized
Net Income
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥  0
¥  0
¥ 0
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
0
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 145.0 million
 100.0 million
 45.0 million
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥145.0 million
¥100.0 million
¥45.0 million
c. IFRS, when GC cannot reliably estimate the contract’s outcome:
Year
Revenue 
Recognized
Expenses 
Recognized
Net Income
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥ 30.0 million
¥ 30.0 million
¥ 0
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60.0 million
60.0 million
0
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  55.0 million
  10.0 million
 45.0 million
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
¥145.0 million
¥100.0 million
¥45.0 million
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Revenue recognition
Revenue measurement
Expense recognition
Sales returns
Multiple deliverable contract
Percentage-of-completion method
Accounts receivable, trade receivables
Uncollectible account
Allowance method
Allowance for Uncollectibles account
Accounts Receivable, Gross account
Accounts Receivable, Net account
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

311
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Bad Debt Expense, Provision for Bad 
Debts, Provision for Uncollectible 
Accounts
Control (or controlling) account
Writing off
Percentage-of-sales procedure
Aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure
Accounts receivable turnover ratio
Days receivables outstanding
Securitization
Deferred performance obligations, 
Advances from Customers, Deferred 
Revenue, Unearned Revenues
Installment method
Gross margin percentage, gross margin
Cost recovery method
Progress payments
Percentage-of-completion method
Construction in Progress, Construction in 
Process account
Completed contract method
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. The cost recovery method and the completed contract method of recognizing revenues are 
similar in that both methods delay the recognition of income even if a firm collects cash. 
In what ways do the two methods differ?
 3. The accounting for a multiple-element contract separates the contract with a customer 
into pieces (components or deliverables) and assigns each component a portion of the 
total contract revenue. The percentage-of-completion method of accounting for a long-
term construction contract also separates the contract for accounting purposes. How do 
the approaches used by the multiple-element contract method and the percentage-of- 
completion method to separate the contract differ from, and resemble, each other?
 4. The allowance method of accounting for uncollectible accounts receivable involves the cre-
ation of a contra account that shows the estimated amount of uncollectible receivables. 
Why would financial statement users want to know both this number and the gross amount 
of accounts receivable?
 5. a.  An old wisdom in tennis holds that if your first serves are always good, you are not hit-
ting them hard enough. An analogous statement in business might be that if you have 
no uncollectible accounts, you probably are not selling enough on credit. Comment on 
the validity and parallelism of these statements.
b. When are more uncollectible accounts better than fewer uncollectible accounts?
c. When is a higher percentage of uncollectible accounts better than a lower percentage?
 6. Under what circumstances will the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts have a debit bal-
ance during the accounting period? The balance sheet figure for the Allowance for Uncol-
lectible Accounts at the end of the period should never show a debit balance. Why?
 7. Construction companies often use the percentage-of-completion method. Why doesn’t a 
typical manufacturing firm use this method of income recognition?
 8. Both the installment method and the cost recovery method recognize revenue when a firm 
collects cash. Why, then, does the pattern of income (that is, revenues minus expenses) over 
time differ under these two methods?
 9. “When the total amount of cash that a firm expects to collect from a customer is highly 
uncertain, the cost recovery method seems more appropriate than the installment method.” 
Explain.
10. A magazine publisher offers a reduced annual subscription fee if customers pay for three 
years in advance. Under this subscription program, the magazine publisher receives from 
customers $45,000, which it credits to Advances from Customers. The estimated cost of 
publishing and distributing magazines for these customers is $32,000. Why does accounting 
report a liability of $45,000 instead of $32,000?
11. Both bad debt expense and expected returns reduce income in the period of sale. How does 
the accounting for these two items differ and how is it similar?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
12. Conceptually, what kind of account is the Deferred Gross Margin account that arises 
under the installment method of accounting? How is this account typically classified on 
balance sheets?
EXERCISES
13. Revenue recognition for various businesses. Discuss when each of the following types of 
businesses is likely to recognize revenue and related costs of sales:
a. A shoe store.
b. A shipbuilding firm constructing an aircraft carrier under a government contract.
c. A real estate developer selling lots on long-term contracts with small down payments 
required.
d. A barbershop.
e. A citrus-growing firm.
f. A producer of television movies working under the condition that it will sell the rights 
to the movies to a television network for the first three years, and all rights thereafter 
revert to the producer.
g. A residential real estate developer who constructs houses only on speculation and later 
sells the houses to buyers.
h. A producer of fine whiskey that ages the whiskey from 6 to 12 years before sale.
i. A savings and loan association lending money for home mortgages.
j. A travel agency that sells tickets in one period to customers who take trips or return 
tickets in the next period.
k. A printer who prints only custom-order stationery.
l. A seller to food stores of coupons redeemable by food store customers for various 
household products.
m. A wholesale food distributor.
n. A livestock rancher.
o. A shipping company that loads cargo in one accounting period, carries cargo across 
the ocean in a second accounting period, and unloads the cargo in a third period; the 
shipping is all done under contract, and cash collection of shipping charges is relatively 
certain.
14. Income recognition for various business arrangements. Refer to the conceptual revenue rec-
ognition guidance given in Appendix 8.1. Applying this conceptual guidance, discuss the 
timing of revenue recognition and any related measurement issues.
a. Company A develops software and sells it to customers for an up-front fee. Company 
A provides these customers with password-protected access to its Web site for two years 
after delivery of the software. With this access, customers can download certain data 
and other software. Company A has an obligation to provide updates on its Web site.
b. Company B develops software and sells it to newly formed storage application service 
providers (SAPs), who promise to pay for the software over the next two years. These 
SAPs in turn place the software on their Web sites and sell rights to access the software 
to their customers.
c. Company C develops software that it places on its Web site. It sells rights to its custom-
ers to access this software online for a period of two years. Customers pay an up-front 
fee for the right to access the software.
d. Company D maintains an auction site on the Web. It charges customers an up-front fee 
to list products for sale and a transaction fee when a sale takes place. The transaction 
fee is refundable if the auction winner fails to honor its commitment to purchase the 
product.
e. Company E sells products of various supplier companies on its Web site. Company E 
transmits customers’ purchase requests to the supplier companies, who fill the orders. 
Customers pay for their purchases using third-party credit cards. Company E receives a 
fee from the supplier companies for each item sold.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

313
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
f. Company F sells products of various supplier companies on its Web site. It promises 
to the supplier companies to sell a minimum number of items each month and pays 
storage and insurance costs for that minimum number of units. Actual storage of these 
units takes place at the supplier companies’ warehouses. The supplier companies also 
handle shipments to customers. Customers pay for their purchases using third-party 
credit cards.
g. Company G manufactures and sells personal computers (PCs). Customers receive a 
$400 rebate on the purchase of the computer if they will purchase Internet access ser-
vices for three years after the purchase of the computer. Customers mail their rebate 
coupons to the Internet service provider, called an ISP. The ISP bears 90% of the initial 
cost of the rebate, and the PC manufacturer bears the other 10%. If customers do not 
subscribe for the full three-year period, the parties reallocate the cost of the rebate, $360 
(= 0.90 × $400) initially borne by the ISP and $40 (= 0.10 × $400) by the manufac-
turer, resulting in the PC manufacturer’s paying the ISP to reduce the ISP’s share of the 
rebate’s cost from $360 to a smaller amount.
h. Company H sells advertising space on its Web site to other companies. For an up-front 
fee, Company H guarantees to the other companies a certain minimum number of hits, 
viewings, or click-throughs each month of the one-year contract period. It must return 
a pro rata portion of the fee if the hits and click-throughs fall short of the guarantee.
i. Company I sells advertising space on its Web site to other companies. It recently received 
10,000 shares of common stock of Upstart Company in payment for certain advertising 
space. Upstart Company intends to make an initial public offering of its common stock 
in six months. At the most recent financing round, venture capitalists paid $10 per share 
for the common stock.
j. Company J and Company K both maintain Web sites. Each company sells advertising 
space to the other company for an agreed-on period, with no funds changing hands.
15. Meaning of allowance for uncollectible accounts. Indicate whether each of the following 
accurately describes the meaning of the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts account 
when properly used. If the description does not apply to this account, discuss why it does 
not.
a. Assets available in case customers don’t later pay what they owe.
b. Cash available in case customers don’t later pay what they owe.
c. Estimates of the amount that customers who purchased goods this period, but who have 
not yet paid, and won’t later pay.
d. Estimates of the amount of goods purchased by customers, whether paid or not, that 
the firm estimates those customers will return.
e. Estimates of the amount that customers who purchased goods at any time, but who 
have not yet paid, and won’t later pay.
f. Estimates of amount the firm will owe to others if its customers who purchased goods 
this period don’t later pay what they owe.
g. Estimates of amount the firm will owe to others if its customers who ever purchased 
goods don’t later pay what they owe.
h. Estimates of the amount of sales for the current period that will become bad debt 
expense for the current period.
i. An amount of deferred revenue.
j. A part of retained earnings.
16. Revenue recognition at time of sale and advances from customers. Pret a Manger is a food 
retailer with stores in the United Kingdom and the United States and is known for its fast 
but fresh food menu. A customer shopping at a London Heathrow store purchased a ham 
and cheese baguette (£4.50), a small fruit salad (£2.40), and a banana-bran muffin (£1.50). 
The customer paid with cash.
a. What journal entry will Pret a Manger record for this transaction?
b. Suppose that, in addition to the above items, the customer purchased a Pret a Manger 
card (to use for future purchases at Pret a Manger stores) for £40.00. What journal entry 
will Pret a Manger record for this transaction?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
c. Suppose that, for the original transaction described in this problem, the customer did 
not pay with cash but used a Pret a Manger card purchased a month earlier. Assume 
there is a sufficient balance on the card to cover the cost of his purchases. What journal 
entry did Pret a Manger record?
17. Revenue recognition at time of sale and advances from customers. A customer shopping 
at Bed, Bath & Beyond, a home products retailer in the United States, made the follow-
ing purchases: $100 for bath towels, $135 for an iron, $45 for an ironing board, and $250 
for a gift certificate. Sales taxes on the purchase amounted to 5% of the total order. The 
customer paid with cash. What journal entry will Bed, Bath & Beyond make to recognize 
revenue on this transaction? Ignore the journal entries to recognize the expenses.
18. Revenue recognition at time of sale. Marks and Spencer Group, Plc., a U.K. retailer, applies 
IFRS and reports its results in millions of pounds sterling (£). The notes to its financial 
statements provide the following information:
■ 
Revenue comprises sales of goods to customers less an appropriate deduction for 
returns and discounts. Marks and Spencer records revenues for sales of furniture and 
items purchased online upon delivery to the customer.
■ 
Marks and Spencer records trade receivables at their nominal amount less an allow-
ance for any doubtful accounts and sales returns. The beginning balance in the allow-
ance for uncollectible accounts and sales returns was £1.1 million, and the ending 
balance was £3.3 million. There were no recoveries of uncollectible accounts during 
the year.
 
Assume that for the year ended March 29, 2013, Marks and Spencer reported revenues 
(before discounts and returns) of £9,022.0 million. The cost of merchandise sold in 2013 
was £5,535.2 million. Assume that Marks and Spencer estimates discounts and returns of 
1% of sales. Further assume that it made all sales on credit and that it estimates that 1.5% 
of revenues will be uncollectible.
a. What journal entry did Marks and Spencer record during the year ended March 29, 
2013, to recognize revenues and expenses?
b. What journal entry did Marks and Spencer make in the year ended March 29, 2013, to 
recognize sales returns and bad debts expense?
c. What was the combined amount of sales returns and write-offs of uncollectible accounts 
during the year ended March 29, 2013?
19. Revenue recognition at time of sale. Assume that Lentiva Group Limited provided the fol-
lowing description of its revenue recognition policies in the notes to its financial statements.
■ 
Lentiva recognizes revenue from the sale of goods (such as sales of hardware and 
software) when it effectively transfers both ownership and risk of loss to the customer, 
generally when there is persuasive evidence a sales arrangement exists, the price is fixed 
or determinable, collectibility is reasonably assured, and delivery has occurred.
■ 
Lentiva defers revenue from contracts to provide training services and amortizes those 
amounts as earned over the contract period, generally three years.
 
Assume that on January 1, 2013, Lentiva sold 50,000 laptop computers to a public educa-
tion system for $75 million. The price of the computers includes a contract for training 
services, which Lentiva will provide evenly over the next two years. The separate selling 
price of the training services is $100 per laptop, and the separate selling price of a laptop 
is $1,500. Lentiva’s cost of a laptop is $1,200, and the expected cost to provide the training 
is $50 per laptop. At the time of sale, the customer paid Lentiva $15 million, and promised 
to pay the remaining amount owed in 30 days. Assuming that the arrangement meets the 
first criterion to recognize revenue, what journal entries will Lentiva make on these dates:
a. January 1, 2013?
b. December 31, 2013?
c. December 31, 2014?
20. Journal entries for coupons. Morrison’s Cafeteria sells coupons that customers may use 
later to purchase meals. Each coupon book sells for $25 and has a face value of $30; that 
is, the customer can use the book to purchase meals with menu prices of $30. On January 
1, redeemable unused coupons that Morrison’s had sold for $4,000 were outstanding. Cash 
inflows during the next three months appear in the following table:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

315
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
March
February
January
Cash-Paying Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$50,000
$48,500
$48,000
Sale of Coupon Books  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2,400
  2,200
  2,100
 Total Cash Receipts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$52,400
$50,700
$50,100
 
Customers redeemed coupons with a discounted face value for meals as follows: January, 
$1,600; February, $2,300; March, $2,100.
a. Prepare journal entries for January, February, and March to reflect the above 
information.
b. What effect, if any, do the coupon sales and redemptions have on the liabilities on the 
March 31 balance sheet?
21. Journal entries for service contracts. Abson Corporation began business on January 1, 
2013, selling copiers. It also sells service contracts to maintain and repair copiers for $600 
per year. When a customer signs a service contract, Abson collects the $600 fee and cred-
its Service Contract Fees Received in Advance. Abson recognizes revenues on a quarterly 
basis during the year of coverage. For purposes of computing revenue, Abson assumes that 
all sales of service contracts occur midway through each quarter. Sales of contracts and 
service expenses for 2013 appear in the following table:
Sales of Contracts
Service 
Expenses
First Quarter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$180,000 (300 contracts)
$ 32,000
Second Quarter. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300,000 (500 contracts)
  71,000
Third Quarter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
240,000 (400 contracts)
 105,000
Fourth Quarter  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120,000 (200 contracts)
 130,000
a. Prepare journal entries for the first three quarters of 2013 for Abson Corporation. 
Assume that the firm prepares quarterly reports on March 31, June 30, and September 
30, 2013.
b. What is the balance in the Service Contract Fees Received in Advance account on 
December 31, 2013?
22. Allowance method for uncollectible accounts. Diversified Technologies opened for business 
on January 1, 2013. Sales on account during 2013 were $126,900. Collections from custom-
ers from sales on account during 2013 were $94,300. Diversified Technologies estimates 
that it will ultimately not collect 4% of 2013 sales on account. During 2013 the firm wrote 
off $2,200 of accounts receivable as uncollectible. The firm uses the allowance method for 
uncollectible accounts.
a. Compute the amount of bad debt expense for 2013.
b. Compute the December 31, 2013, balance sheet carrying value of accounts receivable.
23. Aging of accounts receivable. York Company’s accounts receivable show the following 
balances:
Age of Accounts
Balance 
Receivable
0–30 Days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,200,000
31–60 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
255,000
61–120 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75,000
More than 120 Days. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30,000
 
York Company uses the aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure. The credit balance in the 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts is now $16,000. Analysis of collection experience 
suggests that York should use the following percentages to estimate the amounts that will 
eventually prove uncollectible: 0–30 days, 0.5%; 31–60 days, 1.0%; 61–120 days, 10%; and 
more than 120 days, 30%. Prepare the journal entry to provide for estimated uncollectible 
accounts.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
24. Aging of accounts receivable. Dove Company’s accounts receivable show the following bal-
ances by age:
Age of Accounts
Balance 
Receivable
Not yet due  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,200,000
0–30 Days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
400,000
31–60 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90,000
61–120 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40,000
More than 120 Days. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20,000
 
The credit balance in the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts is now $17,200. Dove 
Company’s analyses of its collection experience suggest that Dove should use the following 
percentages to estimate the amounts that will eventually prove uncollectible: 0–30 days, 
half of 1.0%; 31–60 days, 1.0%; 61–120 days, 10%; and more than 120 days, 70%. Prepare 
the journal entry to record Dove’s bad debt expense.
25. Aging of accounts receivable. Hamilia S.A.’s financial records show the following balances 
in its accounts receivable:
Age of Accounts
Balance 
Receivable
0–30 Days . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€980,000
31–60 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130,000
91–150 Days  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102,000
More than 150 Days. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68,000
 
Hamilia uses the aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure. At the end of the fiscal year, the 
credit balance in the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts is €96,600. Hamilia’s analysis 
of recent collection experience suggests it should use the following percentages to estimate 
the amounts that will eventually prove uncollectible: 0–30 days, 0.5%; 31–90 days, 3.0%; 
91–150 days, 15%; and more than 150 days, 75%. Prepare the journal entry to provide for 
estimated uncollectible accounts.
26. Reconstructing events when using the allowance method. Selected data from the accounts of 
Seward Corporation appear next; the firm’s fiscal year ends on December 31.
January 1
December 31
Accounts Receivable, Gross. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$82,900 Dr.
$ 87,300 Dr.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,700 Cr.
9,100 Cr.
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
4,800 Dr.
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
240,000 Cr.
 
The firm makes all sales on account. There were no recoveries during the year of accounts 
written off in previous years.
 
 
Give the journal entries for the following transactions and events during the year:
a. Sales on account.
b. Recognition of bad debt expense.
c. Write-off of uncollectible accounts.
d. Collection of cash from customers from sales on account.
27. Allowance method: reconstructing journal entry from events. (From a problem by S. A. Zeff.) 
During 2013, Pandora Company wrote off $2,200 of accounts receivable as uncollectible. 
Pandora Company collected no cash during 2013 for amounts it had written off in previ-
ous years. The balance in the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts account on the bal-
ance sheet was $3,500 at the beginning of 2013 and $5,000 at the end of 2013. Present the 
journal entry that the company made to provide for estimated uncollectibles during 2013.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

317
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
28. Allowance method: reconstructing journal entries from events. (From a problem by S. A. 
Zeff.) The balance sheets of Milton Corporation on December 31, 2013 and 2014, showed 
gross accounts receivable of $15,200,000 and $17,600,000, respectively. The balances in the 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts account at the beginning and end of 2014 were cred-
its of $1,400,000 and $1,550,000, respectively. The income statement for 2014 shows that 
the expense for estimated uncollectible accounts was $750,000, which was 1% of sales. The 
firm makes all sales on account. There were no recoveries during 2014 of accounts written 
off in previous years. Give all the journal entries made during 2014 that affect Accounts 
Receivable and the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts.
29. Reconstructing events from journal entries. Give the likely transaction or event that would 
result in making each of the independent journal entries that follow.
a. 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,300
 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,300
b. 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
450
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
450
c. 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
30. Journal entries for the allowance method. Data related to sales on account of Heath Com-
pany appear next. Heath Company began operating in 2011.
Accounts Written Off as Uncollectible in Year
Year
Sales on 
Account
2011
2012
2013
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  340,000
$1,800
$5,800
$ 3,000
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
450,000
—
2,500
8,200
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   580,000
    —
    —
  2,900
$1,370,000
$1,800
$8,300
$14,100
 
Heath Company estimates that 3% of sales on account will ultimately become uncollect-
ible. Uncollectible accounts generally occur within three years of the year of sale.
a. Prepare journal entries to recognize bad debt expense and to write off uncollectible 
accounts for 2011, 2012, and 2013 using the allowance method.
b. Does 3% of sales on account appear to be a reasonable rate for estimating uncollectibles 
for Heath Company?
31. Journal entries for the allowance method. The following data relate to sales made on account 
by Schneider Corporation. The firm began operations in 2011.
Accounts Written Off as Uncollectible in Year
Year
Sales on 
Account
2011
2012
2013
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  750,000
$1,300
$ 8,700
$ 3,900
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,200,000
—
2,500
16,600
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2,400,000
    —
     —
  3,100
$4,350,000
$1,300
$11,200
$23,600
 
Schneider Corporation estimates that 2% of sales on account will ultimately become uncol-
lectible. Uncollectible accounts generally occur within three years of the year of sale.
a. Prepare journal entries to recognize bad debt expense and to write off uncollectible 
accounts for 2011, 2012, and 2013 using the allowance method.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
b. Does 2% of sales on account appear to be a reasonable rate for estimating this firm’s 
uncollectibles?
32. Reconstructing events when using the allowance method. Assume the following data from 
the accounts of Fujitsu Limited for the years ended March 31, 2012, and March 31, 2011. 
Fujitsu reports its results in millions of yen (¥). For purposes of this problem, assume that 
Fujitsu applies U.S. GAAP or IFRS.
March 31, 
2012
March 31, 
2011
Accounts Receivable, Gross. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
¥1,054,048
¥885,300
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(6,906)
(6,781)
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,100,163
—
 
Assume Fujitsu estimates that 1% of sales, which are all on account, will become uncol-
lectible. There were no recoveries during the year of accounts written off in previous years. 
Provide journal entries to record the following:
a. Sales on account during the year.
b. Recognition of bad debt expense.
c. Write-off of actual uncollectible accounts during the year.
d. Collection of cash from customers from sales on account during the year.
33. Effects of transactions involving suppliers and customers on cash flows. WollyMartin Lim-
ited, a large retailer, provided the following information from its accounting records for the 
year ended September 30, 2013:
Selected Balance Sheet Accounts
September 
30, 2013
September 
30, 2012
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€  8,600
€ 8,000
Less: Allowance for Uncollectibles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(750)
(700)
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,200
11,000
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
7,000
Selected Income Statement Accounts
2013
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€130,000
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(2,000)
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(85,000)
 
WollyMartin’s business is characterized by many retail customers—some of whom have not 
paid for goods they have purchased—and many suppliers of goods, some of whom have 
delivered goods for which the firm has not yet paid. WollyMartin settles all its accounts 
with customers and suppliers with cash, never with noncash assets.
a. Calculate the amount of cash WollyMartin received from its customers during the year.
b. Calculate the amount of cash WollyMartin paid to its suppliers during the year.
34. Percentage-of-completion and completed contract methods of income recognition. The Shan-
non Construction Company agreed to build a warehouse for $6,000,000. Expected and 
actual costs to construct the warehouse were as follows: 2012, $1,200,000; 2013, $3,000,000; 
and 2014, $600,000. The firm completed the warehouse in 2014. Compute revenue, 
expense, and income before income taxes for 2012, 2013, and 2014 using the percentage-of- 
completion method and the completed contract method.
35. Percentage-of-completion and completed contract methods of income recognition. Raytheon 
has agreed to construct missile detection system for $900 million. Expected and actual costs 
to construct the system were as follows: 2011, $200 million; 2012, $200 million; and 2013, 
$300 million. Raytheon completed the system in 2013. Compute revenue, expense, and 
income before income taxes for 2011, 2012, and 2013 using the percentage-of- completion 
method and the completed contract method.
36. Installment and cost recovery methods of income recognition. During the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2013, Cunningham Realty Partners sold a tract of land costing $80,000 for $120,000. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

319
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
The customer agreed to pay the purchase price in four equal annual installments, with the 
first payment made on December 31, 2013. Compute revenue, expense, and income before 
income taxes for each of the four years using the installment method and the cost recovery 
method.
37. Installment and cost recovery methods of income recognition. During the year ended Decem-
ber 31, 2012, an aircraft manufacturer sold a jet for $72 million; assume that the cost to 
produce the jet was $57 million. The customer agreed to pay the manufacturer $24 million 
per year, for three years, with the first payment made on December 31, 2012. Compute 
revenue, expense, and income before income taxes for each of the three years using the 
installment method and the cost recovery method.
PROBLEMS
38. Revenue recognition at and after time of sale. Assume that during December 2013, Nord-
strom sold $20 million of merchandise and another $12 million of gift cards, of which $24 
million was on credit and the rest in cash. Nordstrom acquired the merchandise for $7.2 
million. Further assume that Nordstrom estimates that 1% of all credit sales in December 
will be uncollectible, and customers will return 2% of all merchandise sold in December. 
Gift card sales are not included in merchandise sales for the purposes of estimating sales 
returns.
a. What journal entries will Nordstrom make in December 2013 to record December sales?
b. Assume that Nordstrom closes its books monthly. What adjusting entries will Nord-
strom make in December 2013?
c. Assume no other transactions affecting taxable income for the month. How much 
income did Nordstrom earn before taxes in December 2013?
d. In January 2014, customers used gift cards to purchase $6 million of merchandise, with 
a cost to Nordstrom of $3.6 million. What journal entries will Nordstrom make in 
January 2014 to account for these sales? Assume the same sales return percentage as in 
December 2013.
39. Revenue recognition at and after time of sale. Hilton Garden Inn, a division of Hilton 
Hotels, offers its customers two choices when reserving rooms. The customer may pur-
chase a nonrefundable internet special of $150 per night, or pay at the refundable rate of 
$220 per night. Whether a customer purchases the nonrefundable internet special or the 
refundable room, the customer must charge the entire amount to a credit card at the time 
of booking. For the internet special, subsequent cancellation of the reservation results in 
the customer forfeiting the entire amount of the reservation. For the refundable room, 
cancellation prior to 3:00 p.m. of the date of arrival results in a refund of the amount of 
the reservation and cancellation after 3:00 p.m. results in a forfeiture of one day at the 
reserved rate ($220). What journal entries would Hilton Garden Inn record for the follow-
ing transactions assuming it attempts to make correct entries every day? Ignore the journal 
entries involving expenses. Assume that credit card companies credit Hilton Garden Inn’s 
bank account with cash on the same day that Hilton Garden Inn transmits a charge to a 
customer’s credit card, which is the day of the initial reservation.
a. On February 2, 2013, a customer makes a nonrefundable internet special reservation for 
four nights beginning February 16, 2013. The customer arrives at the hotel on February 
16, 2013, and departs on February 20, 2013.
b. On February 2, 2013, a customer makes a nonrefundable internet special reservation for 
four nights beginning February 16, 2013. On February 14, 2013, the customer cancels 
the reservation.
c. On February 2, 2013, a customer makes a refundable reservation for four nights begin-
ning February 16, 2013. The customer arrives at the hotel on February 16, 2013, and 
departs on February 20, 2013.
d. On February 2, 2013, a customer makes a refundable reservation for four nights begin-
ning February 16, 2013. On February 14, 2013, the customer cancels the reservation.
e. On February 2, 2013, a customer makes a refundable reservation for four nights begin-
ning February 16, 2013. At 6:00 p.m. on February 16, 2013, the customer cancels the 
reservation.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
40. Revenue recognition at and after time of sale. Stone Pest Control offers extermination ser-
vices to customers in various arrangements and packages. For example, a customer could 
call Stone as needed to come out and spray for insects; for this service, Stone charges $80 
per service call. For a separate termite inspection, Stone charges a selling price of $100. 
Alternatively, the customer can sign an annual $300 contract with Stone for quarterly ser-
vice visits plus one termite inspection. The annual contract also permits the customer to 
request spraying services at any time between quarterly visits, at no extra charge. Stone 
estimates that the average contract customer requests one service call per year, outside of 
the scheduled quarterly visits. For each of the following transactions, provide the journal 
entries that Stone would make to recognize revenues. Ignore the journal entries involving 
expenses.
a. January 2, 2013, a customer calls Stone to come out and spray for insects. The customer 
has no contract with Stone. Stone performs the service on January 4, 2013, and the 
customer pays in cash.
b. January 2, 2013, a customer calls Stone to come out and spray for insects and inspect 
for termites. The customer has no contract with Stone. Stone performs the services on 
January 4, 2013, and the customer pays in cash.
c. January 2, 2013, a customer calls Stone to come out and spray for insects and inspect 
for termites. The customer signs a contract with Stone on January 4, 2013, the same 
date that Stone provides the first quarterly service and inspects for termites. The cus-
tomer pays the entire contract price in cash on January 4.
d. How should Stone account for the spraying services that occur between scheduled quar-
terly services?
e. April 30, 2013, the customer in part c calls and asks Stone to come out and spray for 
ants.
41. Analyzing changes in accounts receivable. Selected data from the financial statements of 
Kajima Corporation appear next for the years ended March 31, 2009, through March 31, 
2012. Kajima applies Japanese accounting standards and reports its results in millions of 
yen (¥). For purposes of this problem, assume that Kajima applies U.S. GAAP or IFRS.
2012
2011
2010
2009
Balance Sheet
Accounts and Notes Receivable, Gross  . . . . 
¥  630,044
¥  468,387
¥  455,517
¥382,692
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. . . . . . . . 
5,286
10,673
8,341
13,441
Income Statement
Revenues (assume 100% on credit)  . . . . . . 
1,891,466
1,775,274
1,687,380
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,084
3,152
2,999
a. Prepare journal entries for 2010, 2011, and 2012 to record the following:
(1) Revenues.
(2) Recognition of bad debt expense.
(3) Write-off of actual uncollectible accounts.
(4) Collection of cash from customers.
b. Compute the following ratios, combining Accounts and Notes Receivable:
(1) Accounts receivable turnover ratio for 2010, 2011, and 2012. Use total sales in the 
numerator and average accounts receivable (net) in the denominator.
(2) Bad debt expense divided by revenues on account for 2010, 2011, and 2012.
(3) Allowance for uncollectible accounts divided by accounts receivable (gross) at the 
end of 2010, 2011, and 2012.
(4) Write-offs of actual uncollectible accounts divided by average accounts receivable 
(gross) for 2010, 2011, and 2012.
c. What do the ratios computed in part b suggest about the collection experience of Kajima 
Corporation during 2010–2012?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

321
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
42. Analyzing changes in accounts receivable. The financial statements and notes for Polaris 
Corporation reveal the following for the four years ending in March 2010–2013 (amounts 
in millions of US$):
2013
2012
2011
2010
Total Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,880.1
$4,295.4
$3,746.3
$3,305.4
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . 
36.8
40.1
20.1
20.1
End of March
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
Accounts Receivable, 
 Gross. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 680.4
$ 605.6
$ 599.2
$ 566.7
$539.5
Less: Allowance for 
 Uncollectible Accounts . . 
  (172.0)
  (138.1)
  (115.0)
  (111.0)
  (97.8)
Accounts Receivable, Net . . 
$ 508.4
$ 467.5
$ 484.2
$ 455.7
$441.7
 
Assume that Polaris’s credit sales as a percent of total sales was 75% in each year.
a. Compute the amount of accounts written off as uncollectible during 2010–2013.
b. Compute the amount of cash collections from credit customers during each of the four 
years ending in March 2010–2013.
c. Compute the total amount of cash collected from customers during each of the four 
years ended March 2010–2013.
d. Calculate the accounts receivable turnover ratio for the years ended March 2010–2013. 
Use total sales in the numerator and average accounts receivable, net, in the denominator.
43. Analyzing disclosures of accounts receivable. Aracruz Celulose, a Brazilian pulp manufac-
turer, applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in thousands of U.S. dollars. For the years 
ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, Aracruz reported the following information pertaining 
to accounts receivable:
December 31, 
2012
December 31, 
2011
Accounts Receivable, Gross. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$365,921
$290,429
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,318
4,634
Write-Offs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
433
25
 
At December 31, 2010, the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts had a balance of $4,067.
a. What is the carrying value of accounts receivable on Aracruz’s balance sheets for the 
years ended December 31, 2012, and December 31, 2011?
b. What is the total amount that customers owe Aracruz as of December 31, 2012, and 
December 31, 2011?
c. What journal entries did Aracruz make in 2012 and 2011 to recognize Bad Debt 
Expense?
44. Analyzing disclosures of accounts receivable. Metso Corporation is a Finnish engineering 
firm specializing in design and development for the paper and pulp industry. Metso applies 
IFRS and reports its results in millions of euros (€). For the years ended December 31, 
2012 and 2011, Metso reported the following information pertaining to accounts receivable:
December 31, 
2012
December 31, 
2011
Accounts Receivable, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€1,274
€1,218
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36
35
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13
10
Other Charges to Allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(7)
(4)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
 
The Other Charges to Allowance reflect the effects of business acquisitions and exchange 
rates. At December 31, 2010, the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts had a balance of €35.
a. What is the carrying value of accounts receivable on Metso’s balance sheets for the 
years ended December 31, 2012, and December 31, 2011?
b. What is the total amount that customers owe Metso as of December 31, 2012, and 
December 31, 2011?
c. What journal entries did Metso make in 2012 and 2011 to recognize write-offs of uncol-
lectible accounts?
45. Reconstructing transactions affecting accounts receivable and uncollectible accounts. The 
sales, all on account, of Pins Company in 2013, its first year of operations, were $700,000. 
Collections totaled $500,000. On December 31, 2013, Pins Company estimated that 2% of 
all sales would probably be uncollectible. On that date, Pins Company wrote off specific 
accounts in the amount of $8,000.
 
The balances in selected accounts on December 31, 2014, are as follows:
Accounts Receivable, Gross (Dr.)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$300,000
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts (Dr.)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
Sales Revenues (Cr.)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800,000
 
On December 31, 2014, Pins Company carried out an aging of its accounts receivable bal-
ances and estimated that the 2014 ending balance of accounts receivable contained $11,000 
of probable uncollectibles. That is, the allowance account should have an $11,000 end-
ing credit balance. It made adjusting entries appropriate for this estimate. Some of the 
$800,000 sales during 2014 were for cash and some were on account; the problem purpose-
fully does not give the amounts.
a. What was the balance in the Accounts Receivable, Gross, at the end of 2013? Give the 
amount and whether it was a debit or a credit.
b. What was the balance in the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts account at the end 
of 2013? Give the amount and whether it was a debit or a credit.
c. What was bad debt expense for 2014?
d. What was the amount of specific accounts receivable written off as being uncollectible 
during 2014?
e. What were total cash collections in 2014 from customers (for cash sales and collections 
from customers who had purchased on account in either 2013 or 2014)?
f. What was the net balance of accounts receivable included in the balance sheet asset 
total for December 31, 2014?
46. Effect of errors involving accounts receivable on financial statement ratios. Indicate—using 
O/S (overstated), U/S (understated), or NO (no effect)—the pretax effect of each of the fol-
lowing errors on (1) the rate of return on assets ratio, (2) the accounts receivable turnover 
ratio, and (3) the liabilities to assets ratio. Each of these ratios is less than 100% before 
discovering the error.
a. A firm using the allowance method neglected to provide for estimated uncollectible 
accounts at the end of the year.
b. A firm using the allowance method neglected to write off specific accounts as uncollect-
ible at the end of the year.
c. A firm credited a check received from a customer to Advances from Customers even 
though the customer was paying for purchases previously made on account.
d. A firm recorded as a sale a customer’s order received on the last day of the accounting 
period, even though the firm will not ship the product until the next accounting period.
e. A firm sold goods on account to a customer and properly recorded the transactions 
in the accounts. The customer returned the goods within a few days of the sale, before 
paying for them, but the firm neglected to record the return of the goods in its accounts. 
The firm normally treats sales returns as a reduction in Sales Revenue.
47. Income recognition for a nuclear generator manufacturer. The French energy company, 
Areva Group, recently won a $2 billion contract to build a uranium enrichment plant. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

323
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Areva began construction in 2013 and expects to complete it by 2019. Assume that the 
customer agrees to pay as follows: at the time of signing on December 20, 2012, $20 mil-
lion; on December 31, 2013–2018, $100 million; and at completion on December 31, 2019, 
$1,380 million. Assume further that Areva incurs the following costs in constructing the 
generator: 2013, $340 million; 2014–2018, $238 million per year; and 2019, $170 million. 
Areva uses a Construction in Process account to accumulate costs. Although the costs 
involve a mixture of cash payments, credits to assets, and credits to liability accounts, 
assume for purposes of this problem that all costs are paid in cash.
a. Calculate the amount of revenue, expense, and income before income taxes that Areva 
Group will report for years 2013–2019 under each of the following revenue recognition 
methods:
(1) Percentage-of-completion method.
(2) Completed contract method.
b. Show the journal entries that Areva Group will make for this contract in 2012, 2013, 
2014–2018, and 2019 for each of the revenue recognition methods examined in part a.
48. Income recognition for a contractor. On October 15, 2010, Flanikin Construction Company 
contracted to build a shopping center at a contract price of $180 million. The schedule of 
expected and actual cash collections and contract costs is as follows:
Year
Cash Collections 
from Customers
Estimated and 
Actual Cost Incurred
2010. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 36,000,000
$ 12,000,000
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,000,000
36,000,000
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,000,000
48,000,000
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  54,000,000
  24,000,000
$180,000,000
$120,000,000
a. Calculate the amount of revenue, expense, and net income for each of the four years 
under the following revenue recognition methods:
(1) Percentage-of-completion method.
(2) Completed contract method.
b. Show the journal entries Flanikin will make in 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013 for this con-
tract. Flanikin accumulates contract costs in a Contract in Process account. Although 
the costs involve a mixture of cash payments, credits to assets, and credits to liability 
accounts, assume for purposes of this problem that all costs are recorded as credits to 
Accounts Payable.
c. Which method do you believe provides the better measure of Flanikin Construction 
Company’s performance under the contract? Why?
49. Income recognition when collection from the customer is uncertain. Furniture Retailers sells 
furniture to retail customers, offering extended payment terms. In January 2013, a customer 
buys a full set of dining room and living room furniture for $8,400 on an installment plan, 
with no down payment and monthly payments of $400, beginning January 31, 2013. The 
cost of the furniture to Furniture Retailers is $6,800. Furniture Retailers classifies Deferred 
Gross Margin as a liability on its balance sheet. Ignore interest on unpaid accounts receiv-
able. What journal entries will Furniture Retailers make (1) at the time of sale in January 
2013 and (2) when it receives each monthly payment from the customer under each of the 
following methods of recognizing revenue:
a. Installment method.
b. Cost recovery method.
50. Revenue recognition when collection is uncertain. Appliance Sales and Service sells major 
household appliances to retail customers, offering extended payment terms. Its fiscal year 
ends on June 30. In July of 2013, a customer bought a freezer, a refrigerator, and a con-
vection oven on an installment plan, with no down payment and 10 monthly payments of 
$244, beginning July 31, 2013. The gross margin percentage on this arrangement is 9%. 
Appliance Sales and Service classifies Deferred Gross Margin as a liability on its balance 
sheet. Ignore interest on unpaid accounts receivable.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
a. Assume the customer makes all 10 payments. What journal entries will Appliance Sales 
and Service make (1) at the time of sale in July 2013 and (2) when it receives each 
monthly payment from the customer under each of the following methods of recogniz-
ing revenue?
(1) Installment method.
(2) Cost recovery method.
b. Assume the customer stops making payments after making the November 2013 pay-
ment. In December 2013, Appliance Sales and Service repossesses all three appliances 
and estimates that it could sell the repossessed appliances for $980. What journal entries 
would Appliance Sales and Services make under each of the following methods of rec-
ognizing revenue:
(1) Installment method.
(2) Cost recovery method.
51. Point-of-sale versus installment method of income recognition. The J. C. Spangle catalog 
company began business on January 1, 2012. Activities of the company for the first two 
years are as follows:
2013
2012
Sales, All on Account. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$300,000
$200,000
Collections from Customers:
 On 2012 Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110,000
90,000
 On 2013 Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120,000
—
Purchase of Merchandise  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240,000
180,000
Inventory of Merchandise at 12/31  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114,000
60,000
All Expenses Other Than Merchandise, Paid in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44,000
32,000
a. Prepare income statements for 2012 and 2013, assuming that the company uses the 
accrual basis of accounting and recognizes revenue at the time of sale.
b. Prepare income statements for 2012 and 2013, assuming that the company uses the 
accrual basis of accounting and recognizes revenue at the time of cash collection fol-
lowing the installment method of accounting. “All Expenses Other Than Merchandise, 
Paid in Cash” are period expenses.
52. Revenue recognition for a franchise. Pickin Chicken, Inc., and Country Delight, Inc., both 
sell franchises for their chicken restaurants. The franchisee receives the right to use the 
franchisor’s products and to benefit from national training and advertising programs. The 
franchisee agrees to pay $50,000 for exclusive franchise rights in a city. Of this amount, 
the franchisee pays $20,000 on signing the franchise agreement and promises to pay the 
remainder in five equal annual installments of $6,000 each, starting one year after signing 
the franchise agreement. Pickin Chicken recognizes franchise revenue as it signs agree-
ments, whereas Country Delight recognizes franchise revenue on an installment basis. In 
2011, each company sold eight franchises. In 2012, each sold five franchises. In 2013, nei-
ther company sold a franchise.
a. Calculate the amount of revenue recognized by each company during 2011–2017.
b. When do you think a franchisor should recognize franchise revenue? Why?
53. Income recognition for various types of business. Most firms recognize at least some rev-
enues at the time of sale or delivery of goods and services and, following the principles of 
the accrual basis of accounting, match expenses either with associated revenues or with 
the period when they consume resources in operations. Exhibit 8.7 presents common-size 
income statements for seven firms for a recent year, with all amounts expressed as a per-
centage of total revenues. Exhibit 8.7 also indicates the revenues generated by each firm for 
each dollar of assets in use on average during the year. A brief description of the activities 
of each firm follows.
 
 
Amgen engages in the development, manufacturing, and marketing of biotechnology 
products. Developing and obtaining approval of biotechnology products takes 10 or more 
years. Amgen has two principal products that it manufactures and markets and several 
more products in the development pipeline.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

325
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Brown-Forman is a distiller of hard liquors. After combining the ingredients, the com-
pany ages the liquors for five or more years before sale.
Deere manufactures farm equipment. It sells this equipment to a network of inde-
pendent distributors, who in turn sell the equipment to final consumers. Deere provides 
financing and insurance services both to its distributors and to final consumers.
Fluor engages in construction services on multiyear construction projects. It subcon-
tracts most of the actual construction work and receives a fee for its services.
Golden West  (now part of Wachovia) is a savings and loan company. It takes deposits 
from customers and lends funds, primarily to individuals for home mortgages. Customers 
typically pay a fee (called “points”) at the time of loan origination based on the amount 
borrowed. Their monthly mortgage payments include interest on the outstanding loan bal-
ance and a partial repayment of the principal of the loan.
 
 
Merrill Lynch (now a part of Bank of America) engages in the securities business. It 
obtains funds primarily from short-term capital market sources and invests the funds pri-
marily in short-term, readily marketable financial instruments. It attempts to generate an 
excess of investment returns over the cost of the funds invested. Merrill Lynch also offers 
fee-based services, such as financial consulting, buying and selling securities for customers, 
securities underwriting, and investment management.
 
 
Rockwell Collins is a technology-based electronics and aerospace company. It engages 
in research and development on behalf of its customers, which include the U.S. govern-
ment and private-sector entities. Its contracts tend to run for many years on a continually 
renewed basis.
a. When should each of these companies recognize revenue? What unique issues does each 
company face in the recognition of expenses?
b. Suggest possible reasons for differences in the net income divided by revenues percent-
ages for these companies.
54. Understanding the purpose of the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts account. A member 
of the Audit Committee of a firm asks the chief financial officer (CFO) the following ques-
tion: “How do you know the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts is adequate?” Discuss 
the adequacy or inadequacy of each of the following independent responses.
a. “I think it much more likely than not that the amount of cash and marketable securities 
is adequate to cover any cash shortage caused by customers’ not paying what they owe.”
Common-Size Income Statement for Selected Companies
(Problem 53)
Amgen
Brown-
Forman
Deere
Fluor
Golden 
West
Merrill 
Lynch
Rockwell 
Collins
Revenues
Sales of Goods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98.7%
99.9%
83.6%
—
—
—
99.3%
Sales of Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
99.7%
2.0%
47.5%
—
Interest on Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1.3
  0.1
 16.4
  0.3
 98.0
 52.5
  0.7
 Total Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
Expenses
Cost of Goods or Services Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(14.3)
(35.5)
(69.4)
(95.6)
—
(43.3)
(77.4)
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(23.4)
(33.1)
(11.4)
(0.6)
(15.9)
—
(12.6)
Other Operatinga. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(26.4)
(15.4)
(3.5)
—
(3.3)
—
—
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (0.7)
    (1.3)
    (11.0)
     (0.2)
   (60.4)
    (47.2)
 (0.9)
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35.2%
14.7%
4.7%
3.6%
20.4%
9.5%
9.1%
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (16.1)
    (5.9)
     (1.6)
     (1.3)
     (8.4)
     (3.9)
    (3.5)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 19.1%
  8.8%
  3.1%
  2.3%
 12.0%
  5.6%
  5.6%
Revenues/Average Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.9
1.3
0.7
3.1
0.1
0.1
1.2
aRepresents research and development costs for Amgen and Deere, excise taxes for Brown-Forman, and a provision for loan losses by Golden West.
EXHIBIT 8.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326
Chapter 8 
Revenue Recognition, Receivables, and Advances from Customers
b. “I have checked the Bad Debt Expense for sales made this past period and found the 
amount reasonable.”
c. “I have performed an aging of all accounts receivable for all sales this period and found 
the amount reasonable.”
d. “I have performed an aging of all accounts receivable and found the amount reasonable.”
e. “We performed a detailed confirmation of receivables from customers whose accounts 
the firm wrote off as uncollectible this period and found the decision to write them off 
suitable under the circumstances.”
f. “We performed a detailed confirmation of receivables from customers whose accounts 
the firm has neither collected nor written off by the end of this period and found the 
decisions suitable under the circumstances.”
g. “I know the allowance account was correct at the end of last period, and I checked the 
Bad Debt Expense for this period using a percentage of sales recommended for this 
class of customers by the top two credit reporting agencies.”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

UNDERLYING CONCEPTS AND TERMINOLOGY
C
hapter 3 introduced the distinction between current assets and liabilities and noncurrent assets 
and liabilities. For an asset, the current–noncurrent distinction refers to whether a firm will 
convert the benefit to cash, or consume it, or sell it within one operating cycle. For a liability, the 
distinction refers to whether a firm will pay or otherwise settle the obligation within one operating 
cycle. Because the operating cycle for most firms is one year or less, one year is the conventional 
cutoff for distinguishing a current from a noncurrent asset or liability. Working capital is the dif-
ference between a firm’s current assets and its current liabilities. The current ratio, also called the 
working capital ratio, is current assets divided by current liabilities.
Both working capital and the current ratio provide information about liquidity. Liquidity 
refers to a firm’s ability to meet short-term obligations as they come due. A firm whose current 
assets exceed its current liabilities has positive working capital and a current ratio that exceeds one. 
When current liabilities exceed current assets, working capital is negative and the current ratio is 
less than one. Although most firms have positive working capital, negative working capital does 
not mean a firm cannot meet its near-term obligations. A firm may, for example, have a bank line 
of credit that allows it to borrow cash to meet short-term obligations.
Exhibit 1.1 (page 8) shows Great Deal’s balance sheet for fiscal years ending in 2013 and 2012; 
Exhibit 1.5 (page 12) shows similar information for Thames Group for the years ending Decem-
ber 31, 2013 and 2012. Great Deal’s balance sheet reveals working capital of $1,588 (= $10,566 
– $8,978) million, and a current ratio of 1.18, as of February 27, 2013. As of this date, Great Deal 
had $1.18 in current assets for each $1.00 of liabilities due within the next year. Thames had nega-
tive working capital of €483 (= €11,004 – €11,487) million. Thames’s current liabilities, however, 
include a Reserves for Contingencies, explained in Note 22 of its financial statements. Much of this 
amount will not require a cash outlay within a year of the balance sheet date; the discussion of 
why will come later in the book. For now, keep in mind that mechanical computations of financial 
statement ratios across companies will often not yield comparable results.
The accountant’s definition of working capital (total current assets minus total current liabili-
ties) differs from the definition often used in finance, because of the treatment of items that do 
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Working Capital
C h a p t e r
9
1. Identify the principal components of 
working capital (other than accounts 
receivable and advances from custom-
ers, discussed in Chapter 8, and mar-
ketable securities, discussed in Chapter 
13) and the transactions that give 
rise to each component. Components 
include cash, prepayments, inventory, 
accounts payable, short-term notes, 
accrued liabilities (such as wages 
payable and taxes payable), warranties, 
and restructuring liabilities.
2. Understand inventory components, 
inventory cost flows, and the account-
ing for inventory in merchandising and 
manufacturing firms.
3. Understand the recognition and 
 measurement of warranty liabilities 
and restructuring liabilities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

328
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
not clearly relate to a firm’s operations. Working capital as defined in finance equals current 
operating assets minus current operating liabilities, excluding current assets and current liabili-
ties that reflect the firm’s financing structure, called financial assets and financial liabilities. 
Thames’s balance sheet in Exhibit 1.5 makes such distinctions easy to see, as it classifies current 
financial liabilities separately from current operating liabilities. The general rule to distinguish 
an operating asset (operating liability) from a financing asset (financial liability) is its purpose. 
Specifically, does the firm use the item directly in operations, or does the firm use it to finance 
those operations? On the asset side, current financial assets typically include assets that gener-
ate interest or investment income, such as marketable securities and other short-term invest-
ments.1 On the liability side, current financial liabilities typically include obligations that accrue 
interest. Examples include short-term bank borrowings and the current portion of long-term 
debt. In this book, we use the term working capital as the accountant uses it.
The rest of this chapter focuses on specific current assets (cash, prepayments, and inven-
tory) and specific current liabilities (accounts payable, short-term borrowings, accrued liabili-
ties, income taxes payable, warranties, and restructuring liabilities).2
PRINCIPAL CURRENT ASSET ACCOUNTS
CASH AND CASH EQUIVALENTS
Cash includes currency, money orders, bank checks, checking accounts, and time depos-
its. Many firms combine cash and cash equivalents in a single line on the balance sheet. Cash 
equivalents refer to liquid short-term assets in which the firm has temporarily invested excess 
cash. Generally, investments with maturities of three months or less qualify as cash equiva-
lents. Firms classify instruments with longer maturities as short-term investments or marketable 
securities. The measurement of cash and cash equivalents is the cash value of the instruments 
included in this category.
PREPAYMENTS 
Prepayments (also called prepaid assets3) are assets that represent services a firm has paid for 
before consuming them. Examples include rent and insurance payments made before the firm 
consumes rent and insurance services. For example, if on August 1 a firm pays £18,000 for 
insurance coverage for the next 12 months, the firm would record the following journal entry:
 
Prepaid Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
18,000
To record the cash paid for insurance coverage over the next 12 months.
At the end of each of the next 12 months, the firm records the following adjusting entry:
 
Insurance Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Prepaid Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
To record £1,500 (= £18,000/12 months) of insurance services consumed 
during the month.
If the firm prepared a balance sheet as of December 31, the prepayment would be £10,500 
(= £18,000 – [5 months × £1,500/month]).
 1 A user of the financial statements cannot see management’s intent in holding marketable securities and other 
short-term investments. For example, management might plan to use these assets to support an operating strat-
egy. If so, management will classify these securities or investments as operating assets.
 2 Chapter 8 describes two working capital accounts associated with revenues (accounts receivable and advances 
from customers). We defer discussion of other current asset and current liability accounts to later chapters. For 
example, we describe marketable securities in Chapter 13, the current portion of long-term debt in Chapter 11, 
and the current portion of deferred taxes in Chapter 12.
 3 Since all assets are prepaid, we prefer the term prepayments, but practice often refers to prepaid assets.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

329
Principal Current Asset Accounts
INVENTORY
Inventory refers to items a firm holds for sale or for further processing as part of its operations. 
When a firm sells inventory, the carrying amount of that inventory becomes an expense, Cost 
of Goods Sold. Inventories are a major asset for merchandising and manufacturing firms, and 
cost of goods sold is typically their largest expense.
The inventory equation describes changes in inventory. The following equation measures all 
quantities in physical units:
Beginning Inventory + Additions − Withdrawals = Ending Inventory
 
Good Available for Sale (or Use)
A firm that begins a period with 2,000 pounds of sugar (beginning inventory) and pur-
chases (adds) 4,500 pounds has 6,500 (= 2,000 + 4,500) pounds available for sale or use. The 
term goods available for sale (or use) refers to the sum of Beginning Inventory plus Additions. 
If the firm uses (withdraws) 5,300 pounds, 1,200 pounds of sugar remain at the end of the 
period (ending inventory).
The inventory equation can also be written as follows:
Beginning Inventory + Additions − Ending Inventory = Withdrawals
 
Good Available for Sale (or Use)
If the firm begins the period with 2,000 pounds of sugar, purchases 4,500 pounds, and 
observes 1,200 pounds on hand at the end of the period, the firm used 5,300 (= 2,000 + 4,500 
– 1,200) pounds of sugar during the period.4
Financial statements report financial amounts (such as dollars, euros, and yuan), not physi-
cal amounts (such as units, kilograms, and cubic feet). The accountant transforms physical 
quantities of inventories into financial amounts by assigning costs to those physical quantities. 
When acquisition costs are constant, all inventory items carry the same per-unit cost. Physical 
quantities and financial amounts change together so that variation in the monetary amounts 
recorded for inventories results from changes in quantities. Issues in inventory accounting arise 
because the per-unit acquisition costs of inventory items change over time.
The remainder of this section discusses three issues in inventory accounting:
1. The types of costs included in the acquisition cost of inventory.
2. The treatment of changes in the market value of inventories subsequent to acquisition.
3. The cost-flow assumption used to trace the movement of costs into and out of inventory, 
including the effects of per-unit inventory costs changing over time.
ISSUE 1: COSTS INCLUDED IN INVENTORY
The principle for cost inclusion is that the balance sheet amount for inventory should include 
all costs incurred to acquire goods and prepare them for sale.
Merchandising firms, such as Great Deal, acquire inventory items ready for sale. Acquisi-
tion cost includes the invoice price less discounts for prompt payment, plus the cost of trans-
porting, receiving, unpacking, inspecting, and shelving, as well as costs incurred to record the 
purchases in the accounts.
Manufacturing firms, such as Thames Group, do not acquire inventory items ready for sale. 
Manufacturing firms transform raw materials, purchased parts, and components into finished 
products in factories. The acquisition cost of manufactured inventories includes three catego-
ries of costs:
■ 
Direct Materials (also called Raw Materials): The cost of materials a manufacturing firm 
can trace directly to units of product it manufactures. For example, direct materials for 
Thames would include the steel, plastic, nuts, bolts, assembled CD/radios and navigation 
systems, and other items that physically become part of a manufactured item.
}
}
 4 This form of the inventory equation requires that the firm know Goods Available for Sale and Ending Inven-
tory. From those known quantities, it computes Withdrawals. Computing the amount of withdrawals this way 
is called the periodic inventory method. When the firm counts items as it withdraws them from inventory, it is 
using the so-called perpetual inventory method.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

330
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
■ 
Direct Labor: The cost of labor to transform raw materials into a finished product. This 
cost for Thames includes the compensation of factory workers on the production line.
■ 
Manufacturing Overhead: A variety of indirect costs that the firm cannot directly trace to 
products manufactured but that are essential for production to occur, for example, depre-
ciation, insurance and taxes on manufacturing facilities, supervisory factory labor, and sup-
plies for factory equipment.
Until a manufacturing firm sells its products and recognizes revenue, it treats all manu-
facturing costs as product costs. Product costs are assets. The firm accumulates product costs 
in various inventory accounts: raw materials, work in process (also called work in progress), 
and finished goods. (Refer to flow of costs in the Glossary for a diagram showing product cost 
accumulation.) U.S. publicly traded firms must disclose the amounts of each of these three 
components of inventory in their financial reports, usually in a note. IFRS notes that informa-
tion about inventory components “is useful to financial statement users.”5 As an illustration, 
Thames’s balance sheet (Exhibit 1.5, page 12) reports a carrying value for inventory of €2,210.8 
million for the year ended December 31, 2013. Exhibit 9.1 shows the components of Thames’s 
inventory, as revealed in Note 15 to its financial statements (in millions of €).6
A manufacturing firm, like a merchandising firm, also incurs marketing costs (for example, 
sales commissions and depreciation, insurance and taxes on the sales staff’s automobiles) and 
administrative costs (for example, salary of the chief executive officer, depreciation on comput-
ers used in human resources). Both merchandising and manufacturing firms treat selling and 
administrative costs as period expenses. Period expenses are not assets. Firms recognize these 
costs as expenses in the period when they consume the goods or services.
Overview of the Accounting Process for a Manufacturing Firm Figure 9.1
summarizes the flow of costs for a manufacturing firm, and Figure 9.2 shows the flow of manu-
facturing costs through the various accounts.
A manufacturing firm maintains separate accounts for inventories at various stages of 
completion. The Raw Materials Inventory account shows the cost of raw materials purchased 
but not yet transferred to the factory floor. The manufacturing firm records purchases of raw 
materials as debits to the Raw Materials Inventory account. When the manufacturer physically 
transfers raw materials to the factory floor, it also transfers the cost of the raw materials from 
the Raw Materials Inventory account to the Work-in-Process Inventory account. It records this 
transfer as a credit to the Raw Materials Inventory account for the cost of the raw materials 
transferred and a debit to the Work in Process Inventory account. The balance in Raw Materi-
als Inventory is the cost of raw materials on hand in the storeroom or warehouse.
Thames 
Note 15: Inventories
EXHIBIT 9.1
2013
2012
Raw Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€  530.5
€  504.1
Work-in-Progress (including construction contracts)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,195.7
1,191.1
Semi-Finished and Finished Products  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
859.6
859.9
Finished Goods for Resale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   125.1
   145.1
Total Gross . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€2,710.9
€2,700.2
Provisions [Note A] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (500.1)
  (472.8)
Total Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€2,210.8
€  2,227.4
Note A: The term Provisions indicates amount by which the 
total gross value of inventory exceeds a measure of the 
market value of those inventories, labeled "Total net."
 5 International Accounting Standards Board, International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories, revised 2003, par. 
37.
 6 Thames subtracts a provision from inventory. This provision represents the amount by which Thames estimates 
the cost of inventory exceeds its replacement values.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

331
Principal Current Asset Accounts
The Work-in-Process Inventory account (also called Work-in-Progress Inventory account) 
accumulates the cost of raw materials transferred to the factory floor, the cost of direct labor 
used in production, and manufacturing overhead costs. At the completion of the manu-
facturing process, the firm physically transfers completed units from the factory floor to the 
finished goods storeroom. It also transfers the product costs of those completed units to 
Finished Goods Inventory. The firm credits the Work-in-Process Inventory account for the man-
ufacturing costs assigned to the finished units transferred to the finished goods storeroom and 
debits the Finished Goods Inventory account. This journal entry reduces the balance in Work-
in-Process Inventory and increases the balance in Finished Goods Inventory. The balance in the 
Work-in-Process Inventory account measures the accumulated product costs for units not yet 
finished.
The Finished Goods Inventory account measures the manufacturing cost of units completed 
but not yet sold. The sale of manufactured goods to customers results in a transfer of their cost 
from the Finished Goods Inventory account to the Cost of Goods Sold account, an expense 
reducing net income and ultimately retained earnings. The journal entry is a debit to Cost of 
Goods Sold and a credit to Finished Goods Inventory.
Example 1 Moon Products began its Belgian operations on January 1 by issuing 10,000 
shares of €10 par value common stock for €30 per share. Transactions during January and the 
related journal entries follow:
(1)  The firm rents a building and pays 12 months rent in advance, in cash. The amount is 
€250,000.
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
250,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250,000
To record prepayment of 12 months rent.
(2) The firm purchases on account raw materials costing €25,000.
Raw Materials Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
To record purchase of inventory on account.
Stage 1
Acquiring Materials
and Services
Product Costs
Period Expenses
Raw Materials
Factory Labor
Work in Process
Balance Sheet
Income Statement
Finished Goods
Cost of Goods Sold
Other Factory Costs
Selling Costs
Selling Expenses
Net Income
Administrative Costs
Administrative Expenses
Stage 3
Furnishing Goods
and Services
Stage 2
Production
Factors of
Production Used
Completion
of Goods
Sale of
Goods
Diagram of Cost Flows
FIGURE 9.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

332
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
Flow of Manufacturing Costs Through the Accounts
FIGURE 9.2 
 
Raw Materials Inventory 
Work-in-Process Inventory 
Finished Goods Inventory 
Cost of Goods Sold
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shareholders’ 
Shareholders’
Asset 
Asset 
Asset 
Asset 
Asset  
Asset  
Equity  
Equity
Increases 
Decreases 
Increases  
Decreases  
Increases  
Decreases  
Decreases  
Increases
with Debits  
with Credits  
with Debits  
with Credits  
with Debits  
with Credits  
with Debits  
with Credits
Cost of Raw  
Raw Materials  
Raw Materials  
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing
Materials   
Costs Incurred   
Costs Incurred  
Cost of Units  
Cost of Units  
Cost of Units 
Cost of Units
Purchased  
in Manufacturing  
in Manufacturing  
Completed and  
Completed and  
Sold  
Sold
   
 
 
Transferred to  
Transferred to
 
 
 
Storeroom  
Storeroom
 
Cash or Wages Payable
Asset Increases  
Asset Decreases
or Liability  
or Liability 
Decreases  
Increases 
 
Direct Labor  
Direct Labor
 
Costs Incurred  
Costs Incurred
 
in Manufacturing  
in Manufacturing
 
Cash, Accumulated Depreciation
 
and Other Accounts
Asset Increases  
Asset Decreases
or Liability  
or Liability
Decreases  
Increases 
 
Overhead Costs  
Overhead Costs
 
Incurred in  
Incurred in
 
Manufacturing  
Manufacturing
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

333
Principal Current Asset Accounts
(3) The firm issues, to producing departments, raw materials costing €20,000.
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Raw Materials Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
To record the transfer of raw materials to producing departments.
(4)  The total payroll for January is €60,000: €40,000 paid to factory workers and €20,000 paid 
to marketing and administrative personnel.
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
Salaries Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
60,000
To record payroll costs: €40,000 product cost and €20,000 period expense.
A manufacturing firm records nonmanufacturing costs as expenses of the period when the 
firm consumes the services. It consumes the services of marketing and administrative person-
nel when employees provide those services. Journal entry (4) illustrates the difference between 
recording a product cost and recording a period expense. The first debit increases an asset 
account and the second increases an expense, thereby reducing shareholders’ equity. Entries (5) 
and (6) also split a single item between a product cost and a period expense.
(5)  Expenditures for utilities during January are €1,200. Of this amount, €1,000 is for manu-
facturing activities and €200 is for marketing and administrative activities.
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
Utilities Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,200
To record utilities costs: €1,000 product cost and €200 period expense.
(6)  Refer to entry (1). Rental expense for January is €20,833 (= €250,000/12 months). The 
firm uses 70% of the rented space for manufacturing purposes and 30% for administrative 
(nonmanufacturing) purposes.
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,583
Rent Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,250
 
Prepaid Rent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,833
To record the consumption of prepaid rent services: €14,583 product cost 
and €6,250 period expense.
(7)  Units completed during January and transferred to the finished goods storeroom have a 
manufacturing cost of €48,500.7
 
Finished Goods Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
48,500
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
48,500
To record the transfer of completed units to finished goods inventory.
 7 In practice, firms use cost accounting methods, taught in other courses, to compute the cost of goods manufac-
tured and transferred to the finished goods inventory.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

334
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
(8)  Sales during January total €75,000, of which €25,000 is on account.
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
75,000
To record sales of €75,000.
(9) The cost of the goods sold during January is €42,600.
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42,600
 
Finished Goods Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
42,600
To record cost of sales of €42,600.
Exhibit 9.2 presents a statement of income before taxes for Moon Products for Janu-
ary. Exhibit 9.3 shows the T-accounts summarizing the journal entries affecting the inventory 
accounts during the month. Moon Products earned income before taxes of €5,950 in Janu-
ary. At the end of January, Moon Products has a balance of €5,000 in Raw Materials Inven-
tory, €27,083 in Work-in-Process Inventory, and €5,900 in Finished Goods Inventory. Moon 
Moon Products
Income Statement
For January
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€75,000
Less Expenses:
 
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€42,600
 
Salaries Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20,000
 
Utilities Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
200
 
Rent Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  6,250
 
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 69,050
Income Before Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 5,950
EXHIBIT 9.2
Moon Products
T-Accounts Showing Inventory Transactions
During January
Raw Materials Inventory
Work-in-Process Inventory
✓
0
✓
0
(2)
25,000
20,000
(3)
(3)
20,000
(4)
40,000
48,500
(7)
(5)
1,000
(6)
14,583
✓
5,000
✓
27,083
Finished Goods Inventory
Cost of Goods Sold
✓
0
(7)
48,500
42,600
(9)
(9)
42,600
✓
5,900
EXHIBIT 9.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

335
Principal Current Asset Accounts
Products’s balance sheet for January would show a carrying value for Inventories of €37,983 
(= €5,000 + €27,083 + €5,900).
Summary of Accounting for Manufacturing Operations The accounting pro-
cedures for the marketing and administrative costs of manufacturing firms resemble those for 
merchandising firms. The firm expenses these period costs when it consumes the services. The 
accounting procedures for a manufacturing firm differ from those for a merchandising firm in 
the treatment of inventories. A merchandising firm acquires products ready for sale. It debits 
purchases of merchandise to the Inventory account and credits the Inventory account when it 
sells the merchandise. A manufacturing firm incurs costs to transform raw materials into work 
in process and then into finished products. When a manufacturing firm consumes raw materi-
als, labor services, and factory overhead services in the manufacturing process, the consump-
tion results in the creation of an asset—partially completed and completed units of inventory. 
Until the manufacturing firm sells the units produced, it accumulates (debits) manufacturing 
costs in asset accounts—the Raw Materials Inventory account, the Work-in-Process Inventory 
account, and the Finished Goods Inventory account. Upon sale, the firm credits the finished 
goods inventory account and debits cost of goods sold for the cost of the units sold.
 PROBLEM  9.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Flow of manufacturing costs through the accounts. The following data relate to the 
manufacturing activities of Haskell Ltd. during March:
March 1
March 31
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
£42,400
£ 46,900
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
75,800
63,200
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
44,200
46,300
Factory Costs Incurred During the Month
Raw Materials Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60,700
Labor Services Received . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
137,900
Heat, Light, and Power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,260
Other Factory Costs
Rental Charges for Factory Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,800
Rental Charges on Factory Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,100
Prepaid Insurance Expired  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,440
Revenues and Non-Factory Costs
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400,000
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
125,000
a. Calculate the cost of raw materials used during March.
b. Calculate the cost of units completed during March and transferred to finished 
goods.
c. Calculate the cost of units sold during March.
d. Calculate income before taxes for March.
ISSUE 2: VALUATION SUBSEQUENT TO ACQUISITION
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to initially record inventories at acquisition cost 
(Issue 1 discussed above). The market value of inventories held by a firm may change, however. 
This section discusses the treatment of changes in the market value of inventories subsequent 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

336
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
to acquisition. U.S. GAAP and IFRS defined market value differently, but both base the defini-
tion on variants of the cost to replace the inventory (replacement cost).8
Increases in Market Value Inventories may increase in market value subsequent to 
acquisition for various reasons. The increase is called a holding gain. For example, a shortage of 
a raw material (such as rare earth minerals) may increase the market value of that raw material 
and therefore increase the market value of inventory of which the raw material is a component. 
A new labor agreement may increase labor cost and thereby increase the replacement cost of 
manufactured inventories. If a firm were to remeasure its inventories to the higher replacement 
cost, or market value, it would make an entry such as the following:
 
Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Unrealized Holding Gain on Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
To record an increase in the market value of inventories
Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS permit firms to remeasure inventories upward to an amount 
exceeding acquisition cost.9 Although an increase in the market value of inventory may allow 
the firm to raise its selling price, the firm does not realize the benefit of that increase until it 
sells the inventory. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS delay recognition of a holding gain on invento-
ries until the firm sells the inventory.
Decreases in Market Value Inventories can decrease in market value for various rea-
sons. The decrease is called a holding loss. A competitor may introduce a technologically 
superior product; a product may include materials found to contain a health hazard; the intro-
duction of a lower-cost raw material lowers the manufacturing cost of a product using that raw 
material as a component.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to write down (that is, reduce the balance sheet 
carrying value of) inventories when their replacement cost declines below acquisition cost. 
Accountants refer to the inventory as impaired and refer to this valuation as the lower-of-cost-
or-market basis.10 The journal entry to record the inventory impairment results in a loss and a 
new lower balance sheet carrying value. U.S. GAAP does not permit firms to recognize subse-
quent value increases. In contrast, IFRS permits firms to reverse previous impairments, up to 
the amount of the original acquisition cost of the inventory, if the circumstances that caused 
the inventory impairment no longer exist.
To illustrate inventory impairment, if Great Deal experienced a decline of $5,000 in the 
market value of inventory with an acquisition cost of $119,000, it would make the following 
journal entry to recognize the impairment:
 
Unrealized Holding Loss on Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
To record an inventory impairment loss of $5,000.
The Unrealized Holding Loss on Inventory (sometimes called Impairment Loss) is an 
expense of the period. Many firms include the unrealized holding loss in cost of goods sold.
Consider, for example, the calculations in Exhibit 9.4 where beginning inventory is $19,000, 
purchases are $100,000, and ending inventory has a cost of $25,000 and a market value of 
$20,000. Cost of Goods Sold is $5,000 larger when the firm records ending inventory at lower 
of cost or market than when it records the inventory at acquisition cost. The loss of $5,000 
increases Cost of Goods Sold by $5,000 and reduces Net Income by $5,000, compared to the 
acquisition cost basis. The firm should disclose large write-downs included in Cost of Goods 
Sold in the notes so that users of financial statements understand the components of the Cost 
of Goods Sold account.
 8 Refer to the Glossary at the entry for lower of cost or market.
 9 An exception to this rule for agricultural assets is beyond the scope of this book.
10 AICPA, Committee on Accounting Procedures, Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, “Inventory Pricing,” 1953 
(Codification Topic 330); International Accounting Standards Board, International Accounting Standard 2, 
“Inventories,” revised 2003. Refer to the Glossary at the entry for lower of cost or market.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

337
Principal Current Asset Accounts
If the same inventory increased $3,000 in market value in the subsequent period, under U.S. 
GAAP, the firm would continue to report the inventory at $20,000, the lower of cost or market. 
If, however, Great Deal prepared its financial statements in accordance with IFRS, it would 
reverse a portion of its previous impairment by making the following journal entry:
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Unrealized Holding Gain on Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
To record a partial recovery of previous inventory impairment, permitted 
under IFRS but not under U.S. GAAP.
Firms in industries that frequently experience inventory price fluctuations often use an 
allowance account to record lower-of-cost-or-market adjustments.11 For example, Exhibit 9.5
shows the sort of disclosure Nestlé Group has used to describe its inventory allowance account. 
Nestle Group’s balance sheet for Year 7 shows inventories with a carrying value of $9,272 mil-
lion. The gross amount of inventory is $9,547 million, equal to the net (balance sheet carrying 
value) inventory amount of $9,272 million plus the ending balance in the Allowance for Write-
Downs of $275 million. The firm estimates the impairment in inventory arising from application 
of the lower-of-cost-or-market rule and records the impairment in an inventory contra account, 
the Allowance for Write-Down at Net Realizable Value. If the firm had lower-of-cost-or-market 
adjustments of $100 million in Year 7, it would have recorded the following journal entry:
Unrealized Holding Loss on Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
 
Allowance for Write-Down at Net Realizable Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
To record an inventory impairment loss of $100. The Unrealized Holding Loss 
would reduce income in the current period. The Allowance account did not 
increase by the full amount of $100 between the end of Year 6 and the end 
of Year 7 because other inventory items increased in fair value, partially 
offsetting the impairment loss. 
11 Under U.S. GAAP, a firm would not record an inventory impairment loss in its interim (quarterly) financial 
statements if “substantial evidence exists that market prices will recover before the inventory is sold” (Codifica-
tion Topic 330-10-55).
Calculating Cost of Goods Sold Using Different 
Bases of Inventory Valuation
Cost Basis
Lower-of-Cost-
or-Market Basis
Beginning Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 19,000
$ 19,000
Purchases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 100,000
Goods Available for Sale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$119,000
$119,000
Less Ending Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (25,000)
  (20,000)
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 94,000
$ 99,000
EXHIBIT 9.4
Inventory Year Ended December 31, Year 7 and Year 6,
Based on Disclosures of Nestlé Group
10. Inventories
Year 7
Year 6
Raw Materials, Work in Progress, and Sundry Supplies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,590
$3,102
Finished Goods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5,957
 5,164
Allowance for Write-Down at Net Realizable Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (275)
  (237)
$9,272
$8,029
EXHIBIT 9.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

338
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
Under IFRS, the firm would reverse the write-downs in the Allowance for Inventory 
Impairment account, as long as those reversals do not exceed the cumulative amount of prior 
write-downs.12 The lower-of-cost-or-market basis for inventory valuation is a conservative 
accounting policy for two reasons:
1. It recognizes losses from decreases in market value before a sale occurs but recognizes gains 
from increases in market value above original acquisition cost only when a sale occurs;
2. It reports inventories on the balance sheet at amounts that are never greater, but may be 
less, than acquisition cost.13
Subsequent Sale of Inventory Adjusted to Lower of Cost or Market As long 
as the inventory that a firm has written down remains salable, the firm will record revenues 
on the eventual sale of the items. The firm will debit Cost of Goods Sold and credit Inven-
tory at the time it recognizes revenue. The difference between the amount of revenue and the 
amount of cost of goods sold is the gross margin on the transaction. Holding the selling price 
constant, the lower-of-cost-or-market adjustment reduces the carrying value of the inventory in 
the period of write-down but increases the gross margin recognized on the eventual sale of the 
inventory in a future period.
If the write-down and the sale of inventory occur in the same reporting period, the income 
statement for that period captures both effects. The impairment loss (mark-down) will off-
set the lower market value of inventory recognized as cost of goods sold. If the firm sells the 
marked-down inventory in a later reporting period, the impairment loss will reduce income in 
an earlier period, but the later, higher gross margin in the period of sale will partly offset the 
loss. For example, if Great Deal estimates that unsold women’s clothing with a carrying value 
of $400 million has minimal market value given a change in fashion, Great Deal would record 
an impairment loss of $400 million, reducing the carrying value of this inventory to zero. If 
Great Deal sells the clothes for $5 million in a subsequent accounting period, it would recog-
nize zero cost of goods sold and a gross margin of $5 million on the sale, for a net margin of 
–$395 (= –$400 + $5) million over the two periods. Had Great Deal not used lower of cost or 
market, the net margin in the period of sale would have been the same, –$395 million. Lower of 
cost or market does not change total net income over the life of the item, but it does result in 
lower reported income in the earlier periods.
Summary of the Effects of Inventory Remeasurements The gain or loss associ-
ated with any one unit of inventory is the difference between its selling price and its acquisition 
cost. Inventory remeasurement rules determine when this gain or loss appears in the financial 
statements over the accounting periods between acquisition and final disposition. If a firm 
remeasures inventory upward to an amount exceeding acquisition cost (not generally permit-
ted by U.S. GAAP or IFRS), income in the period of the inventory write-up would be higher 
than if the firm had used the acquisition cost basis, but in a later period when the firms sells 
the inventory, income will be lower. The later, lower income results from the inventory having a 
higher balance sheet carrying value and therefore causing a larger cost of goods sold expense. 
When a firm uses the lower-of-cost-or-market basis, income in the period of an inventory write-
down will be lower than if the firm had used the acquisition cost basis, but income in a later 
period, when the firm sells the inventory, will be higher. Thus, income for each accounting 
period considered in isolation depends on the valuation of inventory on the balance sheet.
ISSUE 3: COST-FLOW ASSUMPTIONS
If the accounting records contain information on both the cost of the beginning inventory for a 
period (which equals the ending inventory of last period) and information on purchases made 
or production costs incurred during the current period, firms can easily measure the cost of 
12 Further, because the firm makes lower-of-cost-or-market adjustments for each type or class of inventory, a firm 
using IFRS might record both an impairment charge on one class of inventory and a reversal on a different class 
of inventory in the same year.
13 Consult the Glossary for the definition of conservatism in accounting. Conservative accounting policies result 
in both lower asset totals and lower retained earnings totals, thus implying lower cumulative net income totals. 
Conservatism does not mean reporting lower income in every period. Over long-enough time spans, an account-
ing policy that results in lower income in earlier periods must result in higher income in some subsequent peri-
ods. The conservative accounting policy results in lower income in the early periods.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

339
Principal Current Asset Accounts
goods available for sale or use. Firms can usually match units sold and units in ending inven-
tory with specific purchases using product bar codes or other identifiers.14 Using the identifier, 
the firm can trace the unit back to its purchase invoice or cost record.15 This is an example of 
the specific identification system for computing cost of goods sold.
To illustrate the specific identification system, assume a cycling store has a beginning inven-
tory consisting of bicycle 1, for which it paid $2,500. Suppose that during the period the store 
purchases bicycle 2 for $2,900 and bicycle 3 for $3,000, and that it sells one bicycle for $5,500. 
The three bicycles are physically identical; the store acquired them at different times as their 
acquisition costs changed, so only their costs differ.
We can write the inventory equation as follows, measuring all quantities in dollars of cost:
Beginning Inventory + Purchases
–
Cost of Goods Sold = Ending Inventory
$2,500
+
$5,900
–
?
=
?
If the cycling store uses the specific identification system, and uses serial numbers or prod-
uct bar codes to identify bicycle 2 as the unit sold, the cost of goods sold is $2,900, and the end-
ing inventory consisting of bicycles 1 and 3 is $5,500 (= $2,500 + $3,000).
If a firm does not have a system for the specific identification of units sold and units 
remaining in inventory, it will have records of the cost of the beginning inventory and the cost 
of purchases, but not for the cost of goods sold or for ending inventory. It can use a physical 
count of the ending inventory to obtain the number of units in ending inventory, but it will not 
have records of the costs of those units. Instead, it has records of the costs of units available 
for sale during the period (the cost of beginning inventory plus the cost of purchases). It could 
compute the cost of the units in ending inventory (or, conversely, cost of goods sold) using the 
most recent costs, the oldest costs, or the average cost of the units available for sale. Once it 
determines a cost for one unknown quantity—either ending inventory or cost of goods sold—
the inventory equation automatically determines the cost for the other quantity. The sum of 
the two unknowns, Cost of Goods Sold and Ending Inventory, must equal the Cost of Goods 
Available for Sale (= Beginning Inventory + Purchases). The higher the cost assigned to one 
unknown, the lower must be the cost assigned to the other.
In short, the firm must either know or make an assumption about which units it has sold or 
which units remain in inventory. Specific identification avoids making an assumption but is not 
practicable if inventory items are sufficiently similar and fluid, for example, gasoline in a stor-
age tank or limestone in a quarry. Even when technology that allows firms to track the cost of 
each item in inventory (such as scanners for product bar codes) exists, it may not be cost effec-
tive to do so. For example, a home improvements store likely does not use a bar code system to 
track pieces of lumber or hammers sold.
Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS requires firms to use specific identification. Both allow firms 
to select a cost-flow assumption. That cost-flow assumption need not match the actual physical 
flow of units within the firm. Typical cost-flow assumptions are as follows:
1. Weighted average.
2. First-in, first-out (FIFO).
3. Last-in, first-out (LIFO), which U.S. GAAP permits, but IFRS does not.
We illustrate each of these cost-flow assumptions using the data provided in Exhibit 9.6.
Under the weighted-average cost-flow assumption, a firm calculates the average of the costs 
of all units available for sale during the accounting period, including the cost applicable to the 
beginning inventory. This weighted-average cost applies to the units sold during the period and 
to the units on hand at the end of the period. Column (2) in Exhibit 9.6 illustrates the weighted-
average cost-flow assumption. The weighted-average cost of each bicycle available for sale 
14 Although in theory a firm could apply similar identifiers to manufactured items and work in process, it can be 
impractical to use specific identification for products that contain thousands of parts, each created by its own 
manufacturing operation. Many firms use standard cost systems to allocate costs to products manufactured. 
Standard costing is an important topic in managerial and cost accounting.
15 When a firm computes the cost of goods sold each time it sells an inventory item, it uses a perpetual inventory 
system. When a firm computes the cost of goods sold at the end of each period by taking a physical inventory 
and assumes that it sold any items not in ending inventory, it uses a periodic inventory system. See the Glossary 
for a description of these two inventory systems. We assume use of a periodic system throughout this book, 
unless we make a specific contrary statement or show a specific entry for cost of goods sold at the time of sale 
in an example.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

340
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
during the period is $2,800 [= 1⁄3 × ($2,500 + $2,900 + $3,000)]. Cost of Goods Sold is thus 
$2,800, and ending inventory is $5,600 (= 2 × $2,800).
The first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost-flow assumption assigns the costs of the earliest (or first) 
units acquired to the units sold and assigns the costs of the most recent acquisitions to the 
ending inventory. This cost-flow assumption matches the physical flow of goods and materials 
if the firm uses/sells the oldest materials and goods first. Column (1) of Exhibit 9.6 illustrates 
FIFO, which assigns to cost of goods sold the cost of bicycle 1, while the costs of bicycles 2 
and 3 remain in inventory. FIFO is like a conveyor belt: the first costs come off first for use or 
sale, while the last costs remain at the end of the period.
The last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost-flow assumption assigns the costs of the latest (or last) 
units acquired to the withdrawals and assigns the costs of the oldest units to the ending inven-
tory. Some argue that LIFO matches current costs to current revenues and, therefore, that 
LIFO better measures income. Column (3) of Exhibit 9.6 illustrates LIFO, which assigns to 
cost of goods sold the cost of bicycle 3 while the costs of bicycles 1 and 2 remain in inventory. 
LIFO is like a stack of trays in a cafeteria: the last cost, on the top of the stack, is the first 
expensed, and the longest held unit, which in times of rising prices will have the lowest cost, 
remains as long as the firm has inventories. LIFO does not reflect typical physical inventory 
flows. That is, the next product a firm sells is typically not the last one that it purchased or pro-
duced. As described next, firms use LIFO because it produces a cost of goods sold figure based 
on more recent costs and, therefore, in some cases results in lower net income and reduced tax 
payments.
As noted earlier, IFRS prohibits use of the LIFO cost-flow assumption. The U.S. taxing 
authorities permit a firm to use LIFO for income tax purposes as long as it also uses LIFO for 
financial reporting purposes.16 In periods of rising inventory acquisition costs and increasing 
inventory quantities, LIFO results in a higher cost of goods sold, a lower reported periodic 
income, and lower current income taxes than either FIFO or the weighted-average cost-flow 
assumption. The data in Exhibit 9.6 illustrate this pattern, which shows that, during this period 
characterized by increasing bicycle costs (from $2,500 to $2,900 to $3,000), LIFO results in the 
smallest gross margin ($2,500) of the three cost-flow assumptions. LIFO does not, however, 
16 The requirement that U.S. firms using LIFO for tax-reporting purposes must also use LIFO for financial-
reporting purposes is called the LIFO conformity rule. U.S. disclosure rules require that a LIFO firm must 
disclose ending inventory either at its current cost or on a FIFO cost-flow basis. Coupled with other financial 
statement information, this disclosure provides sufficient information to permit financial statement users to cal-
culate the values of inventory and cost of goods sold under a FIFO cost-flow assumption or an approximation 
thereto.
Comparison of Cost-Flow Assumptions Historical Cost Basis
Assumed Data
Beginning Inventory:
Bicycle 1 Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,500
Purchases:
Bicycle 2 Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,900
Bicycle 3 Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,000
Cost of Goods Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$8,400
Sales Revenues: One bicycle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,500
Cost Flow Assumption
FIFO
Weighted Average
LIFO
Financial Statements
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,500
$5,500
$5,500
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2,500a
 2,800b
 3,000c
Gross Margin on Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,000
$2,700
$2,500
Ending Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,900d
$5,600e
$5,400f
a Bicycle 1 costs $2,500.
d Bicycles 2 and 3 cost $2,900 + $3,000 = $5,900.
b Average bicycle costs $2,800 (= $8,400/3).
e Two bicycles at average cost 2 × $2,800 = $5,600.
c Bicycle 3 costs $3,000.
f Bicycles 1 and 2 cost $2,500 + $2,900 = $5,400.
EXHIBIT 9.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

341
Principal Current Asset Accounts
always provides a lower amount of net income, as we discuss in Appendix 9.1 to this chapter, 
because inventory quantities or acquisition costs of inventory need not always increase.
COMPARISON OF AND CHOICE AMONG COST-FLOW ASSUMPTIONS
Note from Exhibit 9.6 that cost of goods sold plus ending inventory equals $8,400, the total 
cost of goods available for sale, in all three cases. When purchase prices change, no cost-flow 
assumption places up-to-date costs on both the income statement and the balance sheet. For 
example, in a period of rising prices (as in Exhibit 9.6), if cost of goods includes recent, higher 
acquisition prices, as occurs under LIFO, then older, lower acquisition prices must appear in 
the cost of ending inventory on the balance sheet. As long as firms use acquisition costs for 
valuing inventory, either the income statement or the balance sheet will reflect current cost fig-
ures, but not both.
Of the three cost-flow assumptions, FIFO results in balance sheet figures that are closest to 
current cost because the latest purchases dominate the ending inventory amounts. The FIFO 
cost of goods sold will be out of date because FIFO assumes that the earlier acquisition costs 
of the beginning inventory and the earliest inventory acquisitions during the period become 
expenses. When purchase prices rise, FIFO usually leads to the highest reported net income of 
the three methods, and when purchase prices fall, it leads to the smallest.
LIFO ending inventory can contain costs of items acquired many years previously. When 
inventory costs have been rising and inventory amounts increasing, LIFO can produce balance 
sheet figures much lower than current costs, while LIFO’s cost of goods sold figure approxi-
mates current costs. Of the three cost-flow assumptions, LIFO usually results in the smallest 
net income when inventory costs are rising (highest cost of goods sold) and the largest net 
income when inventory costs are falling (lowest cost of goods sold). Also, LIFO results in the 
least fluctuation in gross margins in businesses in which selling prices tend to change as acquisi-
tion costs of inventories change.
The weighted-average cost-flow assumption falls between the other two in its effects, but 
it resembles FIFO more than LIFO in its effects on the financial statements. When inventory 
turns over rapidly, the weighted-average inventory cost-flow assumption provides amounts vir-
tually identical to FIFO amounts. The remaining discussion treats FIFO and weighted average 
as the same in terms of income statement effects.
Differences in cost of goods sold and inventories under different cost-flow assumptions 
relate in part to the rate of change in inventory acquisition costs. Using older purchase prices 
for inventories under LIFO or using older purchase prices for cost of goods sold under FIFO 
has little impact if prices are stable. As the rate of price change increases, the effect of using 
older versus more recent prices increases, resulting in larger differences in cost of goods sold 
and inventories between FIFO and LIFO.
Differences in cost of goods sold also relate in part to the rate of inventory turnover—that is, 
the speed with which the firm sells its products. As inventory turnover increases, current-period 
inventory acquisitions make up an increasing portion of the cost of goods available for sale. 
Because the cost-flow assumption does not affect the current period’s cost of purchases, cost of 
goods sold amounts will not vary as much with the choice of cost-flow assumption. Even with 
rapid inventory turnover, inventory amounts on the balance sheet can still differ significantly 
depending on the cost-flow assumption. The longer a firm uses LIFO, the greater will be the 
difference between inventories based on LIFO and FIFO cost-flow assumptions. Appendix 9.1 
to this chapter describes the financial statement effects introduced by the difference in invento-
ries accounted for under LIFO versus FIFO.
 PROBLEM  9.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Computing cost of goods sold and ending inventory under various cost-flow assumptions. 
Exhibit 9.7 presents data on beginning inventory, purchases, withdrawals, and ending 
inventory for June and July.
a. Compute the cost of goods sold and the ending inventory for June using (1) FIFO, 
(2) LIFO, and (3) weighted-average cost-flow assumptions.
b. Compute the cost of goods sold and the ending inventory for July using (1) FIFO, 
(2) LIFO, and (3) weighted-average cost-flow assumptions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

342
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
ANALYZING INVENTORY DISCLOSURES
The financial statements and notes provide information for analyzing the effects of inventories 
and cost of goods sold on measures of profitability and risk. This section illustrates several 
such analyses.
Two ratios introduced in Chapter 7 that pertain to inventory management are the cost of 
goods sold percentage and the inventory turnover ratio. The cost of goods sold percentage is the 
ratio of cost of goods sold to sales revenue. The larger this ratio, the greater the portion of sales 
revenue required to cover the costs of the product and, therefore, the less is available to contrib-
ute to profitability. Industry economic characteristics, business strategies, and operating envi-
ronments affect cost of goods sold percentages. Highly competitive markets force firms to set 
prices closer to the cost of the product (resulting in a high cost of goods sold percentage) than 
do less competitive markets. The inventory turnover ratio, equal to cost of goods sold divided 
by the average inventory during the period, measures how quickly firms sell their inventory.
We can calculate the cost of goods sold percentage and the inventory turnover ratio for 
Great Deal for the fiscal year ending February 27, 2013, using data from its balance sheet 
shown in Exhibit 1.1 (page 8) and from its income statement shown in Exhibit 1.2 (page 9). 
Great Deal’s cost of goods sold percentage is 75.5%:
Cost of Goods Sold = $37,534 = 75.5%
Sales Revenue
$49,694
Its inventory turnover ratio is 7.3:
Cost of Goods Sold =
$37,534
= 7.3
Average Inventory
0.5 × ($5,486 + $4,753)
An inventory turnover ratio of 7.3 implies that items remain in Great Deal’s inventory for 
an average of 50 days (= 365 days / 7.3 times per year) before Great Deal sells them.
Both the cost of goods sold percentage and the inventory turnover ratio use cost of goods 
sold, so there can, but need not, be a relation between them.17 Changes in the cost of goods 
sold percentage affect the profit margin. Changes in inventory turnover affect total asset 
Data for Inventory Calculations
(Problem 9.2 for Self-Study)
Units
Unit Cost
Total Cost
ITEM X
Beginning Inventory, June 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
Purchases, June 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
$10.00
$1,000
Purchases, June 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
 11.00
 4,400
Purchases, June 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100
 12.50
 1,250
 
Total Goods Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
$6,650
Withdrawals During June  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(495)
     ?
Ending Inventory (June 30) and 
 
Beginning Inventory (July 1)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105
$    ?
Purchases, July 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 13.00
 3,900
Purchases, July 15  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 13.50
 2,700
Purchases, July 23  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 250
 14.00
 3,500
 
Total Goods Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
855
$    ?
Withdrawals During July. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(620)
     ?
Ending Inventory (July 31). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 235
$    ?
EXHIBIT 9.7
17 Chapter 7 presented the disaggregation of the rate of return on assets (ROA) into the profit margin multiplied 
by total asset turnover.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

343
Principal Current Asset Accounts
turnover. The following sections describe possible explanations for various combinations of 
changes in the cost of goods sold percentage and the inventory turnover ratio.
Increasing Cost of Goods Sold Percentage and Increasing Inventory Turn-
over Ratio This combination results in a lower profit margin and an increased total asset 
turnover. The net effect on ROA depends on which effect dominates. The firm may have shifted 
its sales mix toward faster-moving products that generate smaller gross margin, or it may have 
increased the proportion of manufacturing outsourced to other manufacturers. Outsourcing 
reduces raw materials and work-in-process inventories, but the firm must share some of the 
profit margin with the supplier, the outsourcing firm.
Decreasing Cost of Goods Sold Percentage and Increasing Inventory Turn-
over Ratio This combination increases both the profit margin and the total asset turnover 
and thereby increases ROA. This combination might occur if the firm improves its inventory 
control systems and increases its inventory turnover. The savings in storage and obsolescence 
costs reduce the cost of goods sold percentage.
Or, demand for the firm’s products might increase and inventory moves more quickly. The 
increased demand permits the firm to raise prices and thereby lower the cost of goods sold per-
centage. If a manufacturing firm has both a high proportion of fixed costs in its cost structure 
and excess capacity to meet the increase in demand, then cost of goods sold will increase, but 
unit costs will decline because the firm will not incur additional fixed costs. As a result, its cost 
of goods sold percentage will decline.
Increasing Cost of Goods Sold Percentage and Decreasing Inventory Turn-
over Ratio This combination decreases both the profit margin and the total asset turnover 
and lowers ROA. This combination might occur if a firm experiences a buildup of obsolete 
inventory and must write-down the cost of the inventory to lower of cost or market or reduce 
selling prices. If a manufacturing firm with a high proportion of fixed costs experiences a 
decline in demand, production will slow, as will inventory turnover; per-unit manufacturing 
cost increases because the firm must spread, or allocate, the same amount of fixed cost over 
fewer units produced.
Decreasing Cost of Goods Sold Percentage and Decreasing Inventory 
Turnover Ratio This combination increases the profit margin but decreases the total asset 
turnover. The net effect on ROA depends on which effect dominates. This combination could 
occur if a firm reduced the amount of outsourcing and thereby captured more of the gross mar-
gin, while the need for more raw materials and work-in-process inventories slows the inventory 
turnover. Or, the firm shifts its sales mix toward higher-margin products that sell more slowly.
Other explanations could cause the various combinations discussed above. Additional com-
binations of changes in one of the two ratios and not in the other are also possible.
 PROBLEM  9.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Effect of cost-flow assumptions on financial ratios. Refer to the data in Problem 9.2 for 
Self-Study. Assume the following:
July 31
June 30
Current Assets Excluding Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,480
$1,650
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,820
 2,290
a. Compute the current ratio for June 30 and July 31 using (1) FIFO, (2) LIFO, and 
(3)  weighted-average cost-flow assumptions for inventories. Assume for this part 
that there are no differences in income taxes payable related to the three cost-flow 
assumptions.
b. Compute the inventory turnover ratio (= cost of goods sold/average inventory) for 
July using (1) FIFO, (2) LIFO, and (3) weighted-average cost-flow assumptions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

344
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
PRINCIPAL CURRENT LIABILITY ACCOUNTS
Current liabilities are due within the next operating cycle, normally one year. They include 
accounts payable, short-term notes payable, accrued liabilities (such as for payroll and income 
taxes), deferred performance obligations (including advances from customers and warranty lia-
bilities), and restructuring liabilities. Current liabilities also include the portion of long-term 
debt requiring payment within the year after the balance sheet date.18
A firm continually pays its current liabilities and replaces them with new ones in the course 
of business operations. Because the firm will not pay these obligations for several weeks or 
months after the current balance sheet date, they have a present value less than the amount to 
be paid.19 The firm typically reports these items at the full amount owed because, considering 
the small difference between the amount owed and its present value, a separate accounting for 
this difference (as interest expense) would not be cost-effective.
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
A firm typically defers payment for items purchased from its suppliers until it receives a bill 
(invoice) from the supplier, at which point it records a liability called accounts payable (some-
times called trade payables). The firm may not pay the bill immediately but instead accumu-
late it with other bills until a specified time of the month when it pays all bills. Because these 
accounts do not accrue explicit interest, the firm obtains funding from its suppliers by delaying 
payments. Delays that are too lengthy can lead to poor credit ratings and to restrictions on 
future credit.
Chapter 7 introduced the accounts payable turnover ratio—the ratio of purchases during 
the period to average accounts payable. Recall the inventory equation, with terms rearranged:20
Beginning Inventories + Purchases = Cost of Goods Sold + Ending Inventories
Using the information in Great Deal’s balance sheet (Exhibit 1.1, page 8) and its income 
statement (Exhibit 1.2, page 9) for the fiscal year ended February 27, 2013, we can calculate 
Great Deal’s purchases using the preceding equation (dollar amounts in millions):
$4,753 + Purchases = $37,534 + $5,486
Purchases = $38,267
Great Deal’s accounts payable turnover ratio is, then
Purchases
=
$38,267
= 7.5
Average Accounts Payable
0.5 × ($5,276 + $4,997)
One way to understand an accounts payable turnover ratio of 7.5 focuses on the number of 
days, on average, the company owes its suppliers before paying its purchase invoices. This mea-
sure of the efficiency of accounts payable management divides the accounts payable ratio into 
365, to obtain days accounts payable. Great Deal’s days accounts payable for the year ended 
February 27, 2013, is 49 days (= 365/7.5), implying that Great Deal pays its suppliers on aver-
age about every 50 days.
We now introduce the cash cycle (also called the earnings cycle or the operating cycle). The 
cash cycle is the time between a firm’s first acquiring inventory (or components thereof), then 
making and selling the product, and ultimately receiving cash from customers and paying cash 
to suppliers. The cash cycle is Days Inventory + Days Accounts Receivable – Days Accounts 
Payable. Using data for Great Deal for the fiscal year ended February 27, 2013, we can calcu-
late the cash cycle as follows:
18 We discuss this item in Chapter 11.
19 Appendix 9.1 in this chapter explains the concept of present value.
20 This discussion assumes that all credits to Accounts Payable relate to purchases of inventory, and all debits 
relate to payments to suppliers of that inventory. In reality, Accounts Payable could also include a liability for 
the purchase of administrative items, such as office supplies.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

345
Principal Current Liability Accounts
50 days
+
10 days
−
49 days
=
11 days
(Days Inventory)
(Days Accounts Receivable)21
(Days Accounts Payable)
This means that Great Deal’s operations require cash funding for 11 days, a short period 
compared to some retailers. If Great Deal were to reduce the number of days units remain 
in inventory (that is, increase inventory turnover), or collect from customers more quickly 
(increase receivables turnover), or pay its suppliers more slowly (reduce accounts payable turn-
over), its cash cycle would decrease. All else equal, the shorter the cash cycle, the more profit-
able the firm.
Most firms have positive cash cycles. One exception, Dell Inc., a manufacturer and dis-
tributor of laptop and desktop computers, has a negative cash cycle. For one typical year, 
Dell reported financial information that reveals an accounts receivable turnover of 11.6 (or 
days accounts receivable of 31.5), inventory turnover of 53.8 (or days inventory of 6.8), and 
accounts payable turnover of 4.4 (or days accounts payable of 83.0). Dell’s cash cycle is, there-
fore, –44.7 days (= 31.5 days + 6.8 days – 83.0 days). Dell’s negative cash cycle means that, on 
net, Dell receives interest-free financing from its suppliers for about 45 days. Dell’s cash cycle is 
unusual in part because of its high inventory turnover ratio. Because Dell does not build a com-
puter until the customer places the order, it does not have much inventory (especially finished 
goods inventory) on its balance sheet. The time between production of the computer and sale 
of the computer is small, so the inventory turnover ratio is high.
SHORT-TERM NOTES AND INTEREST PAYABLE
Firms obtain financing for less than a year from banks or other lenders by signing a short-term 
note payable. In return for the cash it receives from the lender, the borrower records a current 
liability, Notes Payable. Suppose that on June 1, 2013, Great Deal borrows $1,000,000 from the 
local bank, promising to pay interest at 6% per year. On June 1, 2013, it records the following 
journal entry:
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000,000
 
Notes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000,000
To record $1,000,000 bank loan.
As time passes, the borrower makes entries, usually adjusting entries, debiting Interest 
Expense and crediting Interest Payable, to reflect interest that has been accrued but not yet 
paid. For example, at the end of February 2014 (the end of its 2013 fiscal year), Great Deal 
would make the following adjusting journal entry to record accrued interest:
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,000
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
45,000
To record interest at 6% per year for nine months (June – February); 0.06 × 
1,000,000 × (9/12) = $45,000.
When the borrower makes interest payments, the entry credits Cash and debits Interest Pay-
able. The lending agreement will also specify the payments the borrower must make to reduce 
the principal for Notes Payable. If Great Deal pays, in full, its obligations to the bank on May 
30, 2013, it would show the following two journal entries:
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
To record the remaining interest at 6% per year for the final three months 
(March – May), 0.06 × 1,000,000 × (3/12) = $15,000.
(continued)
21 We derived this number in Chapter 7; see page 229.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

346
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
Notes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000,000
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,060,000
To record payment of the interest and repayment of principal.
WAGES, SALARIES, AND OTHER PAYROLL ITEMS
The end of a firm’s reporting period often does not coincide with the schedule for making wage 
and salary payments to employees. For example, a firm might end its fiscal reporting period 
on December 31, but not have paid all the amounts owed for work done prior to this date. To 
ensure that their financial statements reflect amounts owed to employees, firms debit Wages 
and Salaries Expense and credit Wages and Salaries Payable for the amount employees have 
earned but firms have not yet paid as of the end of the reporting period.
Employees owe part of their wages to governments for income and other taxes. They may 
also owe other amounts for union dues and insurance plans. These amounts are part of the 
employer’s wage expense, but the employer withholds those amounts from each employee’s 
gross pay and then pays them on each employee’s behalf to the governments, unions, and insur-
ance companies. In addition, the employer may itself pay various payroll taxes and may have 
agreed to pay for other fringe benefits, such as paid vacations. The employer must accrue the 
costs of the earned but unused vacations (including the payroll taxes and fringe benefits on 
them) at the time the employees earn them, not when employees take vacations and receive 
their wages. This treatment results in charging each month of the year with a portion of the 
cost of vacations rather than allocating all the costs to the period when employees take their 
vacations.
Example 2 Assume that the Sacramento Radio Shack’s employees earn $100,000 and that 
the employer (Sacramento Radio Shack) withholds taxes averaging 40% of these amounts for 
various taxes. In addition, employees in aggregate owe $500 for union dues to be withheld by 
the employer and $3,000 for health insurance. Sacramento Radio Shack must also pay various 
payroll taxes averaging 18% of gross wages, as well as $4,500 to Fireman’s Fund for payments 
to provide life and health insurance coverage. Employees have earned vacation pay estimated to 
be $4,000; Sacramento Radio Shack estimates employer payroll taxes and fringe benefits to be 
18% of the gross amount of vacation pay.
The journal entries that follow record these wages. If production workers had earned some 
of the wages, the firm would debit those amounts to Work-in-Process Inventory rather than to 
Wages and Salaries Expense.
 
Wages and Salaries Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Taxes Payable to Various Governments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
 
Withheld Dues Payable to Union. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500
 
Insurance Premiums Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
 
Wages and Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
56,500
To record wage expense; plug for $56,500 payable to employees.
 
Wages and Salaries Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18,000
Insurance Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,500
 
Payroll Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
18,000
 
Insurance Premiums Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,500
To record employer’s expense for amounts not payable to employees.
 
Wages and Salaries Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,720
 
Estimated Vacation Wage and Fringes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,720
To record estimate of vacation pay and fringes thereon earned during the 
current period of $4,720 (= $4,000 + [0.18 × $4,000]).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

347
Principal Current Liability Accounts
INCOME TAXES PAYABLE
Most businesses organized as corporations pay income taxes based on their taxable income (the 
income reported on the tax return).22 Some jurisdictions do not levy taxes on income earned 
by corporations. Taxable income (which usually differs from pretax income reported in finan-
cial statements) and corporate income tax rates determine the amount of income taxes payable. 
That is, in many jurisdictions the income reported to the taxing authorities, which we always 
refer to as taxable income, differs from the amount of income reported on the income state-
ment, which we always refer to as pretax income. The difference between taxable income and 
pretax income (sometimes called “book income”) arises from several factors, as Chapter 12 
describes.
For now, we note that a firm reports the amount of taxes it must pay to the taxing authori-
ties in the current liability account, Income Taxes Payable. Some firms use a more general 
account title, Taxes Payable, reflecting the inclusion of other types of taxes (for example, prop-
erty taxes, sales taxes, city and state taxes). A typical entry to record taxes payable would debit 
tax expense and credit taxes payable.
PRODUCT WARRANTIES
Chapter 8 introduced deferred performance liabilities in the form of advances from custom-
ers. A deferred performance liability arises when a firm accepts payments from a customer 
but has not delivered the product or rendered the service to the customer. Another deferred 
performance liability arises when a firm agrees to provide a warranty for service or repairs for 
some period after a sale. At the time of the sale, the firm will estimate the likely amount of the 
warranty  liability. (Firms using IFRS would use the term warranty provision instead of war-
ranty liability.23)
As time passes, firms gain information about both actual warranty usage and actual war-
ranty expenditures. To illustrate the accounting for warranty costs, assume that Thames sold air 
traffic control systems for €280 million during the accounting period. Thames estimates that it 
will eventually spend approximately 4% of the sales revenue to satisfy warranty claims for the 
systems. The current period expense for warranties is, therefore, €11.2 (= 0.04 × €280) million. 
Thames will make the following entry at the time of the sale of the air traffic control systems:
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
280.0
Warranty Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11.2
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
280.0
 
Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11.2
To record sales and estimated liability for warranties on items sold. Thames 
would also record cost of goods sold immediately if it used a perpetual 
method and at the end of the period if it used a periodic method.
Thames recognizes warranty expense, and a related warranty liability, in the period that it 
recognizes revenue, not when it incurs costs to make repairs. The selling price of a warranted 
product includes amounts for the product sold and for the future warranty services. Recogniz-
ing warranty expense in the period of sale results in matching warranty expense against the 
related sales revenue. In this case, both the amount and the timing of the liability are uncertain, 
but Thames can estimate them with reasonable precision. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require 
that firms accrue the expense and the related warranty liability when they can “reasonably esti-
mate” the amount.
In a subsequent period, Thames spends €4.8 million for repairs under the warranty. At this 
time, it would make the following journal entry:
22 In contrast, businesses organized as partnerships or sole proprietorships do not pay income taxes. Instead, 
most taxing authorities tax the income of the business entity as income of the individual partners or the sole 
proprietor. Each partner or sole proprietor adds his or her share of business income to income from all other 
(nonbusiness) sources in preparing an individual income tax return.
23 The word provision usually refers to an expense in U.S. GAAP, but to a liability in IFRS. See the Glossary.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

348
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
 
Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.8
 
Cash (or other assets consumed for repairs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4.8
To record repairs made. The firm does not recognize expense when it 
provides warranty services, because it recognized the expense at the time 
of sale.
Expenditures to satisfy warranty claims do not affect net income. The net income effect 
occurs in the period of sale when Thames recognizes an expense equal to the expected expendi-
tures to satisfy warranty claims arising from products sold in that period. With experience, the 
firm will adjust Warranty Expense to maintain the Warranty Liability (or Warranty Provision 
for IFRS firms) at each balance sheet date with a credit balance that reasonably estimates the 
cost of repairs it will make under warranties outstanding at that time.
The accounting for warranties resembles the allowance method for uncollectible accounts 
receivable discussed in Chapter 8 and is, therefore, sometimes referred to as the “allowance 
method for warranties.” Under the allowance method for warranties, current period income 
reflects an estimate of the cost of future warranty expenditures for products sold during the 
current period. The firm revises this estimate over time so that its balance sheet contains a war-
ranty obligation whose amount is a reasonable estimate of the cost the firm will incur to satisfy 
the remaining warranty obligations. The firm treats any reversal of previously accrued war-
ranty charges as a change in accounting estimate, which increases net income immediately.
When the warranty period is one year or less, the warranty liability is a current liability. 
When the warranty period exceeds one year, the firm will record both a current portion of the 
liability and a noncurrent portion. Firms using IFRS classify both amounts as Provisions on 
the balance sheet. U.S. GAAP provides no common terminology for warranty liabilities. Often, 
firms aggregate them in Other Liabilities.
 PROBLEM  9.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Warranty liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2013, Swede Trucks reported 
the following information for its liability for Product Obligations (amounts in millions 
of euros). For this exercise, ignore exchange rate differences. Swede Trucks uses IFRS 
terminology where Provision means liability.
Product
Obligations
2013
1 January  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€  1,028
Provisions during the year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,339
Provisions used during the year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
–1,056
Provisions reversed during the year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
–230
Exchange rate differences. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     –24
31 December. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 1,057
a. What amount did Swede Trucks report for Product Obligations on its balance sheet at 
the end of 2013?
b. What journal entry did Swede Trucks make to record warranty expense during 2013? 
What effect did this journal entry have on Swede Trucks’ net income for 2013?
c. What journal entry did Swede Trucks make in 2013 for actual expenditures to settle 
its warranty obligations? What effect did this journal entry have on Swede Truck’s net 
income for 2013?
d. During 2013, what journal entry, if any, did Swede Trucks make to reverse previously 
accrued warranty charges? What effect did this journal entry have on Swede Truck’s 
net income for 2013?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

349
Principal Current Liability Accounts
RESTRUCTURING LIABILITIES
Periodically, a firm may decide to restructure all or some portion of its operations. A restruc-
turing involves substantial changes to the scope or conduct of the business. Examples of 
restructuring activities include selling or closing divisions or plants, combining offices, moving 
operations from one location to another, terminating employees or leases, and selling assets. 
Firms restructure their operations because they believe the restructured firm will operate more 
efficiently and profitably.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms estimate the costs of a restructuring effort 
and record this estimate as an expense, with an associated restructuring liability (U.S. GAAP 
terminology) or restructuring provision (IFRS terminology).24 If restructuring efforts extend 
beyond one year, the firm’s balance sheet will display both current and noncurrent restructuring 
liabilities or provisions. U.S. GAAP and IFRS differ with respect to the timing of recognition. 
Under U.S. GAAP firms recognize restructuring charges only under the following conditions:
1. Management has committed to the plan of restructuring.
2. The restructuring costs meet the definition of a liability—a present obligation that the firm 
has little or no discretion to avoid.
Under IFRS, firms recognize restructuring costs when the firm has committed to and 
approved a restructuring plan that management will control. The commitment requires that 
management has estimated the timing and costs of actions and that it has identified and noti-
fied employees for whom the plan will terminate. IFRS does not require that the restructur-
ing costs meet the definition of a liability, so firms usually recognize restructuring costs earlier 
under IFRS than they do under U.S. GAAP.
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the accounting for restructuring charges is similar to 
the accounting for warranty expenditures using the allowance method. To illustrate the journal 
entries, consider financial statements for Swede Trucks for 2013, which show a Restructuring 
Provision (Liability) of €38 million as of December 31, 2013. Swede Trucks uses IFRS termi-
nology where Provision means liability; notes to the financial statements show the following (in 
millions of euros):
2013
1 January
€ 45
Provisions during the year
14
Provisions used during the year
–18
Provisions reversed during the year
–2
Exchange rate differences
  –1
31 December
€ 38
The beginning balance in the Restructuring Provision (a liability) account was €45 million. 
During 2013, Swede Trucks recognized restructuring charges of €14 million (described as “Pro-
visions during the year”) and made the following journal entry:
 
Restructuring Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14
 
Restructuring Provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14
To record restructuring charges for the year.
Swede Trucks also reports that during 2013 it made expenditures of €18 million for the 
restructuring efforts (described as “Provisions used during the year”):
 
Restructuring Provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18
 
Cash (or other assets consumed for restructuring). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
18
To record restructuring expenditures.
24 FASB, Codification Topic 420; IASB, International Accounting Standard 37, “Provisions, Contingent Assets and 
Contingent Liabilities,” 1998.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

350
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
Finally, ignoring the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, Swede Trucks 
also reports that during 2013 it reversed €2 million of previously recorded restructuring charges 
(described as “Provisions reversed during the year”):
 
Restructuring Provision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2
 
Restructuring Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2
To reverse previously recorded restructuring charges.
 PROBLEM  9.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for transactions involving current liabilities. Prepare journal entries for each 
of the following transactions of Ashton S.A. during the year ended December 31, 2008. 
Ashton uses IFRS to prepare its financial reports.
a. January 2: The firm borrows €10,000 on a 9%, 90-day note from First National Bank.
b. January 3: The firm acquires merchandise costing €8,000 from suppliers on account.
c. January 10: The firm receives €1,500 from a customer as a deposit on merchandise 
that Ashton expects to deliver in February.
d. Month of January: The firm sells merchandise costing €6,000 to customers on 
account for €12,000.
e. Month of January: The firm pays suppliers €8,000 of the amount owed for purchases 
of merchandise on account and collects €7,000 of amounts owed by customers.
f. January 31: Products sold during January include a two-year warranty. Ashton S.A. 
estimates that warranty claims will equal 8% of sales. No customer made warranty 
claims during January.
g. January 31: Employees earned wages of €4,000 for the month of January. The firm 
withholds the following from the amounts it pays to employees: 20% for income 
taxes, 10% for pension and welfare taxes, and €200 for union dues. In addition, the 
employer must pay pension and welfare taxes of 10% and employment taxes of 3.5%. 
These wages and taxes remain unpaid at the end of January.
h. January 31: The firm accrues interest expense on the bank loan (see transaction a).
i. January 31: The firm accrues income tax expense, but makes no payment, at a rate of 
40% on net income during January.
j. February 1: Ashton pays employees their January wages net of withholdings.
k. February 10: The firm delivers merchandise costing €800 to the customer in transac-
tion c in full satisfaction of its order.
l. February 15: The firm remits payroll taxes and union dues to government and union 
authorities.
m. February 20: A customer who purchased merchandise during January returns goods 
for warranty repairs. The repairs cost the firm €220, which it paid in cash.
n. March 14: Ashton decides to restructure its operations and has committed to a 
restructuring plan that management has approved and will control. Management has 
identified and notified employees whose employment will be terminated. The esti-
mated costs for the restructuring plan activities are €50,000.
o. June 20: Ashton begins closing plants pursuant to the March restructuring plan and 
incurs cash payments of €20,000. At this time, Ashton also realizes that its estimate 
of total restructuring costs is too high, by €12,500.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

351
Appendix 9.1: A Closer Look at LIFO’s Effects on Financial Statements 
SUMMARY
Working capital is the difference between a firm’s current assets and its current liabilities. Cur-
rent assets include cash, accounts receivable (discussed in Chapter 8), marketable securities 
(discussed in Chapter 13), prepayments, and inventory. Current liabilities include accounts pay-
able, short-term notes payable, the current portion of long-term debt (discussed in Chapter 11), 
advances from customers (discussed in Chapter 8), certain short-term liabilities (such as wages 
payable and taxes payable), the current portion of deferred taxes (discussed in Chapter 12), cer-
tain short-term warranties, and the portion of restructuring obligations management expects to 
settle in the next year.
Of the working capital accounts discussed in this chapter, inventory is the most complex. 
Inventory measurements affect the income statement (through cost of goods sold and through 
impairment charges) and the balance sheet, which reports the carrying value of inventory at 
the end of the reporting period. The sum of cost of goods sold and the ending inventory bal-
ance must equal the sum of the beginning inventory balance plus purchases or other acquisi-
tions of inventory during the period. The amounts allocated to expense (cost of goods sold) 
and the inventory asset (ending inventory balance) will always sum to a given amount. The 
split between expense and asset results in part from the firm’s choices of the cost-flow assump-
tion (FIFO, LIFO, and weighted average). When prices are rising and inventory amounts are 
increasing, LIFO (the last-in, first-out cost-flow assumption) results in the largest cost of goods 
sold and the smallest balance sheet carrying value of inventory. FIFO (the first-in, first-out 
cost-flow assumption) results in balance sheet carrying values that approximate current cost.
APPENDIX 9.1: A CLOSER LOOK AT LIFO’S 
EFFECTS ON FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
LIFO usually presents a cost of goods sold figure that reflects current costs. If a taxpayer uses 
LIFO, in periods of rising prices, LIFO also generally results in reporting lower taxable income 
and, therefore, incurring lower income tax payments. U.S. tax rules permit LIFO for tax pur-
poses, but few other jurisdictions do. U.S. firms that use LIFO for tax purposes must also use 
LIFO for financial-reporting purposes, so they report lower net income to shareholders than 
they would have reported if they had used FIFO (the LIFO conformity rule is described in 
footnote 16). The deferral of income taxes increases the present value of the cash flows for 
LIFO firms, despite reporting lower earnings to shareholders.
LIFO LAYERS
In any year when inventory purchases exceed sales, the quantity of units in inventory increases. 
The amount added to inventory for that year is called a LIFO inventory layer. For example, if a 
firm acquires 100 cell phones each year and sells 98 cell phones each year for four years, start-
ing in 2009, its inventory at the end of the fourth year, 2012, contains 8 units. The cost of the 8 
units under LIFO is the cost of phones numbered 1 and 2 (2009), 101 and 102 (2010), 201 and 
202 (2011), and 301 and 302 (2012). Common terminology would say that this firm has four 
LIFO layers, each labeled with its year of acquisition. The physical units on hand would almost 
certainly be the units most recently acquired in 2012, units numbered 393 through 400, but they 
would appear on the balance sheet at costs incurred for purchases during each of the four years.
DIPPING INTO LIFO LAYERS
A U.S. firm using LIFO must consider the implications of dipping into LIFO layers, also called 
LIFO liquidation. LIFO reduces current taxes in periods of rising purchase prices and rising 
inventory quantities. If inventory quantities decline the opposite effect occurs in the year of 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

352
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
the decline: older, lower costs per unit of prior years’ LIFO layers leave the balance sheet and 
become expenses. If a firm reduces end-of-period physical inventory quantities below the begin-
ning-of-period quantities, cost of goods sold will reflect the current period’s purchases plus a 
portion of the older and lower costs in the beginning inventory. The firm will have lower cost of 
goods sold, implying larger reported income and larger income taxes in that period than if the 
firm had maintained its ending inventory at beginning-of-period levels.
To illustrate, assume that LIFO inventory at the beginning of 2012 consists of 460 units 
with a total cost of $34,200, as in Exhibit 9.8. Assume that the cost at the end of 2012 is $120 
per unit and that the income tax rate is 40%. If 2012 ending inventory drops to 100 units, all 
360 units purchased in 2009, 2010, and 2011 will enter cost of goods sold. These 360 units 
cost $29,200 (= $6,600 + $9,600 + $13,000), but the current cost of comparable units is 
$43,200 (= 360 units × $120 per unit). Cost of goods sold will be $14,000 smaller (= $43,200 
– $29,200) than if quantities had not declined because the firm dipped into old LIFO layers. 
Income subject to income taxes will be $14,000 larger, and income after taxes will be $8,400 
(= [1 – 0.40] × $14,000) larger than if quantities had not declined from 460 to 100 units. LIFO 
results in firms deferring taxes as long as they do not dip into LIFO layers.
LIFO BALANCE SHEET
LIFO usually leads to a balance sheet amount for inventory that is materially less than the cur-
rent cost of that inventory. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has worried 
that this out-of-date information might mislead readers of financial statements. As a result, the 
SEC requires SEC registrants that use LIFO to disclose, in notes to the financial statements, the 
amounts by which inventories based on FIFO or current cost exceed their amounts as reported 
with a LIFO cost-flow assumption. Some managers refer to the excess of FIFO or current 
cost over LIFO cost of inventories as the LIFO reserve. Another term, less commonly used, is 
“LIFO valuation allowance.”
CONVERTING FINANCIAL STATEMENT INFORMATION FROM LIFO TO FIFO
Using disclosures of the excess of FIFO or current cost inventories over LIFO inventories, 
the analyst can compute inventories and cost of goods sold assuming a FIFO cost flow and 
thereby obtain comparable data between a LIFO firm and its FIFO competitor. To illustrate 
the conversion, consider the information reported by Super Soap Company (SSC) for the year 
ended December 31, 2012. Exhibit 9.9 shows SSC’s income statement, Exhibit 9.10 shows the 
asset portion of the balance sheet, and Exhibit 9.11 shows excerpts from the disclosures that 
relate to inventories, which the U.S. SEC requires of LIFO firms.
SSC’s disclosures reveal that it uses the FIFO method for about 80% of its inventories and 
LIFO for the remainder (20%). When a firm reports using LIFO for a material portion of its 
inventory, common practice in the United States describes it as a LIFO firm—even though in 
this case SSC uses FIFO for a majority (80%) of its inventories.
Exhibit 9.12 shows the conversion of inventories and cost of goods sold from a LIFO to a 
FIFO cost-flow assumption. The inventory amounts in the first column under LIFO appear 
on SSC’s balance sheet, and cost of goods sold and sales come from the income statement. 
We compute purchases using the inventory equation. The amounts disclosed for the excess of 
Data for Illustration of LIFO Layers
(Inventory at January 1, 2012)
LIFO Layers
Cost
Year Purchased
Number of Units
Per Unit
Total Cost
2005. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
$ 50
$ 5,000
2006. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
60
6,600
2007. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
80
9,600
2008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
130
100
 13,000
460
$34,200
EXHIBIT 9.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

353
Appendix 9.1: A Closer Look at LIFO’s Effects on Financial Statements   
FIFO over LIFO permit the computation of beginning and ending inventories under FIFO in 
the third column. SSC reports that at the end of 2012, the excess of FIFO cost over LIFO cost 
was $87.4 million ($46.9 million at the end of 2011). This means that if SSC had used FIFO to 
measure all inventories, the inventories would have been $87.4 million higher than reported at 
the end of 2012 and $46.9 million higher than reported at the beginning of 2012. Purchases are 
the same under LIFO and FIFO. Using the inventory equation, we calculate cost of goods sold 
under FIFO as $6,041.8 million, compared to $6,042.3 million under LIFO. The gross margin 
under LIFO is $7,747.4, as compared to $7,787.9 under FIFO. The larger gross margin under 
FIFO suggests that inventory costs increased during the year.
We can compute inventory turnover ratios under LIFO and FIFO as follows:
LIFO: $6,042.3/[0.5 × ($1,008.4 + $1,171.0)] = 5.5 times per year
FIFO: $6,001.8/[0.5 × ($1,055.3 + $1,258.4)] = 5.2 times per year
Super Soap Company
Consolidated Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2012
Net sales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$13,789.7
Cost of sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  6,042.3 
 
Gross profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,747.4
Selling, general, and administrative expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,973.0
Other (income) expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    121.3 
 
Operating profit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2653.1
Interest expense, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    156.6 
 
Income before income taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,496.5
Provision for income taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    759.1 
 
Net income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,737.4 
Earnings per common share, basic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$     3.35
Earnings per common share, diluted. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$     3.20
Based on the financial statements of Colgate Palmolive Company
EXHIBIT 9.9
Super Soap Company
Excerpt from Consolidated Balance Sheet
As of December 31,
2012
2011
Assets
Current Assets
 
Cash and cash equivalents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   428.7
$  489.5
 
Receivables (net of allowances of $50.6 and $46.4, respectively) . . . . . . .
1,680.7
1,523.2
 
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,171.0
1,008.4
 
Other current assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    338.1
   279.9
 
 
Total current assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 3,618.5
3,301.0
Property, plant, and equipment, net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,015.2
2,696.1
Goodwill, net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,272.0
2,081.8
Other intangible assets, net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
844.8
831.1
Other assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    361.5 
   228.0
 
 
Total assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$10,112.0
$9,138.0
EXHIBIT 9.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

354
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
The inventory turnover ratio under LIFO is misleading because it uses relatively current 
costs in the numerator and the older cost of LIFO layers in the denominator. The inventory 
turnover under FIFO more accurately measures the actual turnover of inventory because it 
uses relatively current cost data in both the numerator and the denominator.
Consider also the current ratio (= current assets/current liabilities) as a measure of short-
term liquidity. If a firm uses LIFO in periods of rising prices while inventory quantities 
increase, the amount of inventory included in the numerator of the current ratio will be smaller 
than if the firm measured inventory at more current costs using FIFO. Hence, the unwary 
reader may underestimate the liquidity of a company that uses a LIFO cost-flow assumption.
Super Soap Company
Excerpts from Inventory Disclosures
Super Soap Company
Derivation of FIFO Income from Financial Statements and Notes
(all dollar amounts in millions)
INVENTORIES
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. The cost of approximately 80% of 
inventories is measured using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. The cost of all other 
inventories, predominantly in the United States and Mexico, is measured using the last-in, 
first-out (LIFO) method.
16. SUPPLEMENTAL BALANCE SHEET INFORMATION 
Inventories
2012
2011
Raw materials and supplies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  258.2
$  248.3
Work-in-process  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43.7
45.4
Finished goods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   869.1
   714.7
Total Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,171.0
$1,008.4
Inventories valued under LIFO amounted to $498.8 and $438.2 at December 31, 2012 
and 2011, respectively. The excess of current cost over LIFO cost at the end of each year 
was $87.4 and $46.9, respectively. The liquidations of LIFO inventory quantities had no 
effect on income in 2012, 2011, and 2010.
(Amounts shown in boldface appear in SSC’s financial statements. We derive other amounts 
as indicated.)
LIFO Cost-Flow 
Assumption 
(actually used)
+
Excess of 
FIFO over 
LIFO Amount
=
FIFO Cost-Flow 
Assumption 
(hypothetical)
Beginning Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,008.4
$  46.9
$ 1,055.3
Purchases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   6,204.9a
    0.0
  6,204.9
Cost of Goods Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . .
$   7,213.3
$  46.9
$ 7,260.2
Less Ending Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,171.0
 87.4
  1,258.4
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,042.3
$(40.5)
$ 6,001.8
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13,789.7
0.0
13,789.7
Less Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  6,042.3
    (40.5)
  6,001.8
Gross Margin on Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   7,747.4
$   40.5
$ 7,787.9
aComputation of Purchases not presented in financial statements:
Purchases =
Cost of Goods Sold
+
Ending Inventory
– Beginning Inventory
$6,204.9
=
$6,042.3
+
$1,171.0
–
$1,008.4
EXHIBIT 9.11
EXHIBIT 9.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

355
 Solutions to Self-Study Problems
THE LIFO-FIFO CHOICE
U.S. firms face the choice between the LIFO and FIFO cost-flow assumptions because U.S. tax 
authorities allow LIFO for tax purposes. (Recall that IFRS forbids LIFO for financial report-
ing.) For U.S. firms, the decision as to which cost-flow assumption to use will depend on several 
factors:
 1. The extent of changes in manufacturing or purchase costs: When such costs do not change 
significantly, then the three cost-flow assumptions provide similar amounts for inventories 
and cost of goods sold.
 2. The rate of inventory turnover: The faster the rate of inventory turnover, the smaller are the 
differences in inventories and cost of goods sold among the three cost-flow assumptions.
 3. The direction of expected changes in costs: FIFO results in higher net income and income 
taxes when total costs increase and lower net income and income taxes when costs decrease.
 4. The relative emphasis on reporting higher earnings to shareholders versus saving income 
taxes: U.S. issue only.
 5. The increased record-keeping costs of LIFO (for example, keeping track of LIFO layers for 
all of a firm’s products) and its inconsistency with the usual physical flow of inventories: U.S. 
issue only. 
 6. The requirement that U.S. firms must use LIFO for financial reporting if they use LIFO for 
income tax reporting.
In recent years more than half of U.S. firms use FIFO for a significant portion of their 
inventories, and more than one-quarter use LIFO for a significant portion. Fewer than one-
third of the firms use weighted average or specific identification. Industries with many firms 
using LIFO include the chemical industry and manufacturers of industrial and farm equip-
ment. Retailing firms also use LIFO extensively. The industries with the smallest proportion 
of firms using LIFO include technology-based firms, which experience decreasing production 
costs, such as computers and other electronic equipment. Most foreign tax authorities do not 
allow LIFO for income tax reporting, so most companies that use LIFO for U.S. inventories 
use FIFO for inventories abroad.
 PROBLEM  9.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
Assessing the impact of a LIFO layer liquidation. Refer to the data in Problem 9.2 for Self-
Study. During August the firm purchased 600 units for $15 each and sold 725 units.
a. Compute the cost of goods sold and the ending inventory for August using (1) FIFO, 
(2) LIFO, and (3) weighted-average cost-flow assumptions.
b. Calculate the effect of the LIFO liquidation on net income before income taxes for 
the year.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Haskell Ltd; flow of manufacturing costs through the accounts.)
a. 
Beginning Raw Materials Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£ 42,400
 
Raw Materials Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  60,700
 
Raw Materials Available for Use. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£103,100
 
Subtract Ending Raw Materials Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (46,900)
 
Cost of Raw Materials Used. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£ 56,200
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

356
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
b. 
Beginning Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£ 75,800
 
Cost of Raw Materials Used (from part a)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
56,200
 
Direct Labor Costs Incurred. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
137,900
 
Heat, Light, and Power Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,260
 
Rental Charges for Factory Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,800
 
Rental Charges for Factory Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,100
 
Prepaid Insurance Costs Consumed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   1,440
 
Total Beginning Work-in-Process and Manufacturing Costs Incurred. . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£278,500
 
Subtract Ending Work-in-Process Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (63,200)
 
Cost of Units Completed and Transferred to Finished Goods Storeroom. . . . . . . . . . .  
£215,300
c. 
Beginning Finished Goods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£ 44,200
 
Cost of Units Completed and Transferred to Finished Goods 
 
 Storeroom (from part b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
215,300
 
Subtract Ending Finished Goods Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (46,300)
 
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
£213,200
 
Income before taxes is £61,800 (= £400,000 – £213,200 – £125,000)
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Computing cost of goods sold and ending inventory under various cost-flow assumptions.)
a. See Exhibit 9.13.
b. See Exhibit 9.14. 
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Effect of cost-flow assumptions on financial ratios.)
a. Current Ratio
Suggested Solution to Problem 9.2 for Self-Study, Part a
Total Cost
Units
Unit 
Cost
FIFO
LIFO
Weighted 
Average
Beginning Inventory . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
Purchases, June 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
$10.00
$ 1,000
$ 1,000
$ 1,000
Purchases, June 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
 11.00
  4,400
  4,400
  4,400
Purchases, June 18 . . . . . . . . . . . 
  100
 12.50
  1,250
  1,250
  1,250
Total Goods Available for Sale. . . . 
  600
$ 6,650
$ 6,650
$ 6,650
Withdrawals During June  . . . . . . . 
(495)
  (5,345)a
  (5,595)c
  (5,486)e
Ending Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  105
$ 1,305b
$ 1,055d
$ 1,164f
a(100 × $10.00) + (395 × $11.00) = $5,345.
b(100 × $12.50) + (5 × $11.00) = $1,305.
c(100 × $12.50) + (395 × $11.00) = $5,595.
d(100 × $10.00) + (5 × $11.00) = $1,055.
e495 × ($6,650/600) = $5,486.
f105 × ($6,650/600) = $1,164.
EXHIBIT 9.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

357
   Solutions to Self-Study Problems
 
 
 
 
Weighted
 
 
FIFO 
LIFO 
Average
June 30
($1,650 + $1,305)/$2,290. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.29 
 
($1,650 + $1,055)/$2,290. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1.18
($1,650 + $1,164)/$2,290. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
1.23
July 31
($3,480 + $3,290)/$4,820. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.40 
 
($3,480 + $2,745)/$4,820. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1.29
($3,480 + $3,096)/$4,820. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
1.36
b. Inventory Turnover Ratio
July 
$8,115/0.5($1,305 + $3,290)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.53 
 
$8,410/0.5($1,055 + $2,745) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4.43 
$8,168/0.5($1,164 + $3,096)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 
3.83
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Swede Trucks; warranty liabilities.)
a. Swede Trucks’s balance sheet for the year ended December 31, 2013, shows an ending bal-
ance in Product Obligations of €1,057 million.
b. Journal entry made to record warranty expense during 2013 (described as “Provisions dur-
ing the year”):
Suggested Solution to Problem 9.2 for Self-Study, Part b
Total Cost
Units
Unit Cost
FIFO
LIFO
Weighted 
Average
Beginning Inventory, July 1 . . . .
105
See Exhibit 9.13
$ 1,305
$ 1,055
$ 1,164
Purchases, July 5  . . . . . . . . . . .
300
$13.00
3,900
3,900
3,900
Purchases, July 15  . . . . . . . . . .
200
 13.50
2,700
2,700
2,700
Purchases, July 23  . . . . . . . . . .
  250
 14.00
  3,500
  3,500
  3,500
Total Goods Available for Sale. . .
855
$11,405
$11,155
$11,264
Withdrawals During July. . . . . . .
(620)
 (8,115)a
 (8,410)c
 (8,168)e
Ending Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . .
  235
$ 3,290b
$ 2,745d
$ 3,096f
a$1,305 + (300 × $13.00) + (200 × $13.50) + (15 × $14.00) = $8,115.
b(235 × $14.00) = $3,290.
c(250 × $14.00) + (200 × $13.50) + (170 × $13.00) = $8,410.
d$1,055 + (130 × $13.00) = $2,745.
e620 × ($11,264/855) = $8,168.
f235 × ($11,264/855) = $3,096.
EXHIBIT 9.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

358
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
 
Warranty Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,339
 
Warranty Provision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,339
This journal entry reduced Swede Trucks 2013 income by €1,339 million.
c. Journal entry made in 2013 for actual expenditures under warranty (described as “Provi-
sions used during the year”):
 
Warranty Provision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,056
 
Cash (or other assets consumed for repairs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,056
This journal entry had no effect on Swede Truck’s 2013 income.
d. Journal entry made to reverse previously accrued warranty charges (described as “Provi-
sions reversed during the year”):
 
Warranty Provision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
230
 
Warranty Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
230
This journal entry increased Swede Truck’s 2013 income by €230 million.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Ashton S.A.; journal entries for transactions involving current liabilities.)
a. 
January 2
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
To record 90-day, 9% bank loan.
b. 
January 3
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Accounts Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To record purchases of merchandise on account.
c. 
January 10
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
To record advance from customer on merchandise scheduled for delivery in 
February.
d. 
Month of January
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
To record sales on account during January.
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record the cost of merchandise sold.
e. 
Month of January
Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To record payments to suppliers for purchases on account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

359
 Solutions to Self-Study Problems  
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,000
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,000
To record collections from customers for sales on account.
f. 
January 31
Warranty Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
960
 
Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
960
To record estimated warranty cost for goods sold during January; 0.08 × 
$12,000 = €960.
g. 
January 31
Wages Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Withholding Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800
 
Pension and Welfare Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
 
Withheld Union Dues Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
 
Wages Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,600
To record January wages net of taxes and union dues withheld.
 
Wages Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
540
 
Pension and Welfare Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
 
Unemployment Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
140
To record employer’s share of payroll taxes.
h. 
January 31
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
75
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
75
To record interest expense on notes payable for January; €10,000 × 0.09 × 
30/360 = €75.
i. 
January 31
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
170
To accrue income taxes payable for January: 0.40 × (€12,000 – €6,000 – 
€960 – €4,000 – €540 – €75) = €170.
j. 
February 1
Wages Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,600
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,600
To pay employees their January wages net of withholdings.
k. 
February 10
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
To record the delivery of merchandise to customer, resulting in revenue 
being recognized.
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800
To record the cost of merchandise sold.
l. 
February 15
Withholding Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800
Pension and Welfare Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
800
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

360
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
Unemployment Taxes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
140
Withheld Union Dues Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,940
To record payment of payroll taxes and union dues.
m. 
February 20
Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
To record the cost of warranty repairs on products sold during January.
n. 
March 14
Restructuring Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Restructuring Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
To record restructuring expense.
o. 
June 20
Restructuring Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
To record payments for closing of plants pursuant to restructuring plan.
Restructuring Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,500
 
Restructuring Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,500
To reverse restructuring charges.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 9.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Assessing the impact of a LIFO layer liquidation.)
a. See Exhibit 9.15.
b. 125 × ($15 – $13) = $250.
Suggested Solution to Problem 9.6 for Self-Study, Part a
Total Cost
Units
Unit Cost
FIFO
LIFO
Weighted 
Average
Beginning Inventory . . . . . . . . .
235
See Exhibit 9.14
$  3,290
$  2,745
$  3,096
Purchases During August  . . . . . .
 600
$15
   9,000
   9,000
   9,000
Total Goods Available for Sale. . .
835
$ 12,290
$ 11,745
$ 12,096
Withdrawals During August. . . . .
 (725)
 (10,640)a
 (10,625)c
 (10,503)e
Ending Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . .
 110
$  1,650b
$  1,120d
$  1,593f
a$3,290 + (490 ×$15) = $10,640.
b(110 × $15) = $1,650.
c(600 × $15) + (125 × $13) = $10,625.
d$1,055 + (5 × $13) = $1,120.
e($12,096/835) × 725 = $10,503.
f($12,096/835) × 110 = $1,593.
EXHIBIT 9.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

361
 Questions, Exercises, and Problems 
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Working capital
Current ratio, working capital ratio
Liquidity
Operating assets, operating liabilities
Financial assets, financial liabilities
Cash
Cash equivalents
Prepayments, prepaid assets
Inventory
Merchandising firm
Manufacturing firm
Direct materials, raw materials
Direct labor
Manufacturing overhead
Product costs
Period expenses
Raw materials inventory
Work-in-process inventory, work-in-
progress inventory
Finished goods inventory
Cost of goods sold
Replacement cost
Lower-of-cost-or-market basis
Specific identification
Cost-flow assumption
Weighted average
First-in, first-out (FIFO)
Last-in, first-out (LIFO)
Cost of goods sold percentage
Inventory turnover ratio
Accounts payable, trade payables
Cash cycle, earnings cycle, operating cycle
Note payable
Wages and salaries payable
Income taxes payable, taxes payable
Warranty
Warranty liability, warranty provision
Allowance method for warranties
Restructuring
Restructuring liability, restructuring 
provision
LIFO inventory layer
LIFO liquidation
LIFO reserve
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. What are the characteristics of prepayments that qualify as assets? What is the accounting 
for prepayments?
 3. Identify the underlying principle that guides the measurement of the acquisition cost of 
inventories. What is the rationale for this accounting principle?
 4. Firms may treat depreciation on equipment either as a product cost or as a period expense, 
depending on the type of equipment. Explain.
 5. Compare and contrast the Merchandise Inventory account of a merchandising firm and 
the Finished Goods Inventory account of a manufacturing firm.
 6. “Inventory computations require cost-flow assumptions only because specific identifica-
tion of items sold is costly. Specific identification is theoretically superior to any cost-flow 
assumption and eliminates the possibility of income manipulation available with some 
cost-flow assumptions.” Comment.
 7. Assume no changes in physical quantities during the period. During a period of rising 
purchase prices, will a FIFO or a LIFO cost-flow assumption result in the higher ending 
inventory balance sheet carrying value? During a period of rising purchase prices, will a 
FIFO or a LIFO cost-flow assumption result in the lower balance sheet carrying value? 
Which cost-flow assumption will result in the higher cost of goods sold? Which will result 
in the lower cost of goods sold?
 8. “Firms should obtain as much financing as possible from suppliers through accounts pay-
able because it is a free source of funds.” Do you agree? Why or why not?
 9. The Francis W. Parker School, a private lower school, has a reporting year ending June 
30. It hires teachers for a 10-month period: September of one year through June of the 
following year. It contracts to pay teachers in 12 monthly installments over the period 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

362
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
September of one year through August of the next year. For the current academic year, 
suppose that the school will pay teachers total contractual salaries of $3,600,000. How 
should the school account for this amount in the financial statements issued June 30 at the 
end of the academic year?
10. A noted accountant once remarked that the optimal number of faulty TV sets for Sony 
to sell is “not zero,” even if Sony promises to repair all faulty Sony sets that break down, 
for whatever reason, within two years of purchase. Why could the optimal number be “not 
zero”?
11. Describe the similarities and differences between the allowance method for uncollectibles 
(see Chapter 8) and the allowance method for warranties.
12. What does it mean for a firm to reverse a portion of a previously accrued charge, such as 
the expense creating a warranty liability or a restructuring liability? What is the effect of a 
reversal on the firm’s income statement, balance sheet, and statement of cash flows in the 
period of the reversal?
EXERCISES
13. Accounting for prepayments. A Belgian food distributor reported ending balances in Pre-
payments of €30.7 million, €25.8 million, and €42.1 million for the years ended Decem-
ber 31, 2012, 2011, and 2010, respectively. Assume that Prepayments pertain to insurance 
premiums on warehouses and merchandise. During each of the three years, the firm paid 
insurance premiums of €50 million. The firm follows IFRS and reports its results in mil-
lions of euros (€).
a. What journal entries did the food distributor make in each of the three years to recog-
nize prepayments?
b. What journal entries did the firm make in 2011 and 2012 to recognize insurance on its 
warehouse and inventory?
14. Accounting for prepayments. Liquid Crystal Display Corporation (LCD), a Korean multi-
national firm, reported an ending balance for Prepayments of KRW345,609 million for the 
year ending December 31, 2012. For the year ended December 31, 2011, the ending balance 
in this account was KRW260,324. Suppose that at the beginning of 2012, the Prepayments 
balance consisted of three months of prepaid rent on factory warehouses; at the end of 
the three months, LCD prepaid one year of rent. LCD follows Korean generally accepted 
accounting principles and reports its results in million of Korean won (KRW). For pur-
poses of this problem, assume that LCD uses either U.S. GAAP or IFRS (the choice will 
not matter).
a. What journal entry did LCD make in each of the three months, January–March of 
2012, associated with its prepaid rent?
b. What journal entry did LCD make at the end of March 2012 to reflect its prepayment 
of one year of rent?
c. What journal entry did LCD make in each of the months April–December of 2012 
associated with its prepaid rent?
15. Identifying inventory cost inclusions. Ringgold Winery is a large U.S.-based winery. In 2012 
Ringgold spent $2.2 million to acquire grapes (including transportation costs of $200,000). 
Ringgold incurred processing costs of $50,000 in materials (such as barrels, bottles, and 
corks), $145,000 in labor, $100,000 in machine costs, and $250,000 in utility charges. Dur-
ing the two- to three-year maturing period, Ringgold incurred additional costs for storage 
($600,000), insurance ($120,000), indirect labor ($180,000), and property taxes ($28,000), 
a product cost. Ringgold also spent $400,000 on research and development and $200,000 
on advertising during this period. Identify the costs Ringgold should include in its Wine 
Inventory account, independent of when Ringgold sells the wine.
16. Identifying inventory cost inclusions. Trembly Department Store commenced operations 
on January 1, 2012. It engaged in the following transactions during January. Identify the 
amount that the firm should include in the valuation of merchandise inventory.
a. Purchases of merchandise on account during January totaled $300,000.
b. The freight cost to transport merchandise to Trembly’s warehouse was $13,800.
c. The salary of the purchasing manager was $3,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

363
 Questions, Exercises, and Problems  
d. Depreciation, taxes, insurance, and utilities for the warehouse totaled $27,300.
e. The salary of the warehouse manager was $2,200.
f. The cost of merchandise that Trembly purchased in part a and returned to the supplier 
was $18,500.
g. Cash discounts taken by Trembly from purchases on account in part a totaled $4,900.
17. Effect of inventory valuation on the balance sheet and net income. ResellFast purchases resi-
dential and commercial real estate for resale. ResellFast has a December 31 year-end and 
prepares financial statements quarterly. On February 5, 2012, ResellFast acquired an open-
air mall in Miami, Florida, with space for 15 retail businesses, for $20 million. On April 12, 
2012, a storm flooded a portion of the mall, reducing the mall’s fair value to $16.5 million. 
On August 14, 2012, a large retailer announced plans to build a new store adjacent to the 
open-air mall; this announcement, combined with ResellFast’s repairs, attracted several 
smaller retailers to inquire about acquiring space in the open-air mall. By September 30, 
2012, the fair value of the open-air mall had increased to $26 million. On November 8, 
2012, ResellFast sold the mall for $27.5 million. Compute the carrying value of the open-
air mall on ResellFast’s balance sheet and the related income statement effect for each 
quarter of 2012. ResellFast follows U.S. GAAP.
18. Inventory and accounts payable journal entries. Target Corporation, a U.S.-based retailer, 
follows U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars ($). Its balance sheet 
for the End of Year and Beginning of Year contains the following information:
(Millions of $)
End of 
Year
Beginning 
of Year
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,780
$6,254
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,721
 6,575
 
Target’s income statement reports Cost of Goods Sold of $41,895 million for the year. 
Assume that Accounts Payable relates only to inventory.
a. How much merchandise inventory did Target purchase during the year?
b. What journal entry did Target make related to part a? Assume that Target made all 
purchases on account.
c. What journal entry did Target make in the year, to record its payments to vendors?
19. Inventory and accounts payable journal entries. Tesco Plc. is the U.K.’s largest grocery store 
chain. It applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of pounds sterling (£). For a recent 
year, Tesco reported at year-end and at the beginning of the year, as follows:
(Millions of £)
End of 
Year
Beginning 
of Year
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
£2,420
£1,911
Trade Payables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,936
 3,317
 
During the year ended Tesco paid its suppliers £43,558 million. Assume that Trade Pay-
ables relates only to inventory.
a. What journal entry did Tesco make to record the payments to suppliers during the year?
b. How much merchandise inventory did Tesco purchase during the year and what journal 
entry did it make to record those purchases?
c. What was Tesco’s Cost of Goods Sold for the year? What journal entry did it record to 
reflect this cost?
20. Income computation for a manufacturing firm. Fun-in-the-Sun Tanning Lotion Company 
manufactures suntan lotion made from organic materials. During its first year of opera-
tions, it purchased raw materials costing $78,200, of which it used $56,300 in manufactur-
ing suntan lotions. It incurred manufacturing labor costs of $36,100 and manufacturing 
overhead costs of $26,800 during the year. Inventories taken at the end of the year revealed 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

364
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
unfinished suntan lotions costing $12,700 and finished suntan lotions costing $28,500. 
Compute the amount of cost of goods sold for the year.
21. Income computation for a manufacturing firm. The following data relate to GenMet, a U.S.-
based consumer goods manufacturing firm, for the fiscal year ending October 31, 2013. 
Reported amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars ($).
October 
31, 2013
October 
31, 2012
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$101.5
$ 73.7
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 119.1
 100.8
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 322.3
 286.2
 
GenMet incurred manufacturing costs (direct material, direct labor, manufacturing over-
head) during fiscal 2013 totaling $2,752.0. Sales revenue was $6,700.2, selling and admin-
istrative expenses were $2,903.7, and interest expense was $151.9. The income tax rate is 
35%. Round arithmetic computations to one digit after the decimal point. Compute Gen-
Met’s net income for fiscal year 2013.
22. Income computation for a manufacturing firm. The following data relate to Crystal Chemi-
cal Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2013 (amounts in millions of euros):
December 
31, 2013
December 
31, 2012
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€  373
€  452
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   837
   843
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,396
 2,523
 
The company incurred manufacturing costs (direct material, direct labor, and manufactur-
ing overhead) during the year totaling €28,044. Sales revenue was €32,632, marketing and 
administrative expenses were €2,436, and interest expenses were €828. The income tax rate 
is 35%. Compute net income for the year.
23. Effect of inventory errors. Warren Company uses a FIFO cost-flow assumption and calcu-
lates Cost of Goods Sold as Beginning Inventory + Purchases – Ending Inventory. It uses 
a physical count of merchandise on hand to determine the balance in Ending Inventory. 
On December 30, 2012, Warren Company received merchandise from a supplier and placed 
that merchandise in its merchandise warehouse. Warren Company included the merchan-
dise in its December 31, 2012, physical count of inventory. Although Warren Company had 
not yet received the invoice for this merchandise, it knew the cost was $1,000 from the pur-
chase order confirmation provided by the seller. When the firm received the actual invoice 
on January 4, 2013, it recorded the merchandise purchase. In summary, Warren Company 
received merchandise in December 2012, included the merchandise in its physical count of 
ending inventory at the end of December 2012, but it made no journal entry in December 
to record the purchase of the inventory. Instead, the firm recorded the merchandise pur-
chase in January 2013. Assume that the firm never discovered its error. Indicate the effect 
(overstatement (OS), understatement (US), none (NO)) on each of the following amounts 
(ignore income taxes):
a. Inventory, 12/31/2012.
b. Inventory, 12/31/2013.
c. Cost of goods sold, 2012.
d. Cost of goods sold, 2013.
e. Net income, 2012.
f. Net income, 2013.
g. Accounts payable, 12/31/2012.
h. Accounts payable, 12/31/2013.
i. Retained earnings, 12/31/2013.
24. Lower of cost or market for inventory. Cemex S.A., a Mexican cement and construction 
firm, reported ending inventory, net for the year ended December 31 of $19,631 million 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

365
   Questions, Exercises, and Problems
(all amounts reported in millions of Mexican pesos). During the year, Cemex reported that 
application of the lower-of-cost-or-market rule to inventories resulted in an impairment of 
$131 million. Cemex’s allowance account for inventory impairments had an ending balance 
of $556 million.
a. What was the gross value of Cemex’s inventory at December 31?
b. What journal entry did Cemex make at the end of the year to record the impairment 
charge for inventory?
25. Lower of cost or market for inventory. Ericsson, a Swedish networks and communications 
firm, reported a gross value of inventory of SEK25,227 on December 31. It also reported 
an ending balance in the allowance for impairments of SEK2,752 million. During the 
year, Ericsson recognized a write-down of inventory in the amount of SEK1,276 million. 
Assume the acquisition cost of the inventory written down is SEK3,500 million. Ericsson 
applies IFRS and reports its results in millions of Swedish kronor (SEK).
a. What was the carrying value of Ericsson’s inventory as of December 31?
b. What journal entry did Ericsson make to record the write-down (impairment) of 
inventory?
c. Suppose that in January of the next year, the market value of the impaired inventory 
increased to SEK2,800. What journal entry, if any, would Ericsson make?
d. How, if at all, would your answers to parts a–c differ if Ericsson applied U.S. GAAP?
26. Computations involving different cost-flow assumptions. Sun Health Food’s purchases of 
vitamins during its first year of operations were as follows:
Quantity
Cost per 
Unit
Total 
Cost
January 5 Purchase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  460
$4.30
$ 1,978
April 16 Purchase  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  670
 4.20
  2,814
August 26 Purchase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  500
 4.16
  2,080
November 13 Purchase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  870
 4.10
  3,567
 
Totals. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500
$10,439
 
The inventory on December 31 was 420 units. Compute the cost of the inventory on 
December 31 and the cost of goods sold for the year under each of the following cost-flow 
assumptions:
a. FIFO.
b. Weighted average.
c. LIFO.
27. Computations involving different cost-flow assumptions. Arnold Company’s raw material 
purchases during January, its first month of operations, were as follows:
Quantity
Cost per 
Unit
Total 
Cost
1/2 Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,200 pounds
$2.20
$ 2,640
1/8 Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,200 pounds
 2.25
  4,950
1/15 Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,800 pounds
 2.28
  6,384
1/23 Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,500 pounds
 2.30
  3,450
1/28 Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,000 pounds
 2.32
  6,960
Total Goods Available for Use  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,700 pounds
$24,384
 
The inventory on January 31 was 3,500 pounds. Compute the cost of the inventory on 
January 31 and the cost of raw materials issued to production for January under each of 
the following cost-flow assumptions:
a. FIFO.
b. Weighted average.
c. LIFO.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

366
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
28. Effect of LIFO on financial statements over several periods. Harmon Corporation com-
menced operations on January 1, 2011. It uses a LIFO cost-flow assumption. Its purchases 
and sales for the first three years of operations appear next:
Purchases
Sales
Units
Unit 
Cost
Units
Unit 
Price
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 83,000
$20.00
 64,000
$32.00
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 92,000
 25.00
101,000
 40.00
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120,000
 30.00
110,000
 48.00
a. Compute the amount of ending inventory for each of the three years.
b. Compute the amount of income for each of the three years.
29. LIFO provides opportunity for income manipulation. EKG Company, a manufacturer of 
medical supplies, began the year with 10,000 units of product that cost $8 each. During 
the year, it produced another 60,000 units at a cost of $15 each. Sales for the year were 
expected to total 70,000 units. During November, the company needs to plan production 
for the remainder of the year. The company might produce no additional units beyond 
the 60,000 units already produced. On the other hand, the company could produce up to 
100,000 additional units; the cost would be $22 per unit regardless of the quantity pro-
duced. Assume that sales are 70,000 units for the year at an average price of $30 per unit.
a. What production level for the remainder of the year gives the largest cost of goods sold 
for the year? What is that cost of goods sold?
b. What production level for the remainder of the year gives the smallest cost of goods 
sold for the year? What is that cost of goods sold?
c. Compare the gross margins implied by the two production plans devised in the preced-
ing parts.
30. Conversion from LIFO to FIFO. Cat Incorporated manufactures machinery and engines for 
the construction, agriculture, and forestry industries. It follows U.S. GAAP and reports its 
results in millions of U.S. dollars ($). For the year ended December 31, 2013, it reported 
LIFO inventories of $7,204 million, compared to $6,351 million as of December 31, 2012. 
Cat’s cost of goods sold for 2013 was $32,626 million. Cat reports in the notes to its 2013 
financial statements that inventories would have been $2,617 million higher as of Decem-
ber 31, 2013, had it used the FIFO cost-flow assumption, and $2,403 million higher as of 
December 31, 2012. Compute Cat’s cost of goods sold for 2013 if the firm had used FIFO 
instead of LIFO.
31. Analysis of LIFO and FIFO disclosures. Falcon Motor Company, a U.S. automotive manu-
facturer, reports that it uses the LIFO cost-flow assumption for inventory. For the year 
ended December 31, 2013, Falcon’s cost of goods sold was $142,587 million. It reported 
the following information in the notes to its 2013 financial statements:
December 
31, 2013
December 
31, 2012
Total Inventories Under FIFO. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,221
$11,032
Less: LIFO Adjustment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1,100)
  (1,015)
Total Inventories Under LIFO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,121
$10,017
a. What was the carrying value of Falcon’s inventory as of December 31, 2013, and as of 
December 31, 2012?
b. What would Falcon’s cost of goods sold for 2013 have been had the firm used FIFO?
32. Journal entries for payroll. During the year ended June 30, McGee Associates’ office 
employees earned wages of $700,000. McGee withheld 30% of this amount for payments 
for various income and payroll taxes. In addition, McGee must pay 10% of gross wages 
for the employer’s share of various taxes. McGee has promised to contribute 4% of gross 
wages to a profit-sharing fund, which workers will share as they retire. Employees earned 
vacation pay estimated to be $14,000; estimated fringe benefits are 20% of that amount.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

367
   Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Prepare journal entries for these wage-related items.
b. What is total wage and salary expense?
33. Accounting for uncollectible accounts and warranties. Hurley Corporation sells household 
appliances (for example, refrigerators, dishwashers) to customers on account. The firm 
also provides warranty services on products sold. Hurley estimates that 2% of sales will 
ultimately become uncollectible and that warranty costs will equal 6% of sales. Actual 
uncollectible accounts and warranty expenditures generally occur within three years of the 
time of sale. Amounts in selected accounts appear next:
December 31:
2013
2012
2011
Accounts Receivable, Net of Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts 
 
of $245 on December 31, 2013, $405 on December 31, 2012, 
 
and $355 on December 31, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,470
$ 7,750
$7,000
Estimated Warranty Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,720
  1,535
 1,325
For the Year:
2013
2012
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$16,000
$18,000
a. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts 
account during 2012 and 2013.
b. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the Warranty Liability account during 
2012 and 2013.
34. Journal entries for warranty liabilities and subsequent expenditures. Miele Company is a 
German family-owned appliance business. Assume that Miele provides a two-year war-
ranty on its products and that Miele estimates current year warranty costs to be 4% of 
sales revenues. At the beginning of last year, Miele’s balance sheet carrying value of esti-
mated warranty liabilities was €30,000. Miele will incur actual warranty costs over the two 
years following the time of sale. Assume that sales (all on account) and actual warranty 
expenditures (all paid in cash) were as follows:
Sales
Actual 
Warranty 
Expenditures
Last Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€1,200,000
€12,000
Current Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,500,000
 50,000
a. Prepare journal entries to recognize sales revenues, warranty costs, and warranty expen-
ditures in for the two years. Closing entries are not required.
b. What is the balance in the Warranty Liability account at the end of the current year?
35. Journal entries for warranty liabilities and subsequent expenditures. Kingspeed Bikes offers 
three-year warranties against defects on the sales of its high-end racing bikes. The firm 
estimates that the total cost of warranty claims over the three-year warranty period on 
bikes sold will equal 6% of sales revenue. Kingspeed will incur actual warranty costs over 
the three-year period following the time of sale. Sales (all for cash) and actual warranty 
costs incurred on bikes under warranty (60% in cash and 40% in parts) appear next for 
years 2011–2013:
Sales
Actual Warranty Costs Incurred 
During Year on Racing Bikes 
Under Warranty
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  800,000
$22,000
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,200,000
 55,000
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   900,000
 52,000
a. Prepare journal entries for the events of 2011, 2012, and 2013. Closing entries are not 
required.
b. What is the balance in the Warranty Liability account at the end of 2013?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

368
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
36. Journal entries for restructuring liabilities and subsequent expenditures. For the fiscal year 
ended September 30, Sappi Paper Limited, a South African paper company, reported 
an ending balance in its Restructuring Provision, the balance sheet account, of ZAR16 
million (ZAR denotes the South Africa Rand currency). The beginning balance in this 
account was ZAR41 million. During the year, Sappi made cash expenditures of ZAR32 
million to settle previously accrued costs of severance charges and plant closings. Sappi did 
not change any restructuring estimates during the year. Prepare journal entries related to 
Sappi’s restructuring provision during the year.
37. Journal entries for restructuring liabilities and subsequent expenditures. On December 31, 
2012, Delchamps Group reported a balance in Restructuring Provisions of €50.9 million, 
of which €12.5 million was expected to be paid in 2013, with the remainder to be settled 
during 2014–2015. The balance in this account at the start of the year was €84.0 million. 
During 2012, assume that Delchamps accrued restructuring charges of €14.2 million, and 
reversed €7.3 million of previous charges.
a. Prepare all journal entries Delchamps made during 2012 related to its restructuring 
activities.
b. How will Delchamps report its Restructuring Provision on its balance sheet for the year 
ended December 31, 2012?
c. What is the effect of Delchamps’s 2012 restructuring activities on its income statement? 
How are these activities displayed on the statement of cash flows? Ignore tax effects.
PROBLEMS
38. Preparation of journal entries and income statement for a manufacturing firm. Katherine’s 
Outdoor Furniture, a manufacturer specializing in lawn, deck, and poolside furniture, 
showed the following amounts in its inventory accounts on January 1:
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$226,800
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 427,900
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 182,700
 
Katherine’s Outdoor Furniture engaged in the following transactions during January:
(1) Acquired raw materials costing $667,200 on account.
(2) Issued, to producing departments, raw materials costing $689,100.
(3) Paid salaries and wages during January for services received during the month as 
follows:
Factory Workers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$432,800
Sales Personnel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  89,700
Administrative Officers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  22,300
(4) Calculated depreciation on buildings and equipment during January as follows:
Manufacturing Facilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$182,900
Selling Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 87,400
Administrative Facilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 12,200
(5) Incurred and paid other operating costs in cash as follows:
Manufacturing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$218,500
Selling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  55,100
Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  34,700
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

369
   Questions, Exercises, and Problems
(6) The cost of goods manufactured and transferred to the finished goods storeroom 
totaled $1,564,500.
(7) Sales on account during January totaled $2,400,000.
(8) A physical inventory taken on January 31 revealed a finished goods inventory of 
$210,600.
a. Present journal entries to record the transactions and events that occurred during 
January.
b. Prepare an income statement for Katherine’s Outdoor Furniture for January. Ignore 
income taxes.
39. Flow of manufacturing costs through the accounts. The following data relate to the manu-
facturing activities of the Lord Crompton Plc. during June:
June 30
June 1
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£ 43,600
£ 46,900
Factory Supplies Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   7,700
   7,600
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 115,200
 110,900
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  71,400
  76,700
 
It incurred factory costs during the month of June as follows:
Raw Materials Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£429,000
Supplies Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  22,300
Labor Services Received . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 362,100
Heat, Light, and Power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  10,300
Insurance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   4,200
 
It also experienced expirations of previous factory acquisitions and prepayments as follows:
Depreciation on Factory Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£36,900
Prepaid Rent Expired . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  3,600
 
Other information included the following:
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
£1,350,000
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   246,900
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    47,100
Income Tax Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40%
a. Calculate the cost of raw materials and factory supplies used during June.
b. Calculate the cost of units completed during June and transferred to the finished goods 
storeroom.
c. Calculate the cost of goods sold during June.
d. Calculate the amount of net income for the month of June.
40. Flow of manufacturing costs. Sedan Corporation, a Japanese automobile manufacturer, fol-
lows U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of yen (¥). On March 31, 2013 and 
2012, Sedan reported the following information pertaining to its inventories:
(Millions of Yen) 
March 31
2013
2012
Raw Materials and Supplies Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
¥  374,210
¥  362,686
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   239,937
   236,749
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,211,569
 1,204,521
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

370
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
 
Sedan reported Cost of Products Sold for the year ended March 31, 2013, of ¥20,452,338. 
Sedan reported no write-downs of inventory to lower of cost or market during either fiscal 
year.
a. What is the carrying value of Sedan’s total inventory, as of March 31, 2013?
b. What was the cost of units completed by Sedan during 2012?
c. Suppose that Sedan’s direct labor and overhead were ¥12,000,000 million for the year 
ended March 31, 2013. How much in raw materials and supplies costs did Sedan charge 
to Work in Process during the year ended March 31, 2013? What journal entry did it 
make to record this charge?
d. What was the cost of Sedan’s raw material and supplies purchased for the year ended 
March 31, 2013? Assuming all purchases were made on credit, what journal entry did 
Sedan make to record those purchases?
41. Flow of manufacturing costs. The Minevik Group is a Swedish-based, high-technology 
engineering firm. It follows IFRS and reports its results in millions of Swedish kronor 
(SEK). For the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, Minevik reported the following 
information pertaining to its inventories:
(SEK millions)
December 31
2013
2012
Raw Materials Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
SEK 6,964
SEK5,690
Work-in-Process Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,157
4,093
Finished Goods Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,180
8,955
 
Minevik reported Cost of Sales for 2013 of SEK57,222 million. The notes to its financial 
statements state that 2013 Cost of Sales includes a SEK281 million write-down of Finished 
Goods inventory.
a. What is the carrying value of Minevik’s total inventory as of December 31, 2013?
b. What journal entry did Minevik make in 2013 to reflect inventory write-downs?
c. What was Minevik’s Cost of Sales prior to the write-down of inventory to its lower of 
cost or market value?
d. What was the cost of units completed by Minevik during 2013?
e. Suppose that Minevik’s direct labor and overhead costs are 300% of direct material 
costs. That is, for every SEK1 of direct material costs, Minevik incurs an additional 
SEK3 in direct labor and overhead costs. How much in direct materials costs did Min-
evik charge to Work in Process during 2013? What journal entry did it make to record 
this charge?
f. What was the cost of Minevik’s raw materials purchased in 2013?
42. Lower-of-cost-or-market valuation for inventory; U.S. GAAP versus IFRS. Good Luck 
Brands reported a carrying value of its total inventory as of December 31, 2013, of 
$2,047.6 million; the corresponding figure for December 31, 2012, was $1,937.8. Good 
Luck Brands applies U.S. GAAP and reports its results in millions of U.S. dollars ($).
a. Suppose that on January 1, 2013, the market value of Good Luck Brands’s inventory 
increased to $2,300.0 million. What journal entry, if any, should Good Luck Brands 
record on January 1?
b. Suppose that on January 1, 2014, the market value of Good Luck Brands’s inventory 
decreased to $1,880.6 million. What journal entry, if any, should Good Luck Brands 
record on January 1, 2014?
c. Continuing the scenario in part b, suppose that the market value of the inventory previ-
ously written down increased to $1,962.3 million on February 16, 2014. What journal 
entry, if any, should Good Luck Brands record on this date?
d. Would your answers to parts a, b, and c differ if Good Luck Brands applies IFRS?
43. Detailed comparison of various choices for inventory accounting. Burton Corporation com-
menced retailing operations on January 1, 2011. Purchases of merchandise inventory dur-
ing 2011 and 2012 appear next:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

371
 Questions, Exercises, and Problems  
Quantity 
Purchased
Unit 
Price
Acquisition 
Cost
1/10/2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  600
$10
$ 6,000
6/30/2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  200
 12
  2,400
10/20/2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  400
 15
  6,000
Total 2011 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,200
$14,400
Quantity 
Purchased
Unit 
Price
Acquisition 
Cost
2/18/2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  500
$14
$ 7,000
7/15/2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  500
 12
  6,000
12/15/2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  800
 10
  8,000
Total 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,800
$21,000
 
Burton Corporation sold 1,000 units during 2011 and 1,500 units during 2012.
a. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2011 using a FIFO cost-flow assumption.
b. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2011 using a LIFO cost-flow assumption.
c. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2011 using a weighted-average cost-flow assumption.
d. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2012 using a FIFO cost-flow assumption.
e. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2012 using a LIFO cost-flow assumption.
f. Calculate the cost of goods sold for 2012 using a weighted-average cost-flow assumption.
g. Will FIFO or LIFO result in reporting the larger net income for 2011? Explain.
h. Will FIFO or LIFO result in reporting the larger net income for 2012? Explain.
44. Effect of FIFO and LIFO on income statement and balance sheet. Hanover Oil Products 
(HOP) operates a gasoline outlet. It commenced operations on January 1. It prices its 
gasoline at 10% above its average purchase price for gasoline. Purchases of gasoline during 
January, February, and March appear next:
Gallons 
Purchased
Unit 
Price
Acquisition 
Cost
January 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,000
$1.40
$ 5,600
January 13. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,000
 1.46
  8,760
January 28. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5,000
 1.50
  7,500
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
$21,860
Gallons 
Purchased
Unit 
Price
Acquisition 
Cost
February 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 7,000
$1.53
$10,710
February 14  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,000
 1.47
  8,820
February 21  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 1.42
 14,200
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23,000
$33,730
Gallons 
Purchased
Unit 
Price
Acquisition 
Cost
March 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,000
$1.48
$ 8,880
March 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 5,000
 1.54
  7,700
March 26 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,000
 1.60
  6,400
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
$22,980
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

372
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
 
Sales for each month were as follows:
January: $20,840 (13,000 gallons)
February: $35,490 (22,000 gallons)
March: $28,648 (17,000 gallons)
a. Compute the cost of goods sold for January using both a FIFO and a LIFO cost-flow 
assumption.
b. Repeat part a for February.
c. Repeat part a for March.
d. Why does the cost-flow assumption that provides the largest cost of goods sold amount 
change each month?
e. Compute the cost of goods sold percentage for each month using both a FIFO and a 
LIFO cost-flow assumption.
f. Which cost-flow assumption provides the most stable cost of goods sold percentage 
over the three months? Explain why this is the case.
g. HOP deliberately allowed its inventory to decline to 1,000 gallons at the end of March 
because of the high purchase cost. Assume for this part that HOP had purchased 6,000 
gallons on March 26 instead of 4,000, thereby maintaining an ending inventory equal 
to the beginning inventory for the month of 3,000 gallons. Compute the amount of cost 
of goods sold for March using both a FIFO and a LIFO cost-flow assumption. Why 
are your answers the same as, or different from, those in part c above? Explain.
45. Reconstructing underlying events from ending inventory amounts. (Adapted from CPA 
examination.) Burch Corporation began a merchandising business on January 1, 2010. It 
acquired merchandise costing $100,000 in 2010, $125,000 in 2011, and $135,000 in 2012. 
Information about Burch Corporation’s inventory as it would appear on the balance sheet 
under different inventory methods follows:
Balance Sheet Inventory Amounts
December 31
LIFO 
Cost
FIFO 
Cost
Lower of Cost 
or Market
2010. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$40,200
$40,000
$37,000
2011. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 36,400
 36,000
 34,000
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 41,800
 44,000
 44,000
 
In answering each of the following questions, indicate how you deduced the answer. You 
may assume that in any one year, prices moved only up or down but not both.
a. Did prices go up or down in 2010?
b. Did prices go up or down in 2012?
c. Which inventory method would show the highest income for 2010?
d. Which inventory method would show the highest income for 2011?
e. Which inventory method would show the highest income for 2012?
f. Which inventory method would show the lowest income for all three years considered as 
a single period?
g. For 2012, how much higher or lower would income be on the FIFO cost-flow assump-
tion than on the lower-of-cost-or-market basis?
46. LIFO layers influence purchasing behavior and provide opportunity for income manipulation. 
Wilson Company sells chemical compounds made from expensium. The company has used 
a LIFO inventory flow assumption for many years. The inventory of expensium on Decem-
ber 31, 2012, comprised 4,000 pounds from 2003 through 2012 at prices ranging from $30 
to $52 per pound:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

373
 Questions, Exercises, and Problems  
Year Acquired
Purchase 
Price
Pounds
Cost
2003. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$30
2,000
$ 60,000
2008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 46
  200
   9,200
2009. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 48
  400
  19,200
2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 52
1,400
  72,800
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,000
$161,200
 
 
Expensium costs $62 per pound during 2013, but the purchasing agent expects its price 
to fall back to $52 per pound in 2014. Sales for 2013 require 7,000 pounds of expensium. 
Wilson Company wants to carry a stock of 4,000 pounds of inventory. The purchasing 
agent suggests that the firm decrease the inventory of expensium from 4,000 to 600 pounds 
by the end of 2013 and replenish it to the desired level of 4,000 pounds early in 2014.
 
 
The controller argues that such a policy would be foolish. If the firm allows invento-
ries to decrease to 600 pounds, the cost of goods sold will be extraordinarily low (because 
Wilson will consume older LIFO layers) and income taxes will be extraordinarily high. The 
controller suggests that the firm plan 2013 purchases to maintain an end-of-year inventory 
of 4,000 pounds.
 
 
Assume that sales for 2013 do require 7,000 pounds of expensium, that the prices for 
2013 and 2014 are as forecast, and that the income tax rate for Wilson Company is 40%.
a. Calculate the cost of goods sold and the end-of-year LIFO inventory for 2013, assum-
ing that the firm follows the controller’s advice and that inventory at the end of 2013 is 
4,000 pounds.
b. Calculate the cost of goods sold and the end-of-year LIFO inventory for 2013, assum-
ing that the firm follows the purchasing agent’s advice and that inventory at the end of 
2013 is 600 pounds.
c. Assume the firm follows the advice of the controller, not the purchasing agent. Calcu-
late the tax savings for 2013 and the extra cash costs for inventory.
d. What should Wilson Company do? Consider quality of earnings issues in your response.
e. Management of Wilson Company wants to know what discretion it has to vary income 
for 2013 by planning its purchases of expensium. If the firm follows the controller’s pol-
icy, after-tax income for 2013 will be $50,000. What is the range, after taxes, of income 
that the firm can achieve by the purposeful management of expensium purchases?
47. Interpreting inventory disclosures. Refer to the information in Problem 40 concerning Sedan 
Corporation’s inventory for the years ended March 31, 2013 and 2012. The notes to Sedan’s 
financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2013, state that some of Sedan’s inven-
tory is valued using the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method. Specifically, Sedan reported that 
for the year ended March 31, 2013, ¥283,735 million of inventory was valued using LIFO, 
compared to ¥357,055 for the year ended March 31, 2012. The LIFO inventory amounts 
exceeded their FIFO amounts by ¥13,780 million for the year ended March 31, 2013, and 
by ¥30,360 million for the year ended March 31, 2012.
a. What would have been the carrying value of Sedan’s inventory at March 31, 2013 and 
2012, had the firm used FIFO to value all inventories?
b. What would have been Sedan’s cost of products sold for the year ended March 31, 
2013, if it had used FIFO for all of its inventories? Note: Convention assigns any LIFO 
reserve entirely to Finished Goods Inventory.
48. Allowance method for warranties; reconstructing transactions. Assume that Central Appli-
ance sells appliances, all for cash. It debits all acquisitions of appliances during a year to 
the Merchandise Inventory account. The company provides warranties on all its products, 
guaranteeing to make required repairs, within one year of the date of sale, for any of its 
appliances that break down. The company has many years of experience with its products 
and warranties.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

374
Chapter 9 
Working Capital
 
 
The following table shows summary data and financial statement excerpts for Central 
Appliance for the end of 2012 and for some of the events during 2013. The firm made 
entries to the Warranty Liability account during 2013 as it made repairs, which converted 
the credit balance at the end of 2012 into a debit balance of $15,000 at the end of 2013. 
That is, before the firm makes its entry to recognize warranty expense for the entire year, 
the Warranty Liability account has a debit balance of $15,000. Also, the Merchandise 
Inventory account, to which the firm has debited all purchases of inventory, has a balance 
of $820,000 before the adjusting entry for Cost of Goods Sold, so that Goods Available for 
Sale totaled $820,000. Central Appliance makes its adjusting entries and closes its books 
only once each year, at the end of the year.
Balance Sheet Excerpts
End of 
2012
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
All Other Asset Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 110,000
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$210,000
Warranty Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  6,000
All Other Liability and Shareholders’ Equity Accounts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 204,000
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$210,000
Income Statement Excerpts
2013
2012
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000,000
$800,000
Warranty Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
  18,000
 
At the end of 2013, the management of Central Appliance analyzes the appliances sold 
within the preceding 12 months. It classifies all appliances still covered by warranty as fol-
lows: those sold on or before June 30 (more than six months old), those sold after June 30 
but on or before November 30 (more than one month but less than six months old), and 
those sold on or after December 1. Assume that it estimates that one-half of 1% of the 
appliances sold more than six months ago will require repair, 5% of the appliances sold one 
to six months before the end of the year will require repair, and 8% of the appliances sold 
within the last month will require repair. From this analysis, management estimates that 
$5,000 of repairs will still have to be made in 2014 on the appliances sold in 2013. Items 
remaining in ending inventory on December 31, 2013, had cost $120,000.
a. What were the total acquisitions of merchandise inventory during 2013?
b. What was the cost of goods sold for 2013?
c. What was the dollar amount of repairs made during 2013?
d. What was the warranty expense for 2013?
e. Give journal entries for repairs made during 2013, for the warranty expense for 2013, 
and for cost of goods sold for 2013.
49. Interpreting restructuring disclosures. The notes to the financial statements of Bayer Group, 
a German pharmaceutical company, report a balance of €154 million for Restructuring 
Provisions on December 31; for the prior year, the ending balance in this liability account 
was €196 million. During the current year, Bayer reports Utilizations (that is, expenditures) 
of €134 million, and Reversals of €$31 million. Other effects (such as exchange rate differ-
ences and changes in the scope of consolidation) reduced the balance in this account by €5 
million during the current year.
a. What journal entry did Bayer make in the current year to record Utilizations and 
Reversals?
b. What journal entry did Bayer make in the current year to record new additions to the 
Restructuring Provision account?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapter 3 introduced the distinction between current assets and noncurrent assets. Chapter 9
described the accounting for certain current assets (assets a firm expects to consume in the 
next 12 months). Noncurrent assets, also called long-lived assets, are assets firms expect to con-
sume over periods extending past the next 12 months. Both current and noncurrent assets include 
operational assets used in the firm’s operations and financial assets, typically held for investment 
purposes.1 This chapter focuses on long-lived operational assets, including tangible assets, such as 
land, buildings, and equipment, and intangible assets, such as patents, brand names, and trade-
marks. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide guidance in the following areas for these types of 
assets:
1. Determining which expenditures with potential long-term benefits firms should recognize as 
long-lived assets on the balance sheet and which they should recognize as expenses on the 
income statement.
2. Determining whether to depreciate or amortize the cost of a long-lived asset and, if so, the 
length of time and pattern of depreciation or amortization.
3. Incorporating changes in estimates used to calculate depreciation or amortization.
4. Accounting for disposals of long-lived assets.
5. Recognizing changes in the fair values of long-lived assets.
Long-lived assets have characteristics that present special accounting challenges, including the 
following:
■ 
Long-lived assets have long useful lives. Accounting requires that firms allocate the benefit 
derived from long-lived assets appropriately to each accounting period.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Long-Lived Tangible 
and Intangible Assets
C h a p t e r
10
 1 Chapters 13 and 14 discuss the accounting for financial assets.
1. Understand the concepts distinguishing 
expenditures on long-lived assets that 
increase the carrying value of the assets 
from expenditures that firms treat as 
expenses.
2. Understand the concepts underlying 
the measurement of acquisition cost 
of long-lived assets.
3. Understand the distinction between 
finite-lived and indefinite-lived assets 
and the implications for depreciation 
or amortization.
4. Develop the skills to compute deprecia-
tion and amortization based on initial 
estimates and to adjust depreciation 
and amortization for changes in those 
estimates.
5. Develop the skills to record the disposal 
of long-lived assets at various selling 
prices.
6. Develop the skills to record an impair-
ment loss on long-lived assets.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

376
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
■ 
The useful lives and fair values of these assets may change as technology changes, as firms 
introduce new products, as government regulations change, and for other similar reasons. 
Accounting must be responsive to these changes.
■ 
Intangible long-lived assets have no physical substance. Accounting, therefore, may not be 
able to rely on the same sorts of evidence supporting recognition and measurement that it 
relies on for tangible assets.
For many firms, investments in long-lived assets represent significant balance sheet items 
as well as significant uses of cash. For example, Great Deal’s balance sheet for the year ended 
February 17, 2013 (Exhibit 1.1), includes $4,070 million of long-lived tangible assets and 
$2,890 million of long-lived intangible assets (the sum of the amounts reported for good-
will, trade names, and customer relationships). The statement of cash flows for the same 
period (Exhibit 1.3) shows that Great Deal used $615 million cash to acquire long-lived assets. 
Thames’s balance sheet for the year ended December 31, 2013 (Exhibit 1.5), and its statement 
of cash flows for the same period (Exhibit 1.7) show that the carrying value of Thames’s long-
lived tangible (intangible) assets is €1,338.3 million (€3,912.2 million, the sum of goodwill and 
other intangibles), and its expenditures to acquire long-lived assets are €418.9 million.
Chapter 7 discussed the fixed asset turnover ratio, the ratio of sales to average fixed assets, 
as one measure of operating efficiency. Fixed assets typically refer to long-lived tangible assets.2 
The higher is this ratio, the more sales the firm is able to generate from each dollar invested in 
long-lived tangible assets. Management’s ability to use long-lived assets effectively will affect 
this ratio and, therefore, the firm’s performance. To improve performance, management might 
acquire long-lived assets with a greater ability to produce products and services with high gross 
margins (the difference between sales revenue and cost of sales), or dispose of unproductive or 
low performing long-lived assets.
To understand how the firm is using its long-lived assets, users of financial statements need 
to understand both the accounting standards applicable to long-lived assets and the judgments 
and estimates that firms make to apply those standards.
TREATMENT OF EXPENDITURES AS 
ASSETS VERSUS AS EXPENSES
Firms treat expenditures with potential long-term benefits either as an asset on the balance 
sheet or as an expense on the income statement. Recall from Chapter 4 that an expenditure 
qualifies as an asset if it meets the definition of an asset, and satisfies the criteria for asset rec-
ognition. These conditions mean that a firm classifies expenditures as assets when it (1) has 
acquired rights to the future use of an economic resource as a result of a past transaction or 
event; and (2) can reliably measure the expected benefits at the time of initial recognition. 
Expenditures that do not meet these two conditions are expenses in the period incurred.
The exchange of cash for a resource with future service potential typically satisfies the first 
condition (the asset definition). Satisfying the second criterion, the measurability condition, 
can be more difficult because of the extended time that elapses before all the expected benefits 
materialize. Satisfying the second condition is more challenging for intangible assets than for 
tangible assets because of the difficulty of observing the realization of benefits. The following 
examples illustrate the application of the criteria for long-lived asset recognition.
Example 1 Great Deal pays cash to acquire land and a building. The land and building pro-
vide Great Deal with future benefits. The exchange between an independent buyer and seller 
establishes the cost of the expected benefits at the time of acquisition. The land and building 
therefore are assets on Great Deal’s balance sheet.
Example 2 Great Deal self-constructs new stores using both its employees and outside con-
tractors. The new stores, when completed, will provide Great Deal with future benefits. This 
example differs from Example 1 in that Great Deal (1) incurs part of the cost internally, and 
(2) makes expenditures to construct the stores instead of acquiring a completed asset. The store 
buildings in process provide evidence of the likelihood of future benefits. During the construc-
tion process the accumulated construction costs measure the cost of those expected benefits. 
 2 Fixed assets are sometimes interpreted more broadly to include both long-lived tangible and intangible assets.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

377
Treatment of Expenditures as Assets Versus as Expenses
All expenditures during the construction process are part of the cost of the self-constructed 
asset. The self-constructed asset (called construction in progress until the store is completed) is 
an asset on Great Deal’s balance sheet.
Example 3 Merck acquires a patent from its creator for $120 million. This patent gives Merck 
an exclusive right to develop and market the patented chemical compound for a specified 
period. The transaction between Merck and the seller fixes both Merck’s right to use the patent 
and the cost of the expected benefits. The patent is an asset on Merck’s balance sheet.
Example 4 Merck spends $4.8 billion during the current year on research to identify, develop, 
and test new drugs. This example differs from Example 3 in that Merck (1) incurs the costs 
internally and (2) does not acquire a completed asset. Merck would not engage in research if it 
did not expect future benefits. U.S. GAAP requires firms to expense research and development 
(R&D) costs in the period incurred, based on the reasoning that the costs do not satisfy the sec-
ond criterion for asset recognition because the firm cannot measure the expected future benefits 
with sufficient reliability.3 The difficulty is identifying the portion of each year’s expenditure 
that leads to future benefits and the portion that does not. Thus, Merck recognizes the $4.8 bil-
lion as an expense.
IFRS requires a different treatment for R&D expenditures. IFRS treats research costs (the 
R part of R&D) as expenses, the same as U.S. GAAP, and treats development costs (the D 
part of R&D) as assets.4 IFRS defines the transition from research to development as having 
occurred when three conditions are met: (1) the project reaches technical feasibility; (2) the firm 
intends, and has the ability, to develop the technology for ultimate use or sale; and (3) the firm 
can reliably measure the development asset. When the conditions are met, the project moves 
from the research phase to the development phase. The firm treats development costs incurred 
after this transition as assets.
Example 5 IBM incurs costs internally to develop new computer software products. U.S. 
GAAP treats expenditures associated with internally developed software similar to the IFRS 
treatment of expenditures on R&D.5 Specifically, IBM must expense costs incurred prior to 
establishing technical feasibility, and recognize as assets the costs incurred after establishing 
technical feasibility.
To illustrate the application of asset recognition criteria when a firm purchases intangible 
assets, assume that in the year ended February 27, 2013, Great Deal paid $100 million to purchase 
the following assets of CarPax, Inc., as part of a business combination. The amounts shown are 
the fair values of certain assets; other assets acquired and liabilities assumed are not shown.
Property and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 47
Identifiable Intangible Assets:
 
Customer Lists. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8
 
Trade Names  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10
 
In-Process Research and Development Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  20
Total  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100
Great Deal used appraisals and other means to establish the fair value of the identifiable 
assets acquired, including intangibles that CarPax developed internally and that therefore did 
not appear as assets on CarPax’s balance sheet. An identifiable asset must either (1) be separa-
ble (that is, capable of being separated from the acquired entity and sold, transferred, licensed, 
rented, or exchanged), or (2) arise from contractual or other legal rights.6
 3 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 2, “Accounting for Research and Development Costs,” 
1974 (Codification Topic 730).
 4 IASB, International Accounting Standard 38, “Intangible Assets,” 1998.
 5 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 86, “Accounting for the Costs of Computer Software 
to Be Sold, Leased or Otherwise Marketed,” 1985 (Codification Topic 350).
 6 With a few exceptions, the accounting for separately identifiable tangible and intangible assets is similar, 
whether Great Deal purchased the specified assets as a group from CarPax or bought the entire firm (a business 
combination). Chapter 14 considers the accounting for purchases of entire firms. FASB, Statement of Financial 
Accounting Standards No. 141 (revised), 2007 (Codification Topic 805); IASB, International Financial Reporting 
Standard 3, “Business Combinations,” 2007.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

378
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
Example 6 Great Deal will recognize as assets the fair value of the tangible assets ($47 
million) and the fair value of the customer lists ($8 million) and trade names ($10 million) 
acquired from CarPax. Great Deal recognizes these items as assets even if CarPax developed 
them internally, and, as required by U.S. GAAP, CarPax did not recognize them as assets.
Example 7 Great Deal will recognize an asset ($15 million) for the fair value of in-process 
research and development (IPR&D). This asset is associated with costs incurred to develop 
R&D projects that have not reached the stage of technological feasibility. Firms recognize 
externally acquired IPR&D as an asset measured initially at fair value when the IPR&D is 
acquired in a business combination even though the firm that developed the IPR&D expensed 
the costs as they were incurred.7
Example 8 In addition to the fair values of identifiable tangible and intangible assets, Great 
Deal will also recognize as an asset $20 million of goodwill. In a business combination, the pur-
chase price measures the fair value of the acquired enterprise, which reflects all identifiable and 
unidentifiable net assets (recall that net assets = assets less liabilities). Goodwill reflects the fair 
value of assets that Great Deal cannot separately identify. Great Deal recognizes goodwill as an 
asset because it is part of the fair value of the acquired firm. In the accounting for a business 
combination, goodwill is measured initially as the difference between the purchase price and the 
fair value of all separately identifiable net assets.
Figure 10.1 summarizes the accounting treatment of expenditures on resources with poten-
tial long-term benefits. We make the following generalizations:
1. Firms recognize expenditures to acquire or self-construct tangible assets as assets because 
the physical nature of tangible assets provides evidence of probable future benefits. The 
cost to acquire or build the tangible asset is the best evidence of its fair value.
2. Firms treat expenditures to create internally developed intangible assets as expenses when 
incurred because there is no external market validation of the existence of an asset nor of 
its fair value. Exceptions occur for software development costs incurred after the point of 
technological feasibility (U.S. GAAP) and for development costs generally after the point 
of technological feasibility (IFRS).
 7 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 141 (revised 2007), “Business Combinations,” 2007 
(Codification Topic 805); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 3, “Business Combinations,” 2007.
Nature of Resource
Intangible
Research and Development (expense under U.S. 
GAAP; research is an expense and development 
is an asset under IFRS)
Advertising (expense)
Employee Training (expense)
Software Development Costs:
  Pre-technological Feasibility (expense)
  Post-technological Feasibility (asset)
Proved Technologies (asset)
In-Process Technologies (asset)
Patents, Trademarks, Customer Lists, and Other 
Identifiable Resources (asset)
Trained Labor Force and Other Unidentifiable 
Resources (part of goodwill)
Goodwill (asset)
Tangible
Self-constructed Buildings 
and Equipment (asset)
Land, Buildings, and 
Equipment (asset)
Acquired
Externally
Acquired
Internally
Treatment of Expenditures with Potential Long-Term Benefits
FIGURE 10.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

379
Measurement of Acquisition Cost
3. Firms recognize expenditures to acquire intangible assets from third parties as assets. The 
market transaction validates the existence of an intangible asset and provides its fair value.
4. In a business combination, the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identi-
fiable tangible and intangible assets (net of any liabilities) is goodwill. Goodwill is an asset.
Inconsistencies between the treatment of tangible items and intangible items and between 
costs incurred internally and externally to obtain intangible assets permeate U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS. The user of the financial statements should recognize such inconsistencies when compar-
ing firms. For example, accounting rules will typically result in the recognition of more assets 
on the balance sheet of a manufacturing firm with significant tangible assets than on the bal-
ance sheet of a technology or service firm that engages in extensive research and development 
activities and which therefore has significant unrecognized intangible assets. Accounting rules 
will typically also result in the recognition of more assets on the balance sheet of a firm that 
purchases intangible assets than on the balance sheet of a firm that develops those assets itself.
MEASUREMENT OF ACQUISITION COST
Firms initially record (that is, measure) long-lived assets, whether tangible or intangible, at 
acquisition cost, presumed to equal the asset’s fair value on the date of acquisition. Acquisition 
cost includes all costs incurred to prepare a long-lived asset for rendering services. The acquisi-
tion cost of equipment, for example, includes the invoice price (less any discounts), transporta-
tion costs, installation charges, and any other costs incurred before the equipment is ready for 
use. Also consider the following more complex example.
Example 9 Refer to Example 1. Great Deal incurs the following costs in searching for and 
acquiring the land and building:
1. Purchase price of land with an existing building, $1,000,000.
2. Fees paid to attorney in handling purchase contracts, $10,000.
3. Taxes paid to local real estate taxing authorities, $2,000.
4. Management salaries earned during the search for the site and the negotiation of its pur-
chase, $8,000.
5. Operating expenditures for company automobiles used during the search, $375.
6. Depreciation charges for company automobiles used during the search, $440.
7. Fees paid to consulting engineer for a report on the structural soundness of the building, 
its fair value, and the estimated cost of making needed repairs, $15,000.
8. Uninsured costs to repair automobiles damaged in a multi-vehicle accident during the 
search, $3,000.
9. During the search, management paid insufficient attention to a potential new customer. 
The profits lost were $20,000.
The first six cost items relate to the search for, and acquisition of, the land and building. 
Great Deal will accumulate these items in a temporary Land and Building account. Some firms 
would treat items 5 and 6 as expenses of the period because they are immaterial, but strict 
application of accounting theory would capitalize these costs as an asset. After completing 
the acquisition of the land and building, Great Deal should allocate the accumulated costs of 
$1,020,815 (= $1,000,000 + $10,000 + $2,000 + $8,000 + $375 + $440) between the land and 
the building based on their relative fair values. For example, if the fair value of the building is 
$250,000, Great Deal will allocate 25% (= $250,000/$1,000,000) of $1,020,815 to the building 
and 75% to the land. Great Deal will recognize depreciation on the building but not on the 
land. Item 7 relates to the building only, so the cost of the engineer’s services is part of the cost 
of the building. Some accountants would treat item 8, repair costs for the accident, as an asset 
on the basis that it was incurred in the process of searching for the land and building. Others 
would treat this cost as an expense on the basis that it was not a necessary cost to acquire the 
land and building. Item 9, forgone profits, is not a cost incurred in an arm’s-length transaction 
with outsiders. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not recognize this opportunity cost.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

380
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
Example 10 Refer to Example 3. Merck’s acquisition cost for the patent includes $120 mil-
lion paid to its creator, $800,000 in legal fees to evaluate Merck’s legal rights under the pat-
ent, and $1,800 to register the patent. Merck’s acquisition cost is therefore $120,801,800 
(= $120,000,000 + $800,000 + $1,800).
Noncash Consideration A firm sometimes acquires assets by exchanging an asset other 
than cash or by issuing its own shares or debt instruments. In these cases, acquisition cost is 
either the fair value of the consideration given or the fair value of the asset received, depending 
on which is more reliably measurable.
Self-Constructed Asset When a firm, such as Great Deal in Example 2, constructs its 
own buildings or equipment, it recognizes the labor, material, and overhead costs incurred as 
an asset. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to include interest costs during construction in the 
cost of a self-constructed long-lived asset, based on the reasoning that firms must incur financ-
ing costs in self-constructing an asset just as they must incur labor and material costs.8
Firms base the amount of interest costs capitalized on the amount borrowed to finance the 
construction of the asset. The amount represents the interest cost incurred during periods of 
construction that the firm could have avoided by not constructing the asset. If the costs of con-
struction exceed the amount of new borrowing, the firm uses the weighted-average rate it pays 
for its other borrowings to measure the amount capitalized. The total amount capitalized can-
not exceed total interest costs for the period. Interest capitalization ends when construction ends.
Including (capitalizing) interest costs as part of the cost of a self-constructed asset reduces 
interest expense and thereby increases net income during the construction period but has no 
effect on the cash paid for interest charges. The self-constructed asset will have higher deprecia-
tion charges because the amount of interest capitalized increases the initial recognized cost of 
the self-constructed asset. The higher depreciation charges reduce net income in future periods. 
Capitalizing interest does not affect either total expenses or total cash flows over the life of the 
self-constructed asset.
Example 11 Refer to Example 2. Assume the following long-term debt structure for Great 
Deal:
Construction Loan at 5% on Building Under Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,000,000
Other Borrowings at 6% Average Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 3,600,000
 
Total Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,600,000
The account Building Under Construction has an average balance during the year of 
$3,000,000. Great Deal bases the amount of interest capitalized on the new construction-
related borrowing, $1,000,000, and enough of the other borrowing, $2,000,000, to bring the 
total to $3,000,000. Great Deal computes capitalized interest as follows:
$1,000,000 × 0.05  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 50,000
$2,000,000 × 0.06  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 120,000
$3,000,000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$170,000
The entries to record interest and to capitalize the required amounts are as follows:
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
266,000
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
266,000
To record all interest as expense: $266,000 [= (0.05 × $1,000,000) + 
(0.06 × $3,600,000)] = $50,000 + $216,000.
 8 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 34, “Capitalization of Interest Costs,” 1979 (Codifica-
tion Topic 835); IASB, International Accounting Standard 23 (revised 2007), “Borrowing Costs.”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

381
Measurement of Acquisition Cost
 
Building Under Construction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170,000
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
170,000
To capitalize the portion of interest related to the self-constructed building. 
The amount capitalized reduces interest expense and increases the recorded 
cost of the building. There is no effect on cash interest paid.
The firm might combine the preceding two entries into one as follows:
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
96,000
Building Under Construction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170,000
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
266,000
To record interest cost for the year as either an expense or capitalized into 
the cost of the self-constructed building.
The firm must disclose both total interest costs for the year, $266,000, and the amount capi-
talized, $170,000. In this example, interest expense on the income statement is $96,000.
 PROBLEM  10.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Calculating the acquisition cost of fixed assets. Jensen Company purchased land with a 
building as the site for a new plant it planned to construct. The company received bids 
from several independent contractors for demolition of the old building and construction 
of the new one. It rejected all bids and undertook demolition and construction using 
company labor, facilities, and equipment.
 
Jensen Company debited or credited amounts for all transactions relating to these 
properties to a single account, Construction in Process. Descriptions of various items in 
the Construction in Process account appear below. At the completion of construction, 
Jensen Company will remove all amounts in the Construction in Process account and 
close that account. It will reclassify the amounts into the following accounts:
1. Land account.
2. Building account.
3. Revenue, gain, expense, or loss account.
4. Some balance sheet account other than Land or Building.
Reclassify the effects of the following transactions into one or more of these four account 
categories. If you use 4 (some other balance sheet account), indicate the nature of the 
account.
a. Cost of land, including old building.
b. Legal fees paid to bring about purchase of land and to transfer its title.
c. Invoice cost of materials and supplies used in construction of the new building.
d. Direct labor and materials costs incurred in demolishing the old building.
e. Direct costs of excavating raw land to prepare it for the foundation of the new 
building.
f. Discounts earned for prompt payment of item c.
g. Interest for the year on notes issued to finance construction.
h. Amounts equivalent to interest on Jensen Company’s own funds that it used in con-
struction but that it would have invested in marketable securities if it had used an 
independent contractor; it debited the amount to Construction in Process and cred-
ited Interest Revenue so that the cost of the real estate would be comparable to the 
cost if it had purchased the building from an independent contractor.
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

382
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
i. Depreciation during the construction period on trucks used both in construction and 
in other company operations.
j. Proceeds of sale of materials salvaged from the old buildings; the firm debited these 
to Cash and credited Construction in Process.
k. Cost of building permits.
l. Salaries of certain corporate engineering executives; these represent costs for both 
Salary Expense and Construction in Process. The portion debited to Construction in 
Process is based on an estimate of the time spent during the year on planning and 
construction activities for the new building.
m. Payments for property taxes on the plant site (its former owner owed these taxes, but 
Jensen Company agreed to pay them).
n. Payments for property taxes on plant site during construction period.
o. Insurance premiums to cover workers engaged in demolition and construction activ-
ities; the insurance policy requires the company to pay the first $5,000 of damages 
from any accident.
p. Cost of injury claims for $2,000 paid by the company because the amount was less 
than the deductible amount in the policy.
q. Costs of new machinery to be installed in the new building.
r. Installation costs for the machinery in item q.
s. Profit on construction of the new building (computed as the difference between the 
lowest independent contractor’s bid and the actual construction cost); the firm deb-
ited this to Construction in Process and credited Construction Revenue.
TREATMENT OF ACQUISITION COST OVER 
THE LIFE OF A LONG-LIVED ASSET
The accounting for the acquisition cost of a long-lived asset over the time that a firm uses the 
asset follows these principles:
■ 
A portion of the cost of a long-lived asset with a finite life is recognized as an expense each 
period that the firm consumes the asset’s services. An asset’s life pertains to its service life 
or useful life, the period during which management intends to use the asset. An asset’s use-
ful life is finite when management expects to use the asset over a defined period, or when 
the useful life is limited by contract or by a law, for example, a patent. Management esti-
mates the asset’s service life. Examples of finite-lived assets include buildings, equipment, 
patents, copyrights, landing rights, and customer lists. As explained later, the balance sheet 
carrying value of the asset decreases over time as the firm recognizes this periodic expense.
■ 
The cost of a long-lived asset with an indefinite life is not recognized as an expense each 
period. The asset remains on the balance sheet at its acquisition cost.9 Indefinite-lived 
assets have service lives that are not necessarily limited by legal, regulatory, contractual, 
or economic factors. Examples of indefinite-lived assets include trade names, trademarks, 
certain renewable licenses, and goodwill. Certain tangible assets, including land and works 
of art, are also treated as having an indefinite life because their service lives are potentially 
long and indeterminate.
■ 
Depreciation (amortization) refers to the periodic charge to income of the acquisition cost 
of a tangible long-lived asset (intangible asset) with a finite service life.
 9 The carrying value of the asset would, however, be reduced if an impairment occurs.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

383
Treatment of Acquisition Cost over the Life of a Long-Lived Asset
Example 12 Refer to Examples 2 and 11. Great Deal consumes the services of the building 
over time. It depreciates the acquisition cost minus estimated salvage value of the building over 
the building’s useful life. Salvage value is the estimated value of the building at the end of its 
useful life. Firms compare the proceeds generated when the building is sold at the end of its use-
ful life with the building’s carrying value (its salvage value) to compute a gain or loss on the sale.
Example 13 Refer to Examples 3 and 10 where Merck acquires a patent from its creator. 
Although a patent has a legal life of up to 20 years, management’s expectations of technological 
change may lead to a shorter economic life. Merck should amortize the acquisition cost of the 
patent over its expected useful life, equal to the shorter of the economic life and the legal life.
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS OF DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
We next describe the concepts underlying depreciation and amortization and illustrate several 
depreciation and amortization methods.
Depreciation and Amortization: A Process of Cost Allocation The acquisi-
tion cost of a long-lived asset represents a payment in advance for services a firm will consume 
in the future, similar to prepaid rent. As the firm uses the asset in each accounting period, it 
treats a portion of the cost less salvage value of the asset as the cost of the service received. 
Accounting refers to this periodic cost as depreciation expense (if the asset is tangible) and 
amortization  expense (if the asset is intangible). The cost of a long-lived asset is a joint cost of 
the accounting periods during which the asset provides services. There is usually no single cor-
rect way to allocate a joint cost. Firms select a depreciation or amortization method for a long-
lived asset that allocates the acquisition cost minus salvage value to each period of expected 
useful life in a systematic, predetermined manner.
Depreciation and Amortization: Not a Measure of the Decline in Eco-
nomic Value Depreciation and amortization involve cost allocation, not valuation. In 
ordinary conversation, depreciation and amortization may refer to a decline in value. Over the 
service life of a long-lived asset, the asset’s value usually declines from acquisition until the firm 
retires the asset from service. The periodic depreciation or amortization charge does not mea-
sure that decline in value, nor is it meant to. Depreciation and amortization represent a sys-
tematic allocation of the asset’s cost, adjusted for salvage value. If, in a given period, an asset 
increases in value, the firm still records depreciation and amortization during that period. In 
such a time period, there are two offsetting processes: (1) a holding gain on the asset for the 
increase in value and (2) an allocation of the asset’s acquisition cost to the period in the form 
of depreciation or amortization expense. A holding gain refers to an increase in the fair value 
of the asset.10
MEASUREMENT OF DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Calculating depreciation or amortization of long-lived assets requires management to
1. Measure the depreciable or amortizable basis of the asset.
2. Estimate its service (useful) life.
3. Decide the pattern of depreciation or amortization over the asset’s service life.
This section discusses each of these three items.
Depreciable or Amortizable Basis of Long-Lived Assets: Acquisition Cost 
Less Salvage Value Firms base depreciation and amortization charges on the acquisition 
cost less the estimated salvage value of long-lived assets. Salvage value or residual value is the 
estimated amount a firm expects to receive when it disposes of the asset at the end of its service 
life. Salvage value is not part of the depreciable or amortizable basis of an asset because firms 
expect to recover this amount through the proceeds from the sale.
10 U.S. GAAP precludes recognition of holding gains on long-lived tangible and intangible assets. IFRS permits 
recognition of these holding gains under certain circumstances. We discuss this treatment later in the chapter.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

384
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
For buildings, common practice uses a zero salvage value on the assumption that the costs a 
firm will incur in tearing down the building will approximate the sales value of the scrap mate-
rials recovered. Other tangible assets may have substantial salvage values. For example, a car-
rental firm will replace its automobiles at a time when other owners can use the cars for several 
years more. The car-rental firm expects to recover a substantial part of acquisition cost from 
selling used cars. Intangible assets related to a contractual right, such as landing rights at an 
airport, generally expire at a specific time and therefore have zero residual value.
Some assets are not readily salable at the end of their useful lives, and retiring them may 
impose substantial costs, for example, the cost of dismantling a nuclear power plant at the 
end of its service life. Firms must estimate the fair value of the dismantling costs and include 
that amount in the initial measurement of the asset. The firm must also recognize a liability, 
an asset retirement obligation, of equal amount. The firm computes depreciation based on the 
cost of the assets, including the fair value of the dismantling obligation, because the firm must 
recover this cost through depreciation during the asset’s useful life.11
Estimating Service (Useful) Life In addition to regulatory, contractual, and legal fac-
tors, both physical and functional factors affect service lives. Physical factors include ordinary 
wear and tear from use, chemical action such as rust, and the effects of weather. An impor-
tant functional factor for both tangible and intangible assets is obsolescence. Changes in pro-
duction processes, for example, might reduce the unit cost of production to the point where a 
firm finds continued operation of old equipment uneconomical, even though the equipment 
remains physically usable. Computers may work as well as ever, but firms replace them because 
new, smaller computers occupy less space and compute faster. Although display cases and 
storefronts may not have worn out, retail stores replace them to make the store look better. 
Technology- based intangibles can become obsolete overnight.
Estimating service lives presents the most difficult task in the depreciation and amortization 
calculation. Because obsolescence typically results from external forces, its effect on the ser-
vice life is uncertain. As a result, firms must review their estimates of service lives each year. A 
change in this estimate will change the depreciation and amortization amounts going forward. 
We discuss changes in estimates later in this chapter.
Pattern of Depreciation and Amortization An asset’s acquisition cost, salvage 
value, and service life determine the total of depreciation or amortization charges and the time 
over which to charge those costs. The firm must also select the pattern for allocating those 
charges to the specific years of the service life. U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide firms consider-
able flexibility in choosing depreciation methods. The most common methods for depreciating 
tangible assets are as follows:
1. Straight line over time.
2. Straight line with respect to usage.
3. Accelerated over time (with higher depreciation in the early years of the service life).
Amortization of intangible assets is usually straight line over time.
The next section describes and illustrates the depreciation and amortization patterns.
Straight-Line (Time) Method The straight-line (time) method is the most common method for 
financial reporting. This method divides the acquisition cost of an asset (including the cost to 
dismantle and retire) less its estimated salvage value by the estimated service life to calculate 
depreciation or amortization expense as follows:
Annual Depreciation or Amortization =
Cost Less Estimated Salvage Value
Estimated Life in Years
For example, if a machine costs $5,000, with an estimated salvage value of $200 and an 
expected service life of five years, annual depreciation expense is $960 [= ($5,000 – $200)/5]. If 
a patent acquired for $30,000 has an expected service life of five years and zero salvage value, 
the annual amortization expense is $6,000 (= $30,000/5).
11 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 143, Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations,” 
2001 (Codification Topic 410); IASB, International Accounting Standard 16, “Property, Plant and Equipment,” 
1998.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

385
Treatment of Acquisition Cost over the Life of a Long-Lived Asset
When a firm acquires a long-lived asset during an accounting period, it calculates deprecia-
tion and amortization for the portion of the period during which it uses the asset. For example, 
if the firm acquired the above machine with three months remaining in the fiscal year, deprecia-
tion expense would be $240 [= $960 × (3 months/12 months)].
Straight-Line (Use) Method For assets whose use varies over time, the straight-line (time) 
method of depreciation may result in depreciation patterns unrelated to usage patterns. For 
example, manufacturing plants often have seasonal variations in operations, so they use certain 
machines 24 hours a day at one time of the year and 8 hours or less a day at another time 
of the year. Trucks do not receive the same amount of use in each year of their service lives. 
A straight-line (use) method is appropriate for such assets. For example, a firm could calculate 
depreciation of a truck based on the ratio of miles driven during a period to total expected driv-
ing miles over the truck’s service life. The depreciation cost per unit (mile) of use is as follows:
Depreciation or Amortization Cost per Unit =
Cost Less Estimated Salvage Value
Estimated Units of Use
Assume that a truck costs $54,000, has an estimated salvage value of $4,000, and will pro-
vide 200,000 miles of use before retirement. The depreciation per mile is $0.25 [= ($54,000 – 
$4,000)/200,000]. If the truck operates 24,000 miles in a given year, the depreciation charge is 
$6,000 (= 24,000 × $0.25).
Accelerated Depreciation The service capacity of some depreciable assets declines with 
age or use. Cutting tools lose some of their precision; printing presses require more frequent 
shutdowns for repairs; rent receipts from an old office building fall below those from a new 
one. Some assets provide more and better services in the early years of their lives and require 
increasing amounts of maintenance as they grow older. These cases justify accelerated deprecia-
tion methods, which recognize larger depreciation charges in early years and smaller deprecia-
tion charges in later years.
Two common accelerated depreciation methods are the declining-balance method and the 
sum-of-the-years’-digits method. The declining balance method multiplies the carrying value 
(that is, acquisition cost minus accumulated depreciation)12 of the asset by a depreciation rate. 
A double-declining balance method sets the depreciation rate at double the straight-line rate. 
Because the straight-line rate is 1/n, double that rate is 2/n, where n is the number of periods 
in the asset’s service life. A firm will never fully depreciate an asset using the declining-balance 
method; firms switch to the straight-line method before the end of an asset’s useful life.
The sum-of-the-years’-digits method begins by summing the digits of an asset’s useful life. 
The sum for a five-year asset is 15 (= 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1). The depreciation rate for the first 
year of useful life is 5/15, for the second year is 4/15, and so forth. The depreciation base is 
the same as for the straight-line method, acquisition cost minus salvage value. Multiplying the 
depreciation base by the depreciation rate yields the amount of depreciation for each year.
To illustrate the double-declining balance method and the sum-of-the-years’-digits method, 
consider the previous example: a machine costs $5,000, with an estimated salvage value of $200 
and a service life of five years. The annual depreciation expense using the double-declining bal-
ance method (assuming the firm switches to the straight-line [time] method at the start of Year 
4) is as follows:
Year
Carrying Value
Double-Declining 
Depreciation Rate
Annual 
Depreciation 
Expense
Year 1
$5,000
×
0.4 = 2*(1/5)
=
$2,000
Year 2
$3,000
(= $5,000 – $2,000)
×
0.4 = 2*(1/5)
=
 1,200
Year 3
$1,800
(= $3,000 – $1,200)
×
0.4 = 2*(1/5)
=
   720
Year 4
$1,080
×
0.5
=
   540
Year 5
$540
   540
12 Under the double-declining-balance method, the salvage value is not considered. The carrying value of the asset 
is never allowed to drop below its salvage value.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

386
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
The annual depreciation expense using the sum-of-the-years’-digits method is
Year
Acquisition Cost 
Less Salvage Value
Sum of Years 
Ratio
Annual 
Depreciation 
Expense
Year 1
$4,800
(=$5,000 – $200)
×
5/15
=
$1,600
Year 2
$4,800
×
4/15
=
 1,280
Year 3
$4,800
×
3/15
=
   960
Year 4
$4,800
×
2/15
=
   640
Year 5
$4,800
×
1/15
=
   320
For both accelerated methods, depreciation expense is highest in the first year of the asset’s 
life and declines each year thereafter.
 PROBLEM  10.2  FOR SELF-STUDY
Calculating periodic depreciation. Markam Corporation acquires a machine costing 
$20,000 on January 1, 2013. The firm expects:
■ To use the machine for five years.
■ To operate it for 24,000 hours during that time.
■ To recoup an estimated salvage value of $2,000 at the end of five years.
Calculate the depreciation charge for each of the five years using the following:
a. The straight-line (time) method.
b. The straight-line (use) method. The expected operating times are 5,000 hours each 
year for four years and 4,000 hours in the fifth year.
c. Double-declining balance method (assuming switch to straight-line [time] method at 
start of 2015.)
d.  Sum-of-the-years’-digits method.
FACTORS IN CHOOSING A DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION METHOD
Depreciation and amortization affect both net income reported in the financial statements and 
taxable income on tax returns. In most jurisdictions, taxing authorities specify allowable depre-
ciation methods for tax reporting. When permitted to do so by the taxing authority, firms often 
use different depreciation methods for financial and tax reporting. When this happens, the dif-
ference between depreciation expense in the financial statements and the depreciation deduc-
tion on the tax return leads to an issue in accounting for income taxes.13
Tax Reporting If permitted a choice of depreciation methods for tax reporting, a firm 
should try to maximize the present value of the reductions in tax payments from claiming 
depreciation. If tax rates do not change over time and the firm is sufficiently profitable to ben-
efit from tax deductions, earlier deductions have greater value than later ones because taxes 
saved now have greater value than taxes saved later. When taxing authorities permit a choice 
among alternative depreciation methods, a firm should choose the alternative that allows it to 
pay the least amount of tax, as late as possible, within the law.
Financial Reporting The financial reporting treatment of depreciation and amortization 
is intended to provide a reasonable pattern of cost allocation. The cost of a long-lived asset 
13 Chapter 12 discusses the accounting for income taxes.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

387
Treatment of Acquisition Cost over the Life of a Long-Lived Asset
jointly benefits all the periods of use, and there is no single correct way to allocate such joint 
costs. As a consequence, authoritative guidance requires that financial statements report depre-
ciation charges based on reasonable estimates. In practice, the straight-line (time) method is the 
most common.
ACCOUNTING FOR PERIODIC DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
Recording periodic depreciation and amortization results in a debit to either an expense 
account or a product cost account. Depreciation of factory buildings and equipment used in 
manufacturing operations becomes part of the cost of work-in-process and finished goods 
inventories. That is, using the language introduced in Chapter 9, these depreciation charges are 
product costs. The amortization of a patent on a semiconductor that a firm uses to make its 
product is likewise a product cost that a firm would record as a debit to the Work-in-Process 
Inventory account.14 Firms classify the amortization of a customer list as either amortization 
expense or selling expense, depending on whether the firm classifies expenses by their nature 
or by their function. Firms classify the depreciation of office equipment in the corporate head-
quarters as either depreciation expense or administrative expense. The amortization of the cus-
tomer list and depreciation of the office equipment do not relate to product manufacturing and 
are, therefore, period expenses.
The recording of depreciation of tangible assets and amortization of intangible assets 
could, in principle, result in a credit directly to the asset account, such as Buildings or Equip-
ment (a tangible asset) or Patent (an intangible asset). U.S. GAAP and IFRS, however, require 
firms to disclose both the cost (the gross carrying amount) and the accumulated deprecia-
tion or accumulated amortization on long-lived tangible and intangible assets.15 Accumulated 
depreciation and accumulated amortization are examples of contra accounts; these accounts 
accumulate subtractions from their partner accounts. Disclosing both cost and accumulated 
depreciation or amortization permits the analyst to analyze the amount of the asset’s cost 
charged to income through depreciation or amortization and the remaining acquisition cost. 
If the firm credited the asset account directly, an analysis of the accounts would reveal only the 
net effect of the two, that is, the net book value or balance sheet carrying amount.
To illustrate, the entry to record periodic depreciation of $1,500 on manufacturing facilities 
(a product cost) is as follows:
 
Work-in-Process Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
The entry to record periodic depreciation of $1,500 on office facilities (a period expense) is 
as follows:
 
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
The balance in Accumulated Depreciation represents the total charges in all accounting 
periods up through the balance sheet date. The balance in this account is subtracted from its 
partner asset account, for example, Property, Plant, and Equipment, Gross, where gross refers 
to the acquisition cost of the assets. The difference between the gross amount of an asset and 
the balance in the asset’s partner Accumulated Depreciation account is the asset’s net carrying 
value or net book value. If a firm reports an amount for Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net on 
its balance sheet, that amount is the difference between the gross cost of property, plant, and 
equipment and the balance in accumulated depreciation. That is:
14 The Work-in-Process Inventory account is an asset. Product costs, such as depreciation on manufacturing facili-
ties, accumulate in the Work-in-Process Inventory account until the firm completes the goods and transfers 
them to Finished Goods Inventory.
15 FASB, Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 350-30-50; Topic 360-10-50; IASB, International 
Accounting Standard 16, “Property, Plant and Equipment,” 1998; International Accounting Standard 38, Intan-
gible Assets, 1998.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

388
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
Property, Plant and Equipment, Gross
Less: Accumulated Depreciation
= 
Property, Plant and Equipment, Net
IMPACT OF NEW INFORMATION 
ABOUT LONG-LIVED ASSETS
This chapter has described the acquisition and depreciation or amortization of long-lived assets 
based on transactions and knowledge at the time a firm acquired the asset. New information 
often comes to light over the life of tangible or intangible assets that affects the accounting for 
these assets. This section discusses the accounting for changes in expected service lives or sal-
vage values, and for expenditures to maintain or improve the assets.
CHANGES IN SERVICE LIVES OR SALVAGE VALUES
Each period a firm must assess whether its estimates of service life and salvage value require 
changing in light of new information. If a change in estimates would have a material impact, 
the firm must change the depreciation or amortization schedule prospectively (that is, going 
forward). The firm does not adjust previously recorded amounts. The firm spreads the remain-
ing carrying value less the new estimate of salvage value over the new estimate of the remain-
ing service life of the asset.16 The reasoning for this reporting requirement rests on the nature 
and role of estimates in accounting. Management’s estimates of service lives and salvage values, 
uncollectible accounts, warranty costs, and similar items use the available information at the 
time of the estimate. Changes in estimates occur regularly, as the available information changes. 
Many changes in estimates do not materially affect the financial statements. Requiring the 
restatement of previously issued financial statements for changes in estimates would take a lot 
of time, might confuse users, and could suggest that the original estimates were erroneous (as 
opposed to being based on information that was reasonable at the time and has now changed).
To understand the treatment of changes in periodic depreciation and amortization, assume 
the following facts, illustrated in Figure 10.2. A firm
■ 
purchases an office machine for $9,200,
■ 
estimates that it will use the machine for 15 years, and
■ 
estimates a salvage value of $200.
The depreciation charge recorded for each of the first five years under the straight-line 
method is $600 [= ($9,200 – $200)/15]. On December 31 of the sixth year, before closing its 
books, the firm assesses its estimates of useful life and salvage value. In light of new informa-
tion, the firm estimates that
■ 
the machine will have a total useful life of 10 years, not 15 years, and
■ 
the new salvage value is $50 not $200.
The decreases in the service life and salvage value will change future depreciation charges. 
The amount of the changes will ensure that the correct total accumulates in the Accumulated 
Depreciation account by the end of the revised service life. The correct total is $9,150 (= $9,200 
original acquisition cost – $50 revised salvage value). The firm does not adjust amounts previ-
ously recorded. In the example, the acquisition cost yet to be depreciated before the change 
in the sixth year is $6,200 [= $9,200 – (5 years × $600 per year)]. The new estimate of the 
remaining life is five years (the year just ended plus the next four). This change in estimate, and 
the change in the salvage value (from $200 to $50), changes the amount recorded for annual 
depreciation in the current and future years from $600 to $1,230 [= ($6,200 – $50)/5 years]. The 
depreciation entry on December 31 of the sixth year and each year thereafter is as follows:
16 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 154, “Accounting Changes and Error Corrections,” 
2005, par. 19 (Codification Topic 250); IASB, International Accounting Standard 16, “Property, Plant, and 
Equipment,” 1998.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

389
Impact of New Information About Long-Lived Assets
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,230
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,230
To record depreciation for the sixth year based on revised estimates.
Figure 10.2 illustrates the revised depreciation path.
 PROBLEM  10.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Adjustments for changes in estimates. Central States Electric Company constructs a 
nuclear power plant at a cost of $200 million. It estimates the service life of the plant to 
be 50 years and the cost to dismantle and retire the asset from service to be $20 million. 
These “decommissioning” costs include the costs to dismantle the plant and dispose of 
the radioactive materials. The firm computes and charges straight-line depreciation once 
per year, at year-end.
 
During the company’s 11th year of operating the plant, Congress enacts new 
regulations governing nuclear waste disposal. The estimated decommissioning costs 
increase from $20 million to $24 million. During the 31st year of operation, the firm 
revises the estimated service life of the plant to 60 years in total.
a. What is the depreciation charge for the first year?
b. What is the depreciation charge for the 11th year?
c. What is the depreciation charge for the 31st year?
ADDITIONAL EXPENDITURES TO MAINTAIN OR IMPROVE LONG-LIVED ASSETS
Firms often incur costs to maintain, repair, and improve their tangible assets. U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS require firms to treat
■  Expenditures for maintenance and repairs as expenses of the period.
■ 
Expenditures for improvements as assets. Firms subsequently depreciate or amortize these 
expenditures because they are included as part of the cost of the asset.
Revised
Depreciation
Schedule
$1,230
per Year
$600
per Year
Original
Depreciation
Schedule
$9,200
Book
Value
($)
$200
$50
$0
Acquisition
    Date
5 Years
  Later
10 Years
(revised
estimate)
15 Years 
(original
estimate)
Time
An asset costs $9,200. At the start of the sixth 
year, the asset service life decreases from 15 years 
to 10 years and the salvage value decreases from 
$200 to $50. Depreciation is straight line.
Revised Depreciation Schedule
FIGURE 10.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

390
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
Maintenance and Repairs To keep its tangible assets in normal operating condition a 
firm incurs routine maintenance costs such as for cleaning and adjusting, and repairs costs, to 
restore an asset’s service potential after breakdowns or other damage to its initially expected 
level. These expenditures do not extend the asset’s estimated service life or increase its pro-
ductive capacity. Therefore, U.S. GAAP and IFRS treat such expenditures as expenses of the 
period when the firm makes the expenditure.
Improvements Expenditures for improvements increase an asset’s performance by, for 
example, increasing the asset’s service life, reducing operating costs, or increasing the rate of 
output. Expenditures that increase service potential meet the definition and recognition crite-
ria for an asset under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS. When the firm makes the expenditure, it 
capitalizes the cost of the improvement by debiting the existing asset account (or a new asset 
account). Subsequent depreciation charges will increase because of the increased investment in 
depreciable assets.
Example 14 Assume Thames suffers fire damage to a building and spends €200,000 on 
repairs and improvements. It judges that €160,000 of the expenditure qualifies as a repair of 
fire damage, and €40,000 represents improvements. It would make the following journal entry:
 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
Loss from Fire  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
160,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200,000
To record the loss from fire damage and the subsequent expenditure.
The following two entries are equivalent and may be easier to understand:
 
Loss from Fire  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
160,000
 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
160,000
To record the loss from fire damage.
 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200,000
To record the expenditures to improve the building.
Distinguishing Maintenance and Repairs from Improvements Some expen-
ditures may both repair (a period expense) and improve (an asset). Consider expenditures to 
replace a damaged roof. If architects design the new roof to be stronger and to last longer than 
the old one, part of the expenditure represents repair and part represents improvement. Firms 
must make judgments and allocate costs between maintenance and repairs and improvements 
using professional judgment and all available information.
 PROBLEM  10.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Distinguishing repairs from improvements. Purdy Company acquired two used trucks from 
Foster Company. Although the trucks were not identical, they both cost $15,000. Purdy 
knew when it negotiated the purchase price that the first truck required engine repairs, 
estimated to cost $4,000. The repairs were made the week after acquisition and cost 
$4,200. Purdy Company thought the second truck was in normal operating condition 
when it negotiated the purchase price but discovered, after taking possession of the truck, 
that it required new bearings. The firm made this repair, costing $4,200, during the week 
after acquisition.
a. What costs should Purdy Company record in the accounts for the two trucks?
b. If the amounts recorded in part a are different, distinguish between the two repairs.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

391
Disposal of Assets
DISPOSAL OF ASSETS
This section considers how disposal of a long-lived asset through sale, abandonment, or trade-
in affects asset measurement and net income.
Sale of Asset The firm records the consideration received from an asset’s sale (usually 
cash), eliminates all debits and credits in the accounts related to the asset sold, and recognizes a 
gain or loss. Because sales of long-lived assets are usually peripheral to a firm’s principal busi-
ness activities, the firm records the gain or loss net instead of gross. That is, the firm does not 
record the amount received as revenue and the carrying value of the asset sold as an expense. 
Rather, the firm nets the two amounts and reports only the gain or loss.
Before recording the sale, the firm recognizes depreciation and amortization for the current 
year up to the date of the sale. When a firm disposes of an asset, it removes the cost of the asset 
and the related amount of accumulated depreciation (or accumulated amortization) from the 
balance sheet. As part of this entry, the firm records the amount received from the sale, a debit, 
and the amount of net carrying value removed from the books, a net credit (that is, a credit to 
the asset account and a smaller debit to the accumulated depreciation or accumulated amorti-
zation account). Typically, the amount of the debit for cash proceeds differs from the net credit 
to remove the asset from the accounts. The difference between the proceeds received and the net 
carrying value is a gain (if positive) or a loss (if negative).
To illustrate, assume Great Deal has office equipment that originally cost $5,000, with a 
service life of four years and salvage value of $200. Great Deal has depreciated this asset on a 
straight-line basis at $1,200 [= ($5,000 – $200)/4] per year. The firm has recorded depreciation 
for two years and sells the equipment at midyear in the third year. The firm records the depre-
ciation from the start of Year 3 to the date of sale: $600 [= 1/2 × ($5,000 – $200)/4].
 
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
To record depreciation charges up to the date of sale.
The carrying value of the asset is now its original cost less two and a half years of straight-
line depreciation of $1,200 per year, or $2,000 [= $5,000 – (21⁄2 × $1,200) = $5,000 – $3,000]. 
The entry to record the sale of the asset depends on the sales proceeds.
1. If the firm sells the equipment for $2,000, the entry to record the sale is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
 
In this case, there is no gain or loss on the sale because the proceeds equal the carrying 
value of the asset at the time of sale.
2. If the firm sells the equipment for $2,300 cash, the entry to record the sale is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,300
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
 
Gain on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
 
Great Deal recognizes a gain because the proceeds exceed the carrying value of the office 
equipment at the time of sale. The gain appears in net income and, after closing entries, 
increases Retained Earnings.
3.  If the firm sells the equipment for $1,500 cash, the entry to record the sale is as follows:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

392
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
Loss on Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
Great Deal recognizes a loss because the proceeds are less than the carrying value of the 
office equipment at the time of sale. The firm includes the loss in net income, reducing Retained 
Earnings.
Abandonment of Asset Firms will sometimes abandon assets if there is no market for 
them, for example, an automobile severely damaged in an accident. The firm eliminates the car-
rying value of the asset and recognizes a loss equal to the carrying value. For example, if Great 
Deal decides to abandon a damaged delivery truck, with an original purchase price of $120,000 
and accumulated depreciation of $67,000 at the time of abandonment, the entry to record the 
abandonment is as follows:
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
67,000
Loss on Abandonment of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
53,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
120,000
Trading in an Asset A firm may dispose of an asset by trading it in on another asset, with 
little or no cash payment. Authoritative guidance refers to these as nonmonetary exchanges 
because they involve little or no monetary assets.17 U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms 
record trade-in transactions at the fair value of the asset surrendered in the trade-in, unless 
the fair value of the asset received is a better estimate of the fair value of the arrangement.18 
To illustrate, suppose Great Deal owns a van that originally cost $275,000 and has $25,000 of 
accumulated depreciation. The fair value of the van is $250,000. Great Deal exchanges the van 
for a similar van with fair value $260,000. Assuming that the fair value of the van Great Deal 
obtains is the best evidence of the fair value of the exchange, the entry to record the transaction 
is as follows:
 
Equipment (new van)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
260,000
Accumulated Depreciation (old van)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Equipment (old van). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
275,000
 
Gain on exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 10,000
To record the trade-in of a van with a carrying value of $250,000 and a fair 
value of $250,000 for a van with fair value $260,000 when the fair value of 
the acquired asset is the best evidence of the fair value of the exchange.
CHANGES IN THE FAIR VALUES 
OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
A firm acquires assets for their future benefits. The world changes, and those benefits can 
increase or decrease. Changes in future benefits give rise to changes in the fair values of the 
assets that generate those benefits. As future benefits increase, fair value increases. As future 
benefits decline, fair value declines. Authoritative guidance specifies the recognition of these 
17 If the exchange involves a considerable cash payment, the arrangement does not qualify as a trade-in transac-
tion for accounting purposes.
18 Trade-in transactions that lack commercial substance are treated differently. A trade-in transaction lacks com-
mercial substance if the firm’s future cash flows are not expected to change significantly as a result of replacing 
the old asset with the new one. Firms record trade-ins that lack commercial substance at the carrying value of 
the exchanged asset. See FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 153, “Exchanges of Nonmon-
etary Assets,” 2004. (Codification Topic 845); IASB, International Accounting Standard 16, “Property, Plant, and 
Equipment,” revised 1998.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

393
Changes in the Fair Values of Long-Lived Assets
changes in fair value in the financial statements. This section discusses the accounting for 
increases and decreases in fair values of long-lived assets.
INCREASES IN FAIR VALUES OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
U.S. GAAP does not permit firms to increase the balance sheet carrying values of tangible and 
intangible long-lived assets when the fair values of these assets increase. This means that a firm 
can recognize an increase in the fair value of an asset only if it realizes the value increase, for 
example, by selling the asset. Since the proceeds of the sale would equal the fair value of the 
asset, the firm would recognize a gain on the transaction. As described in the previous section, 
that gain would increase the firm’s income in the period of the sale, regardless of when the fair 
value increase occurred.
In contrast, IFRS permits upward asset revaluations under certain conditions.19 An upward 
revaluation means that the firm recognizes an unrealized increase in the fair value of the asset. 
For long-lived intangible assets, the conditions that must be met are so restrictive that upward 
revaluations of intangibles are rare.20 For long-lived tangible assets, the conditions are less 
restrictive,21 but upward revaluations remain uncommon. If the conditions were met (for either 
tangible assets or intangible assets), the firm would credit the increase in a revalued asset’s bal-
ance sheet carrying value to other comprehensive income, not net income.
DECREASES IN FAIR VALUES OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS (ASSET IMPAIRMENTS)
Although U.S. GAAP and IFRS differ in the recognition of unrealized increases in fair values, 
both require firms to recognize decreases in fair values as an impairment loss. U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS distinguish three categories of long-lived assets for purposes of measuring and recogniz-
ing impairment losses:
 
Category 1. Long-lived assets with definite services lives and land. Category 1 includes prop-
erty, plant, equipment, patents, franchise rights, and similar assets, as well as land. With 
the exception of land, category 1 assets provide benefits over finite periods and are subject 
to depreciation or amortization.
 
Category 2. Intangible assets with indefinite service lives, other than goodwill. Category 2 
includes brand names, trademarks, and renewable licenses or other legal rights that provide 
benefits over an indefinite period of time, and are not subject to amortization.
 
Category 3. Goodwill. Category 3 includes one asset, purchased goodwill arising in a trans-
action in which one firm buys another.
Although both U.S. GAAP and IFRS distinguish the same three categories of long-lived 
assets for impairment analysis, the procedures for assessing an asset for impairment and mea-
suring the impairment loss differ. For both sets of reporting standards, management begins the 
assessment of long-lived assets for impairment at each reporting date by determining if impair-
ment indicators are present. Impairment indicators include, for example, a decline in the market 
value of an asset significantly beyond what would be expected because of use or the passage of 
time; significant adverse changes in the entity’s technological, market, economic, or legal envi-
ronment; significant increases in expected return on investment. Management then follows the 
procedures specified by U.S. GAAP or IFRS to test the asset for impairment and, if an impair-
ment exists, to measure the amount of the impairment loss. We separately describe U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS procedures for each category of asset in the Appendix to this chapter.22
The form of the journal entry for recording an impairment loss is similar under U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS. In the case of a long-lived tangible asset, the accounting involves first removing the 
asset’s acquisition cost and the related accumulated depreciation from the accounts and then 
19 IASB, International Accounting Standard 16, “Property, Plant and Equipment,” 1998 and International Account-
ing Standard 38, Intangible Assets, 1998.
20 The conditions are that the firm (1) must base the revaluation on the price of the intangible asset in an active 
market and (2) must perform the revaluation regularly and at the same time for all assets in a class of intangible 
assets.
21 The firm need not base the fair value on prices of assets from an active market. It must, however, keep the 
revaluations up to date and the amounts must be reliably measured.
22 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for Impairment of Long-Lived 
Assets,” 2001 (Codification Topic 360) and Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142, “Goodwill and 
other Intangible Assets,” 2001 (Codification Topic 350); IASB, International Accounting Standard 36, “Impair-
ment of Assets,” revised 2004.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

394
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
establishing a new asset valuation. As explained in the Appendix, the calculation of the impair-
ment loss and the new asset valuation differs under U.S. GAAP versus under IFRS. To illus-
trate the form of the journal entry, assume an impairment loss of $5 million on a long-lived 
tangible asset with acquisition cost of $17 million and accumulated depreciation of $4 million. 
The asset’s new valuation is $8 million. The form of a journal entry to record this impairment 
loss would be as follows: 23
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.0
Asset (New Valuation). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8.0
Loss on Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.0
 
Asset (Acquisition Cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17.0
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the loss reduces income, unless the firm had previously 
revalued the assets upward under IFRS. In that case, the loss is a revaluation decrease (a debit 
to other comprehensive income) up to the amount of the revaluation, with any excess loss rec-
ognized in net income.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION 
OF LONG-LIVED ASSETS
BALANCE SHEET
The balance sheet separates noncurrent assets from current assets. Tangible long-lived assets 
typically appear among the noncurrent assets under the title Property, Plant, and Equipment. 
Intangible assets may appear as a separate line item or may be included with Other Assets. 
Firms generally display tangible long-lived assets’ acquisition cost and accumulated deprecia-
tion in one of three ways:
1. All information is displayed on the balance sheet. Great Deal uses this presentation (see 
Exhibit 1.1; amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars for the year ended February 27, 2013):
Property and Equipment:
Land and Buildings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  757
Leasehold Improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,154
Fixtures and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,447
Property Under Capital Lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    95
 
 
 
 
 
$7,453
Less Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 3,383
 
Net Property and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,070
2. Acquisition cost is omitted from the balance sheet. If Great Deal had used this presenta-
tion style, its balance sheet would display the net book value, as follows:
Property and Equipment, Less Accumulated Depreciation of $3,383  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$4,070
3. The balance sheet displays net book value and discloses acquisition cost and accumulated 
depreciation in the notes. Thames uses this presentation (see Exhibit 1.5; amounts are in 
millions of euros for the year ended December 31, 2013):
23 Our reading of financial reports suggests that firms commonly use an alternative accounting procedure that 
debits an impairment loss and credits accumulated depreciation. Both this approach and the one illustrated in 
the text reduce the asset’s balance sheet carrying value to the new valuation amount; the difference is in the 
treatment of the acquisition cost of the asset. If the asset is not depreciated or amortized, including indefinite-
lived intangibles, land, and goodwill, some firms recognize a loss on impairment (debit) and a reduction in the 
asset’s balance sheet carrying value (credit).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

395
Summary 
Tangible Assets, Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€1,338.3
Thames references Note 12, which displays the following information (amounts in millions 
of euros):
Gross
Depreciation
Net
 
Lands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€   54.2
€     —
€   54.2
 
Buildings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,039.3
  (531.7)
507.6
 
Plant and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,029.7
(1,518.7)
511.0
 
Other . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   710.6
   (445.1)
   265.5
 
Tangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€3,833.8
€(2,495.5)
€1,338.3
Firms typically disclose the amounts for various classes of long-lived tangible and intangi-
ble assets separately in notes to the financial statements. Some firms use the third balance sheet 
presentation for intangible assets.
INCOME STATEMENT
Depreciation and amortization expenses appear in the income statement as a separate line 
item, or are included in selling and administrative expenses, or (if they are product costs) are 
included as part of cost of goods sold expense.24 For example, Great Deal’s income statement 
(Exhibit 1.2) includes depreciation expense for its distribution network as part of cost of goods 
sold and includes depreciation expense associated with retail operations and corporate assets as 
part of selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Gains and losses on disposals of property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets 
appear on the income statement, sometimes included in “Other income and expense.” For 
example, gains and losses on Great Deal’s asset sales are included in “Investment income and 
other” in its income statement (Exhibit 1.2). In contrast, Thames includes a separate line in its 
income statement (Exhibit 1.6) for “Gain (loss) on disposal of assets and other.”
Finally, impairment losses sometimes appear on a separate line in the income statement and 
sometimes are included in selling and administrative expenses. Both Great Deal and Thames 
have separate income statement items for impairments. Great Deal reports “Goodwill and trade 
name impairment” while Thames reports “Impairment on noncurrent operating assets.”
SUMMARY
This chapter started by listing six areas in which U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide guidance for 
the accounting for long-lived assets. We repeat those six areas here and summarize U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS guidance in each area.
 1. Firms capitalize an expenditure as an asset if it meets the definition of an asset and meets 
the asset recognition criteria; otherwise, the expenditure is an expense of the period. These 
criteria are readily applicable to tangible assets (such as buildings and equipment) because 
of their physical attributes. They are harder to apply to intangibles (such as expenditures 
for research and development, brand names, and software development costs) because of 
the non-physical nature of these items.
 2. Firms depreciate or amortize the cost of long-lived assets with finite useful lives, for 
example, buildings, equipment, and patents. Firms do not depreciate or amortize the cost 
of long-lived assets with indefinite lives, for example, land and goodwill. Regardless of 
whether assets have a finite life or an indefinite life, firms must test all long-lived assets for 
impairment.
24 Depreciation and amortization expense are included in cost of goods sold when they are product costs. They 
are included elsewhere in the income statement when they are period expenses.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

396
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
 3. Firms depreciate or amortize the cost of assets (less salvage value, if applicable) over the 
assets’ expected service lives. Most firms depreciate or amortize an equal amount each year 
using the straight-line method for financial reporting.
 4. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to reconsider estimates of salvage value and 
service life in light of new information. If there is a change in estimate, firms depreciate or 
amortize the remaining carrying value at the time of the change in estimate over the revised 
remaining useful life.
 5. When a firm sells an asset, the firm records the proceeds of the sale, eliminates the carrying 
value of the asset, and records a gain or loss for the difference.
 6. The treatment of changes in fair values of long-lived assets under U.S. GAAP is asym-
metric. Firms cannot increase balance sheet carrying values of long-lived assets if the fair 
values of those assets increase but must test assets for impairments (losses) in value and 
recognize impairment losses. IFRS also requires impairment testing and the recognition of 
impairment losses, but the technical details of the impairment tests are different. IFRS also 
permits upward revaluations of assets, under certain conditions, to recognize both unreal-
ized fair value increases and recoveries of impairment losses.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to exercise significant judgment in accounting 
for long-lived assets. For example, firms must estimate service lives and salvage values of finite-
lived assets and choose depreciation and amortization methods for those assets. Both impair-
ment testing and the remeasurement of assets to fair values also require substantial judgment 
and estimation.
APPENDIX 10.1: LONG-LIVED ASSET IMPAIRMENT 
PROCEDURES IN U.S. GAAP AND IFRS
Category 1: Asset Impairment of Long-Lived Assets with Definite Service 
Lives and Land U.S. GAAP requires a three-step process for measuring and recording 
impairments for land and long-lived assets with definite service lives.
 
Step 1. Compare the sum of the undiscounted cash flows from the asset with its balance 
sheet carrying value. An impairment loss occurs if the carrying value of the asset exceeds 
the sum of the undiscounted cash flows.
 
Step 2. The amount of the impairment loss is the excess of the carrying value of the asset 
over its fair value.
 
Step 3. At the time of the impairment loss, the firm reduces the carrying value of the asset 
to its current fair value. The recognized impairment loss reduces net income. U.S. GAAP 
does not permit reversals of impairment losses.
In requiring the use of undiscounted cash flows to test for an asset impairment in Step 1, the 
FASB reasoned that a loss has not occurred if the firm can recover in future cash flows an 
amount at least equal to the asset’s carrying value. Under U.S. GAAP, firms do not recognize 
impairment losses if the fair value of an asset declines below carrying value, but only if the 
undiscounted cash flows from that asset decline below carrying value.
In contrast to U.S. GAAP, the IFRS test for an impairment loss for Category 1 assets com-
pares the asset’s carrying value with its recoverable amount, defined as the higher of (1) fair 
value less cost to sell and (2) value in use, defined as the present value of future cash flows of 
the asset in its current use by the firm. The impairment loss is the excess of the carrying value 
over the asset’s recoverable amount. IFRS requirements differ from U.S. GAAP in three ways:
 1. Under IFRS, firms do not compare the asset carrying value to the sum of the undis-
counted cash flows to determine if an impairment loss has occurred. An impairment loss 
occurs whenever the carrying value exceeds the recoverable amount.
 2. The impairment loss under IFRS is the carrying value less the recoverable amount (the 
higher of fair value less cost to sell and value in use).
 3. A firm that applies IFRS will reverse all or part of an impairment loss if evidence exists 
that the loss has decreased or no longer exists.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

397
Appendix 10.1: Long-Lived Asset Impairment Procedures in U.S. GAAP and IFRS
We illustrate the application of this guidance with examples.
Basic Impairment Example Great Deal owns an office building that cost $20 million, 
with accumulated depreciation of $5 million. The balance sheet carrying value (net book value) 
of the building is $15 (= $20 – $5) million. Great Deal originally expected to collect annual 
rentals of $1.67 million for 30 more years before selling the building for $8 million. Because of 
the opening of a new shopping center, Great Deal now expects the building to provide rentals 
for only 15 more years before Great Deal will sell it. Great Deal uses a discount rate of 8% per 
year in discounting expected rentals from the building.
Example 15 Great Deal now expects to receive annual rentals of $1.35 million per year for 15 
years and to sell the building for $5.0 million after 15 years. The present value of the payments 
is $13.1 million when discounted at 8% per year; this amount is the value in use under IFRS. 
The building’s fair value is $12.5 million today. Estimated costs to sell are $500,000.
Under U.S. GAAP, no impairment loss has occurred because the expected undiscounted 
future cash flows of $25.25 [= ($1.35 × 15.0) + $5.00] million exceed the carrying value of 
$15 million. Although Great Deal has suffered an economic loss (because the fair value of the 
building of $12.5 million is less than the carrying value of $15.0 million), it will not recognize 
an impairment loss. Applying IFRS, Great Deal would compare the asset’s carrying value of 
$15.0 million to the higher of the fair value less cost to sell of $12.0 million (= $12.5 million 
less $500,000) and the value in use of $13.1 million. The impairment loss would be $1.9 million 
(= $15.0 million – $13.1 million).
Example 16 Now assume that Great Deal expects to receive annual rentals of $600,000 per 
year for 15 years and to sell the building for $3.0 million after 15 years. The present value of 
these amounts is $6.1 million when discounted at 8% per year; this is the value in use under 
IFRS. The building’s fair value is $5.5 million today, and costs to sell are $300,000.
Under U.S. GAAP, Great Deal has an impairment loss because the carrying value of $15.0 
million exceeds the expected undiscounted future cash flows of $12.0 [= ($0.6 × 15) + $3.0] 
million. Great Deal recognizes an impairment loss of $9.5 million, equal to the excess of the 
carrying value of the building of $15 million over its fair value of $5.5 million. Under IFRS, 
Great Deal compares the carrying value of $15.0 million to the recoverable amount of $6.1 mil-
lion (that is, the higher of the value in use of $6.1 million and the fair value less cost to sell of 
$5.2 million; $5.2 million = $5.5 million less $300,000). Under IFRS, Great Deal recognizes an 
impairment loss of $8.9 million (= $15.0 million – $6.1 million).
The journal entry for recording an impairment loss is similar under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, 
illustrated using Example 16. The accounting involves first removing the building’s acqui-
sition cost and the accumulated depreciation from the accounts and then establishing a new 
asset cost: fair value under U.S. GAAP and recoverable amount under IFRS. The journal entry 
applying U.S. GAAP to recognize the impairment loss (with amounts in millions) would be as 
follows:
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.0
Building (New Valuation). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.5
Loss on Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9.5
 
Building (Acquisition Cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20.0
Applying IFRS would record the impaired asset at a larger amount (its recoverable amount 
of $6.1 million) and recognize a smaller impairment loss ($8.9 million). Under both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS, the loss reduces income, unless the firm had previously revalued the assets 
upward under IFRS. In that case, the loss is a revaluation decrease (a debit to other compre-
hensive income) up to the amount of the revaluation, with any excess loss recognized in net 
income.
Category 2: Asset Impairments of Intangible Assets with Indefinite Ser-
vice Lives, Other Than Goodwill Because Category 2 assets have an indefinite life, 
firms cannot apply the undiscounted cash flow test for asset impairment (the indefinite life 
precludes estimation of total future cash flows). U.S. GAAP requires firms to recognize an 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

398
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
impairment loss on a non-amortized intangible asset other than goodwill whenever the carrying 
value of the asset exceeds its fair value.25 The IFRS treatment for these assets parallels that for 
amortized or depreciated assets (Category 1 assets) except that firms must perform the impair-
ment test annually, regardless of the presence of impairment indicators. The measurement of 
the loss and the new balance sheet carrying value are the same as for Category 1 assets.
Example 17 Great Deal’s balance sheet for the year ended February 27, 2013 (Exhibit 1.1) 
shows a trade name with carrying value of $159 million. The trade name has an indefinite life 
and therefore Great Deal does not amortize it. Negative publicity regarding the product carry-
ing the trade name has reduced its fair value to $128 million. Great Deal compares the carrying 
value of the trade name of $159 million with its fair value of $128 million and recognizes a $31 
million impairment loss. The entry (with amounts in millions) is as follows:
 
Loss on Impairment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
31
 
Trade Name (or Accumulated Amortization)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
31
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR CATEGORY 1 AND CATEGORY 2 IMPAIRMENTS
Accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets is complex because U.S. GAAP require-
ments differ for various assets and requirements differ between U.S. GAAP and IFRS. 
Exhibit 10.1 summarizes these requirements for Category 1 and Category 2 assets.
 PROBLEM  10.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Measuring impairment losses. Real Estate Financing Corporation (REFC) acquired the 
assets of Key West Financing Corporation (KWFC) on June 1, 2011, for $250 million. 
On the acquisition date, KWFC’s assets consisted of loans receivable with a fair value 
of $120 million and real estate leased to businesses and individuals with a fair value of 
$60 million. The remainder of the purchase price of $70 (= $250 – $120 – $60) million 
represents goodwill. On October 15, 2013, a hurricane hit Key West and severely damaged 
many homes and businesses. Information related to the assets of KWFC on October 15, 
2013, is as follows (amounts in millions):
Carrying 
Value
Undiscounted 
Cash Flows
Fair 
Value
Loans Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$140
$160
$125
Real Estate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  80
  65
50
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  70
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$290
Assume that the fair value of KWFC on October 15, 2013, after the hurricane is 
$310 million. Compute the amount of any asset impairment losses on Category 1 and 
Category 2 assets under U.S. GAAP.
Category 3: Asset Impairment for Goodwill Recall from Example 8 that goodwill 
arises in a business combination when the purchase price exceeds the fair value of the net iden-
tifiable assets. Firms do not amortize goodwill under either U.S. GAAP or IFRS. Both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require firms to test goodwill for impairment losses annually, or whenever 
25 The FASB has issued guidance that permits an approach that is similar to the qualitative assessment described 
later in this Appendix for goodwill to be applied to impairment assessments of indefinite-lived intangibles other 
than goodwill. FASB, Accounting Standards Update No. 2012-02, Intangibles—Goodwill and Other (Topic 350), 
“Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment,” 2012.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

399
Appendix 10.1: Long-Lived Asset Impairment Procedures in U.S. GAAP and IFRS
there is an indication of impairment, such as change in the regulatory environment or the loss 
of key personnel.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment as part of a reporting unit (U.S. GAAP) or a 
cash-generating unit (IFRS). These units are identifiable groups of assets that generate identifi-
able cash flows.26 Firms use these identifiable groups of assets to measure the fair value (U.S. 
GAAP) or the recoverable amount (IFRS) of goodwill.
Under U.S. GAAP, firms must first determine if there are impairment losses on other 
non-current assets before they examine goodwill. Firms then follow one of two procedures for 
assessing whether goodwill is impaired.27 The first procedure is quantitative; firms compare 
the fair value of a reporting unit to the carrying value of the reporting unit’s assets (includ-
ing goodwill) less liabilities. If the carrying value is less than the fair value, an impairment loss 
on goodwill may have occurred, and the firm proceeds to a second step. In this second step, 
the firm allocates the fair value of the reporting unit to identifiable assets and liabilities of the 
reporting unit based on their current fair values, allocates any excess fair value to goodwill, and 
compares this allocated amount of goodwill with the balance sheet carrying value of goodwill. 
These allocations do not change the reported amounts of assets and liabilities; the only pur-
pose of the allocations is to assess goodwill impairment. If the allocated goodwill amount is 
less than the carrying value of goodwill, the firm recognizes an impairment loss equal to the 
difference.
The second procedure is qualitative; firms assess qualitative factors, for example, adverse 
changes in industry or economy conditions or adverse changes in input costs, to determine 
whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its balance 
sheet carrying amount. If the firm determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair 
value of a reporting unit is less than its balance sheet carrying amount the test is complete; oth-
erwise, the firm must revert to the quantitative procedure just described. Beginning with 2012, 
firms that apply U.S. GAAP can choose between these two options; the qualitative assessment 
option is not permitted by IFRS. As this book goes to press, the FASB has proposed permit-
ting the qualitative assessment described here for goodwill to be applied as well to Category 
2 asset impairment tests, that is, impairment assessments of indefinite-lived intangibles other 
than goodwill.
26 SFAS No. 142 defines a reporting unit as a segment or a component of a segment that is a business with 
separate financial information that management regularly reviews. IAS 36 defines a cash-generating unit as the 
smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash inflows that are largely independent of the cash inflows 
from other assets or groups of assets.
27 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 142, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” 2001 
(Codification Topic 350); Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-08, “Intangibles—Goodwill and Other (Topic 
350), Testing Goodwill for Impairment,” 2011.
Summary of Accounting for Impairments 
of Long-Lived Assets Except Goodwill
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
Long-lived assets 
with definite service 
lives and land
An asset impairment occurs when the 
carrying value of the asset exceeds 
its undiscounted future cash flows. 
The amount of the impairment loss is 
the excess of the carrying value over 
the fair value of the asset. Fair value 
is the amount a firm would receive if 
it sold the asset in an arm’s-length 
transaction on the measurement date.
An asset impairment occurs and is 
measured by the excess of the carrying 
value of the asset over its recoverable 
amount. The recoverable amount is 
the larger of the fair value less cost to 
sell and the present value of the cash 
flows the firm expects the asset to 
generate in its current use.
Intangibles with 
indefinite service 
lives, except goodwill
An asset impairment occurs and 
is measured by the excess of the 
carrying value over the fair value of 
the asset.
The requirements are the same as 
for long-lived assets subject to 
depreciation or amortization.
EXHIBIT 10.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

400
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
The following example illustrates the application of the quantitative procedure.
Example 18 Refer to Example 8, involving Great Deals’ acquisition of CarPax for $100 mil-
lion, as follows:
 
Property and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 47
 
Identifiable Intangible Assets:
 
 
Customer Lists  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
 
 
Trade Names. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
 
 
In-Process Research and Development Projects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
 
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  20
 
Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
Assume that CarPax qualifies as a reporting unit under U.S. GAAP, and that market pres-
sure from competitors forced drastic price reductions for CarPax products and services; these 
reductions reduced the fair value of CarPax to $80 million.
■ 
Great Deal first applies the U.S. GAAP requirements for identifying and measuring an 
impairment loss on long-lived tangible assets, the property and equipment, with fair value 
at acquisition of $47 million. Great Deal estimates that the undiscounted cash flows related 
to property and equipment total $50 million, the carrying value is $47 million, and the 
current fair value is $47 million. The property and equipment is not impaired because the 
undiscounted cash flows of $50 million exceed the carrying value of $47 million.
■  Great Deal next applies the U.S. GAAP requirement for identifying and measuring an 
impairment loss on intangible assets other than goodwill, customer lists, trade names, and 
IPR&D. Great Deal estimates that the fair value of these intangibles is now $25 million, 
less than the carrying value of $33 million, and recognizes an $8 million impairment loss. 
This loss reduces the carrying value of CarPax to $92 million (= $47 million for property 
and equipment + $25 million for intangibles + $20 million for goodwill).
■ 
Finally, Great Deal applies the U.S. GAAP requirements for identifying and measuring an 
impairment loss on goodwill. Great Deal identifies the fair value of CarPax’s long-lived 
tangible assets ($47 million) and intangibles ($25 million). The sum of these, $72 million, is 
the fair value of CarPax exclusive of goodwill. The difference between $72 million and the 
$80 million fair value of CarPax yields an implied fair value of goodwill of $8 million. The 
balance sheet carrying value of goodwill of $20 million exceeds this implied fair value by 
$12 million (= $20 – $8 million). Great Deal recognizes a $12 million goodwill impairment.
The journal entry to record impairment losses is as follows:
 
Loss on Impairments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 
Intangible Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8
 
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12
The loss appears on the income statement. Recording this loss reduces the carrying value of 
CarPax to $80 (= $46 + $25 + $8) million, its current fair value.
The impairment test under IFRS is applied at the level of a cash-generating unit, defined as 
the smallest identifiable group of assets that generates cash flows that are largely independent 
of the cash flows of other assets. If the recoverable amount of the unit is less than the balance 
sheet carrying value, the firm recognizes an impairment loss. The credit to offset the debit for 
the impairment loss is allocated first to goodwill and second to other assets, prorated based on 
their carrying amounts. In each instance, the asset (whether goodwill or a separately identifi-
able asset) is written down to its recoverable amount or zero, whichever is larger. Although the 
amounts will be different, because both the impairment test and the subsequent balance sheet 
carrying value will be different, the journal entries for recognizing goodwill impairments under 
IFRS are similar to those shown previously for Great Deal. Unlike U.S. GAAP, however, IFRS 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

401
Appendix 10.1: Long-Lived Asset Impairment Procedures in U.S. GAAP and IFRS
requires that firms assess, every reporting period, whether there has been a recovery of a good-
will impairment loss. Firms must recognize a recovery if one has occurred.
Example 19 Refer to Example 18. Assume that Great Deal applies IFRS and views CarPax 
as a cash-generating unit. Assume the following carrying values and recoverable amounts28 for 
CarPax for purposes of measuring impairment losses (amounts in millions):
Carrying 
Value
Recoverable 
Amount
Property and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 47
$47
Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  33
 25
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  20
  8
 
Total for Cash Generating Unit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
$80
Great Deal recognizes an impairment loss of $20 million because the carrying value of the 
cash-generating unit ($100 million) exceeds its recoverable amount of $80 million. Great Deal 
first reduces the carrying value of goodwill by $12 million to its recoverable amount, then allo-
cates the remaining impairment loss of $8 million to the property and equipment and intangibles 
based on their relative carrying values. Because the carrying amount of property and equipment 
equals its recoverable amount, no impairment loss is recognized (because the allocation of the 
excess impairment loss cannot decrease an asset below its recoverable amount). Therefore, the 
excess impairment of $8 million reduces the carrying value of the intangible assets, from $33 mil-
lion to $25 million. The journal entry is the same as that shown in Example 18.
The following chart summarizes the U.S. GAAP and IFRS requirements for goodwill 
impairments.
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
Goodwill
Starting in 2012, firms may choose between two 
approaches.
Quantitative approach: First, compare the carrying 
value of a reporting unit that has goodwill to the fair 
value of that reporting unit. If the carrying value of 
the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, continue 
to the next step; otherwise, stop. Second, compare 
the carrying value of the goodwill with its fair value. 
To measure the fair value of goodwill, determine the 
fair value of the reporting unit to which the goodwill 
applies. Allocate this total fair value to identifiable 
assets and liabilities on the balance sheet based 
on their fair values. The remaining fair value of the 
reporting unit is the fair value of goodwill. A firm 
allocates the total fair value of the reporting unit 
only for the purpose of measuring the fair value of 
goodwill. If the carrying value of the goodwill exceeds 
its fair value from this second step, recognize a 
goodwill impairment loss.
Qualitative approach: Use available qualitative 
information to assess whether it is more likely than 
not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than 
its carrying amount. If an entity determines that it is 
more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting 
unit exceeds its carrying value, the entity applies the 
quantitative approach.
A goodwill impairment loss occurs when 
the carrying value of the net assets of a 
cash-generating unit with goodwill exceeds 
the recoverable amount for that unit. First, 
reduce the carrying value of goodwill by 
the amount of the impairment loss but 
not below its recoverable amount. Second, 
reduce all other assets pro rata based on 
their carrying values but not below their 
recoverable amounts for any remaining 
impairment loss.
28 To simplify the example, we assume the recoverable amounts under IFRS in Example 19 equal the fair values 
under U.S. GAAP in Example 18. These amounts usually differ.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

402
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
 PROBLEM  10.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
Refer to the information provided for Problem 10.5 for Self-Study. Assume that the 
market value of KWFC on October 15, 2013, after the hurricane is $220 million. 
Compute the amount of any asset impairment losses for Category 1 assets, Category 2 
assets, and goodwill under U.S. GAAP.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Jensen Company; calculating the acquisition cost of fixed assets.)
 1. a, b, d, j, m, o, p.
 2. c, e, f, g, i, k, l, n, o, p.
 3. h, i, l, p.
 4. i, q, r.
COMMENTS AND EXPLANATIONS
d. Removing the old building makes the land ready to accept the new one. These costs apply 
to the land, not to the new building.
f. The reduction in the cost of materials and supplies will reduce the cost of the building. The 
actual accounting entries depend on the method used to record the potential discount. This 
book does not discuss these issues.
h. Explicit interest is capitalized but not opportunity-cost interest or interest imputed on one’s 
own funds. The adjusting entry credits Construction in Process and debits Interest Rev-
enue. The debit reduces income, removing the revenue that the company had recognized.
i. Computation of the amounts to be allocated requires an estimate. Once the firm estimates 
amounts, it debits them to Building or to Depreciation Expense and Work-in-Process 
Inventory, as appropriate, for the regular company operations.
j. Credit to Land account, reducing its cost.
l. Allocate to Building and to expense, based on an estimate of how time was spent. Given 
the description, most of these costs are probably for the building.
m. Include as part of the cost of the land.
n. Capitalize as part of the Building account for the same reasons that a firm capitalizes inter-
est during construction.
o. Allocate the costs for insuring workers to the same accounts as the wages for those workers.
p. Probably as an expense or a loss for the period. An alternative and justifiable treatment 
is to include this as part of the cost of the building, paralleling the treatment of explicit 
insurance cost. If, however, the company was irrational in acquiring insurance policies with 
deductible clauses, this item would be an expense or loss. Accounting usually assumes that 
most management teams make rational decisions most of the time.
q. Debit to Machinery and Equipment account, an asset account separate from Building.
r. Treat the same as the preceding item; installation costs are part of the cost of the asset.
s. Recognizing revenue is incorrect. Credit the Construction in Process account and debit the 
Construction Revenue account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

403
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Markam Corporation; calculating periodic depreciation.)
a. Straight-Line (Time) Method:
Years 2013 to 2017: ($20,000 – $2,000)/5 = $3,600 each year
Total: $3,600 × 5 = $18,000
b. Straight-Line (Use) Method:
Years 2013 to 2016: 5,000 × $0.75a = $3,750 per year
Year 2017: 4,000 × $0.75a = $3,000
Total [($3,750 × 4) + $3,000] = $18,000
a($20,000 – $2,000)/24,000 = $0.75 per hour
c. Double-Declining Balance Method (assuming the firm switches to the straight-line [time] 
method at the start of 2015):
Year
Carrying Value
Double-Declining 
Depreciation Rate
Annual 
Depreciation 
Expense
2013
$20,000
×
0.4 = 2 × (1/5)
=
$8,000
2014
$12,000
(= $20,000 – $8,000)
×
0.4 = 2 × (1/5)
=
 4,800
2015
$7,200
(= $12,000 – $4,800)
×
0.33
=
 1,733a
2016
$5,467
×
0.33
=
 1,733
2017
$3,734
×
0.33
=
 1,733
End 2017
$2,000
(= salvage value)
      a Depreciation expense in years 2015–2017 is calculated using the straight-line (time) method, 
using the carrying value of the asset at the end of year 2014 and its expected salvage 
value of $2,000. Annual depreciation expense = $1,733 (= [$7,200 – $2,000] / 3 years 
remaining).
d. Sum-of-the-Years’-Digits Method:
Year
Acquisition Cost Less 
Salvage Value
Sum of 
Years Ratio
Annual 
Depreciation 
Expense
2013
$18,000
(= $20,000 – $2,000)
×
5/15
=
$6,000
2014
$18,000
×
4/15
=
 4,800
2015
$18,000
×
3/15
=
 3,600
2016
$18,000
×
2/15
=
 2,400
2017
$18,000
×
1/15
=
 1,200
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

404
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Central States Electric Company; adjustments for changes in estimates.) (All dollar amounts in 
millions of U.S. dollars.)
a. $4.4 per year = ($200 + $20)/50 years
b. $4.5 per year  = [$200 + $20 + $4 – ($4.4 per year × 10 years)]/40 years remaining life 
= ($224 – $44)/40 = $180/40
c. $3.0 per year  = [$180 – ($4.5 × 20 years)]/30 years remaining life  
 
 
= ($180 – $90)/30 = $90/30
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Purdy Company; distinguishing repairs from improvements.)
a. Record the first truck at $19,200. Record the second truck at $15,000; debit $4,200 to 
expense or loss.
b. When Purdy Company acquired the first truck, it knew it would have to make the “repair,” 
which is an improvement. The purchase price was lower because of the known cost to 
be incurred. At the time of acquisition, the firm anticipated the cost as required to pro-
duce the expected service potential of the asset. The fact that the cost was $4,200, rather 
than “about $4,000,” does not seem to violate Purdy Company’s expectations at the time 
it acquired the truck. If the repair had cost significantly more than $4,000—say, $7,000—
then the excess could be a loss or an expense.
 
 
Purdy Company believed that the second truck was operable when it agreed on the pur-
chase price. Purdy Company incurred the cost of the repair to achieve the level of service 
potential it thought it had acquired. There are no more future benefits after the repair than 
it had anticipated at the time of acquisition. Therefore, the $4,200 is an expense or a loss.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Real Estate Financing Corporation; measuring impairment losses on Category 1 and Category 
2 assets.)
The undiscounted cash flows related to the loans receivable of $160 million exceed their carry-
ing value of $140 million, so no impairment loss arises for the receivables. For real estate, the 
carrying value of $80 million exceeds their undiscounted cash flows of $65 million, so Real 
Estate Financing Corporation recognizes an impairment loss of $30 (= $50 – $80) million. The 
carrying value of the firm after recognizing the impairment loss is $260 million (= $140 million 
for loans receivable + $50 million for real estate + $70 million for goodwill).
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 10.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Real Estate Financing Corporation; measuring impairment losses on Category 1 and Category 
2 assets and on goodwill). 
The answers for the loans receivable and the real estate in Problem 10.5 for Self-Study apply here 
as well. In this case, however, the carrying value of the firm of $260 million exceeds the fair value 
of $220 million, so an impairment loss of goodwill arises. To measure the impairment loss, the 
accountant attributes $125 million of the fair value of $220 million to loans receivable, $50 mil-
lion to real estate, and $45 million to goodwill. Comparing the fair value of goodwill of $45 mil-
lion to the carrying value of goodwill of $70 million yields an impairment loss of $25 million.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Operational or operating assets
Financial assets
Tangible assets
Intangible assets
In-process research and development 
(IPR&D)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

405
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Goodwill
Interest costs during construction
Finite life
Service life, useful life
Indefinite life
Depreciation, depreciation expense
Amortization, amortization expense
Joint cost
Salvage value, residual value
Physical and functional factors
Straight-line (time and use) methods
Declining-balance methods
Sum-of-the-years’-digits method
Accumulated depreciation
Property, Plant, and Equipment, Gross
Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net
Treatment of changes in periodic 
depreciation and amortization
Maintenance
Repairs
Improvements
Trade-in transaction
Commercial substance
Asset revaluations
Impairment loss
Recoverable amount
Reporting unit
Cash generating unit
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. A firm that makes expenditures to self-construct a building treats the expenditures as an 
asset. When that same firm makes research and development expenditures to create a new 
patented technology, it must treat the expenditures as an expense. When that same firm 
makes expenditures to create computer software for eventual sale to customers, it might 
treat some of those expenditures as an asset and some as an expense. Explain U.S. GAAP’s 
rationale for the different treatment of these expenditures.
 3. If Merck, a pharmaceutical firm, makes expenditures to research new drugs, it must treat 
the expenditures as an expense. If it acquires a patent for a new drug from its creator, it 
must treat the expenditure as an asset. If it acquires another firm with in-process R&D, it 
must treat the portion of the purchased price allocated to the in-process R&D as an asset. 
Explain U.S. GAAP’s rationale for the different treatment of these expenditures.
 4. What is the effect of capitalizing interest costs associated with self-constructed assets on 
reported income summed over all the periods of the life of a given self-constructed asset, 
from building through use until eventual retirement? Contrast with a policy of expensing 
interest as incurred.
 5. Contrast the terms finite life and indefinite life as they apply to depreciation of tangible 
long-lived assets and amortization of intangible assets.
 6. When Thames acquires another firm, it allocates a portion of the purchase price to brand 
names, some of which it amortizes and some of which it does not amortize. How does 
Thames likely justify this different treatment of brand names?
 7. An airline has depreciated its new aircraft in the past over 25 years. New fuel usage and 
safety standards indicate that a shorter useful life is now appropriate for all of its existing 
aircraft. Depending on the circumstances, the airline might (a) spread the undepreciated 
cost of the aircraft over the remaining life of the aircraft, or (b) recognize an asset impair-
ment loss immediately and then spread the carrying value over the remaining life of the 
aircraft. Under what circumstances might each of these two treatments be appropriate?
 8. A firm expects to use a delivery truck for five years. At the end of three years, the transmission 
wears out and requires replacement at a cost of $4,000. The firm argues that it should capital-
ize the expenditure because without it the useful life is zero and with it the useful life will be 
another three years. Comment on the firm’s reasoning relative to U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
 9. Relate the concept of return of capital to the criterion under U.S. GAAP for deciding 
whether an impairment loss on long-lived assets other than non-amortized intangibles has 
occurred.
10. Why does the cash recoverability criterion apply to impairment losses on amortized intan-
gibles but not on non-amortized intangibles under U.S. GAAP?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

406
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
11. The use of undiscounted, instead of discounted, cash flows for identifying asset impairment 
losses under U.S. GAAP seems to lack a conceptual basis. Explain why discounted cash 
flows are preferred to undiscounted cash flows in this scenario.
12. Suppose that competition among acquiring firms to make a corporate acquisition results in 
a valuation error, such that the acquiring firm overpays for the acquired firm. The acquir-
ing firm will allocate the excess purchase price to goodwill, along with amounts attribut-
able to unidentifiable intangible benefits. Because U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not require 
firms to amortize goodwill, the excess purchase price will not affect net income. Do you 
agree? Why or why not?
EXERCISES
13. Calculating acquisition costs of long-lived assets. Outback Steakhouse opened a new res-
taurant on the site of an existing building. It paid the owner $260,000 for the land and 
building, of which it attributes $52,000 to the land and $208,000 to the building. Out-
back incurred legal costs of $12,600 to conduct a title search and prepare the necessary 
legal documents for the purchase. It then paid $35,900 to renovate the building to make 
it suitable for Outback’s use. Property and liability insurance on the land and building for 
the first year was $12,000, of which $4,000 applied to the period during renovation and 
$8,000 applied to the period after opening. Property taxes on the land and building for the 
first year totaled $15,000, of which $5,000 applied to the period during renovation and 
$10,000 applied to the period after opening. Calculate the amounts that Outback Steak-
house should include in the Land account and in the Building account.
14. Classifying expenditure as asset or expense. For each of the following expenditures or acqui-
sitions, indicate the type of account debited. Classify the account as (1) asset other than 
product cost, (2) product cost (Work-in-Process Inventory), or (3) expense. If the account 
debited is an asset account, specify whether it is current or noncurrent.
a. $150 for repairs of office machines.
b. $1,500 for emergency repairs to an office machine.
c. $250 for maintenance of delivery trucks.
d. $5,000 for a machine acquired in return for a three-year note.
e. $4,200 for research and development staff salaries.
f. $3,100 for newspaper ads.
g. $6,400 for wages of factory workers engaged in production.
h. $3,500 for wages of factory workers engaged in installing equipment the firm has 
purchased.
i. $2,500 for salaries of the office workforce.
j. $1,000 for legal fees incurred in acquiring an ore deposit.
k. $1,200 for a one-year insurance policy beginning next month.
l. $1,800 for U.S. Treasury notes, to be sold to pay the next installment due on income 
taxes.
m. $4,000 for royalty payment for the right to use a patent used in manufacturing.
n. $10,000 for purchase of a trademark.
o. $100 filing fee for copyright registration application.
p. $1,850 to purchase computer software used in record keeping.
q. $8,600 to purchase from its creator initial research on a possible drug to treat 
hypertension.
15. Cost of self-constructed assets. Bolton Company purchased a plot of land for $90,000 as 
a factory site. A small office building sits on the plot, conservatively appraised at $20,000. 
The company plans to use the office building after making some modifications and renova-
tions (item (4) below). The company had plans drawn for a factory and received bids for its 
construction. It rejected all bids and decided to construct the factory itself. Management 
believes that plant asset accounts should include the following additional items:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

407
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 (1) Materials and Supplies for Factory Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $200,000
 (2) Excavation of Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,000
 (3) Labor on Construction of Factory Building. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
140,000
 (4) Cost of Remodeling Old Building into Office Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
13,000
 (5) Interest Paid on Cash Borrowed by Bolton to Construct Factorya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6,000
 (6) Interest Foregone on Bolton’s Own Cash Used  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
9,000
 (7) Cash Discounts on Materials Purchased for Factory Building. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
7,000
 (8) Supervision by Management on Factory Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
10,000
 (9) Workers’ Compensation Insurance Premiums on Labor in (3)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,000
(10) Payment of Claims for Injuries During Construction of Factory Building Not 
 
Covered by Insurance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,000
(11) Clerical and Other Expenses on Construction of Factory Building. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8,000
(12) Paving of Streets and Sidewalks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
(13) Architect’s Plans and Specifications of Factory Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,000
(14) Legal Costs of Conveying Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,000
(15) Legal Costs of Injury Claim During Construction of Factory Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,000
(16) Income Credited to Retained Earnings Account (the difference between 
 
the foregone cost and the lowest contractor’s bid) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
11,000
aThis interest is the entire amount of interest paid during the construction period.
 
Show in detail the items Bolton should include in the following accounts: Land, Factory 
Building, Office Building, and Site Improvements. Explain the reason for excluding any of 
these items from the four accounts.
16. Cost of self-developed product. Duck Vehicle Manufacturing Company incurs various costs 
in developing a new, amphibious vehicle for use in providing tours on land and water. Indi-
cate the accounting treatment for each of the following expenditures. Duck Vehicle applies 
U.S. GAAP.
 (1) Salaries of Company Engineers to Design the New Vehicle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $325,000
 (2) Cost of Prototype of New Vehicle Built by External Contractor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
278,200
 (3) Cost of Supplies and Salaries of Personnel to Test Prototype  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
68,900
 (4) Fees Paid to Environmental Protection Agency to Test Emissions of New Vehicle  . . . . . . . . .  
15,200
 (5) Legal Fees Incurred to Register and Establish a Patent on the New Vehicle. . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,500
 (6) Cost of Castings, or Molds, for Metal Parts of New Vehicle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
46,000
 (7) Cost of Local Permits to Commence Manufacturing the New Vehicle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5,000
 (8) Cost of Manufacturing the First Vehicle for a Customer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
167,600
17. Calculating interest capitalized during construction. Bulls Eye Stores constructed new 
stores during the current year. The average balance in the Construction-in-Process account 
excluding the current year’s capitalized interest costs was $3,400,000. Bulls Eye Stores 
engaged in borrowing directly related to these stores in the amount of $2,000,000, which 
carries an interest rate of 6%. Bulls Eye Stores has other borrowing outstanding totaling 
$8,000,000 at an average interest rate of 7%. Compute the amount of interest capitalized 
in the Construction-in-Process account during the current year.
18. Amount of interest capitalized during construction. Nexor, a steel manufacturer, self-constructs 
a new manufacturing facility in Vermont. At the start of 2013, the Construction-in-Process 
account had a balance of $30 million. Construction activity occurred uniformly throughout 
the year. At the end of 2013, the balance was $60 million before capitalization of interest for 
the year. The outstanding borrowings of the company during the year were as follows:
New Construction Loans at 8% per Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 25,000,000
Old Bond Issues Averaging 6% Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 100,000,000
Total Interest-Bearing Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$125,000,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

408
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
a. Compute the amount of interest capitalized in the Construction-in-Process account for 
2013.
b. Present journal entries for interest for 2013.
c. On December 31, 2014, Nexor completed the manufacturing facility and put it to work. 
Average Construction-in-Process for 2014 was $110 million. The debt listed above 
remained outstanding throughout the construction project, and the firm did not issue 
any additional interest-bearing debt during this time. Present journal entries for 2014 
related to interest expense and interest capitalization.
19. Calculations for various depreciation methods. In 2013, Carlton, Inc., acquires a machine 
for $88,800. It expects the machine to last six years and to operate for 30,000 hours during 
that time. Estimated salvage value is $4,800 at the end of the machine’s useful life. Calcu-
late the depreciation charge for each of the first three years using each of the following 
methods:
a. The straight-line (time) method.
b. The straight-line (use) method, with the following operating times: first year, 4,500 
hours; second year, 5,000 hours; third year, 5,500 hours.
20. Calculations for various depreciation methods. On January 1, 2013, Luck Delivery Company 
acquired a new truck for $30,000. It estimated the truck to have a useful life of five years 
and no salvage value. The company closes its books annually on December 31. Indicate 
the amount of the depreciation charge for each year of the asset’s life under the following 
methods:
a. The straight-line (time) method.
b. The double-declining-balance method, with a switch to straight-line in 2016.
c. The sum-of-the-years’-digits method.
d. The truck belongs to a category of property for tax purposes requiring the following 
proportions of the asset’s cost to be depreciated each year: 0.20, 0.32, 0.192, 0.115, 
0.115, 0.058. The tax law allows firms to ignore salvage value in calculating depreciation.
21. Change in depreciable life and salvage value. Thom Corporation acquired a computer 
on January 1, 2011, for $10,000,000. The computer had an estimated useful life of six 
years and $1,000,000 estimated salvage value. The firm uses the straight-line depreciation 
method. On January 1, 2013, Thom Corporation discovers that new technologies make it 
likely that the computer will last only four years in total and that the estimated salvage 
value will be only $600,000. Compute the amount of depreciation expense for 2013 for this 
change in depreciable life and salvage value. Assume that the change does not represent an 
impairment loss.
22. Journal entries for revising estimate of service life. Give the journal entries for the fol-
lowing selected transactions of Florida Manufacturing Corporation. The company uses 
the straight-line method of calculating depreciation and reports on a December 31 
year-end.
a. The firm purchases a cutting machine on November 1, 2013, for $180,000. It estimates 
that the machine will have a useful life of 12 years and a salvage value of $7,200 at the 
end of that time. Give the journal entry for the depreciation at December 31, 2013.
b. Record the depreciation for the year ending December 31, 2014.
c. In August 2019 the firm estimates that the machine will probably have a total useful 
life of 14 years and a $3,840 salvage value. Record the depreciation for the year ending 
December 31, 2019.
d. The firm sells the machine for $40,000 on March 31, 2024. Record the entries of that 
date, assuming that the firm records depreciation as indicated in part c.
23. Distinguishing repairs versus improvements. Disney World experienced damage from a tor-
nado at Space Mountain, one of its most popular attractions. It paid $30,200 to replace 
steel reinforcements to the structure damaged by the tornado, $86,100 for a new roof torn 
off by the tornado, $26,900 for a new air conditioning system that was housed on the roof, 
and $12,600 to replace carpeting damaged by water. Disney World estimates that higher 
quality steel used as replacements added 20% more structural support in terms of weight-
bearing capacity. The new air conditioning system provides 25% more cooling power than 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

409
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
the unit previously installed in the attraction. Compute the amount of these expenses that 
Disney World should treat as a repair and the amount it should treat as an improvement.
24. Computing the amount of an impairment loss on tangible long-lived assets. Wildwood Prop-
erties owns an apartment building that has a carrying value of $15,000,000 on January 1, 
2013. The highway department has decided to construct a new highway near the building, 
which substantially decreases its attractiveness to tenants. Wildwood Properties estimates 
that it will now collect rentals from the building of $1,400,000 a year for the next six years 
and that it will sell the building at the end of that time for $4,000,000. Wildwood Properties 
will use the present value of expected cash flows to measure the fair value of the building 
under U.S. GAAP and the recoverable amount under IFRS. An appropriate interest rate 
to discount cash flows is 10%. Assume that all cash flows occur at the end of the year. 
Compute the amount of any impairment loss that Wildwood Properties should recognize 
under U.S. GAAP and under IFRS.
25. Computing the amount of impairment loss. Tillis Corporation acquired the assets of Kieran 
Corporation (Kieran) on January 1, 2011, for $2,400,000. On this date the fair values of the 
assets of Kieran were as follows: land, $400,000; building, $600,000; equipment, $900,000. 
On June 15, 2013, a competitor introduced a new product that will likely significantly affect 
future sales of Kieran’s products. It will also affect the value of Kieran’s property, plant, 
and equipment because of their specialized nature in producing Kieran’s existing products. 
The following information relates to the property, plant, and equipment of Kieran on June 
15, 2013:
Carrying 
Value
Undiscounted 
Cash Flows
Fair 
Value
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  550,000
$575,000
$550,000
Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   580,000
 600,000
 580,000
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,200,000
 950,000
 800,000
 
The fair value of Kieran as an entity on June 15, 2008, is $2,200,000.
 
 
Compute the amount of impairment loss recognized on each of Kieran’s property, 
plant, and equipment and on goodwill on June 15, 2013, under U.S. GAAP.
26. Computing the gain or loss on sale of equipment. Fedup Express acquired a delivery truck 
on January 1, 2009, for $48,000. It estimated that the truck would have a six-year useful 
life and $6,000 salvage value. Fedup Express uses the straight-line depreciation method. On 
July 1, 2013, Fedup Express sells the truck for $14,000. Give the journal entries that Fedup 
Express makes on July 1, 2013, to recognize depreciation for 2013 and the sale of the truck.
27. Working backward to derive proceeds from disposition of plant assets. The balance sheets of 
Wilcox Corporation at the beginning and end of the year contained the following data:
Beginning 
of Year
End of 
Year
Property, Plant, and Equipment (at cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$400,000
$550,000
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 180,000
 160,000
Net Carrying Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$220,000
$390,000
 
During the year, Wilcox Corporation sold machinery and equipment at a gain of $4,000. 
It purchased new machinery and equipment at a cost of $230,000. Depreciation charges 
on machinery and equipment for the year amounted to $50,000. Calculate the proceeds 
Wilcox Corporation received from the sale of the machinery and equipment.
28. Journal entries to correct accounting errors. Give correcting entries for the following situ-
ations. In each case, the firm uses the straight-line method of depreciation and closes its 
books annually on December 31.
a. A firm purchased a computer for $3,000 on January 1, 2011. It depreciated the com-
puter at a rate of 25% of acquisition cost per year. On June 30, 2013, it sold the com-
puter for $800 and acquired a new computer for $4,000. The bookkeeper made the 
following entry to record the transaction:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

410
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,200
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,200
b. A firm purchased a used truck for $7,000. Its cost, when new, was $12,000. The book-
keeper made the following entry to record the purchase:
 
Truck  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,000
c. A firm purchased a testing mechanism on April 1, 2011, for $1,200. It depreciated the 
testing mechanism at a 10% annual rate. A burglar stole the testing mechanism on June 
30, 2013. The firm had not insured against this theft. The bookkeeper made the follow-
ing entry:
 
Theft Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,200
 
Testing Machine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,200
PROBLEMS
29. Recording transactions involving tangible and intangible assets. Present journal entries for 
each of the following transactions of Moon Macrosystems:
a. Acquired computers costing $400,000 and computer software costing $40,000 on Janu-
ary 1, 2011. Moon expects the computers to have a service life of 10 years and $40,000 
salvage value. It expects the computer software to have a service life of four years and 
zero salvage value.
b. Paid $20,000 to install the computers in the office. Paid $10,000 to install and test the 
computer software.
c. Recorded depreciation and amortization using the straight-line method for 2011 and 
2012. Moon records a full year of depreciation in the year of acquisition. Treat depre-
ciation and amortization as a period expense.
d. On January 1, 2013, new software offered on the market made the software acquired in 
part a completely obsolete. Give any required journal entry.
e. On January 2, 2013, Moon revised the depreciable life of the computers to a total of 14 
years and the salvage value to $56,000. Give the entry to record depreciation for 2013.
f. On December 31, 2014, Moon sold the computers for $260,000. Give the required jour-
nal entries for 2014.
30. Effect on net income of changes in estimates for depreciable assets. Cloud Airlines has $3 
billion of assets, including airplanes costing $2.5 billion with net carrying value of $1.6 bil-
lion. It earns net income equal to approximately 6% of total assets. Cloud Airlines depre-
ciates its airplanes for financial reporting purposes on a straight-line basis over 10-year 
lives to a salvage value equal to 10% of acquisition cost. Cloud announces a change in 
depreciation policy; it will use 14-year lives and salvage values equal to 12% of acquisition 
cost. The airplanes are all four years old. Assume an income tax rate of 35%.
 
 
Calculate the approximate impact on net income of the change in depreciation policy. 
Compute both dollar and percentage effects.
31. Recognizing and measuring impairment losses. Give the journal entry to recognize an 
impairment loss, if appropriate, in each of the following cases under U.S. GAAP. If a loss 
does not qualify as an impairment loss, explain the reason, and indicate the appropriate 
accounting.
a. Commercial Realty Corporation leases office space to tenants in Boston. One of its 
office buildings originally cost $80 million and has accumulated depreciation of $20 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

411
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
million. The city of Boston has announced its intention to construct an exit ramp from 
a nearby expressway on one side of the office building. Rental rates in the building will 
likely decrease as a result. The expected future undiscounted cash flows from rentals 
and from disposal of the building decreased from $120 million before the announce-
ment to $50 million afterward. The fair value of the building decreased from $85 million 
before the announcement to $32 million afterward.
b. Refer to part a. Assume that the undiscounted cash flows totaled $70 million and that 
the fair value totaled $44 million after the announcement.
c. Medical Services Corporation plans, and then builds, its own office building and clinic. It 
originally anticipated that the building would cost $15 million. The physicians in charge 
of overseeing construction had medical practices so busy that they did not closely track 
costs, which ultimately reached $25 million. The expected future cash flows from using 
the building total $22 million, and the fair value of the building totals $16 million.
d. Medco Pharmaceuticals acquired New Start Biotechnology two years ago for $40 mil-
lion. Medco allocated $25 million to a patent held by New Start and $15 million to 
goodwill. By the end of the current period, Medco has amortized the carrying value of 
the patent to $20 million. A competitor recently received approval for a biotechnology 
drug that will reduce the fair value of the patent that Medco acquired from New Start. 
The expected future undiscounted cash flows from sales of the patented drug total $18 
million, and the fair value of the patent is $12 million. The fair value of the former New 
Start Biotechnology operation owned by Medco is now $25 million.
e. Chicken Franchisees, Inc., acquires franchise rights in the Atlanta area for Chicken 
Delight Restaurants, a national restaurant chain. The franchise rights originally cost 
$15 million; since acquisition, Chicken Franchisees has amortized the book value to 
$10 million. Chicken Delight Restaurants recently received negative publicity because 
the chickens it delivered to its franchisees contained potentially harmful pesticides. As 
a result, business has declined. Chicken Franchisees estimates that the future undis-
counted cash flows associated with the Chicken Delight name total $6 million and that 
the franchise rights have fair value of $3 million.
32. Expensing versus capitalizing research and development costs. Pfizer, a pharmaceutical com-
pany, plans to spend $90 million on research and development (R&D) at the beginning of 
each of the next several years to develop new drugs. As a result of the R&D expenditure 
for a given year, it expects pretax income (not counting R&D expense) to increase by $36 
million a year for three years, including the year of the expenditure itself. Pfizer has other 
pretax income of $30 million per year. The controller of Pfizer is curious about the effect 
on the financial statements of following one of two accounting policies with respect to 
R&D expenditures:
(1) Expensing the R&D costs in the year of expenditure (the policy required in the United 
States).
(2) Capitalizing the R&D costs and amortizing them over three years, including the year 
of the expenditure itself.
 
Assume that the company does spend $90 million at the beginning of each of four years 
and that the planned increase in income occurs. Ignore income tax effects.
a. Prepare a four-year condensed summary of income before income taxes, assuming that 
Pfizer follows policy (1) and expenses R&D costs as incurred.
b. Prepare a four-year condensed summary of income before income taxes, assuming that 
Pfizer follows policy (2) and capitalizes R&D costs, then amortizes them over three 
years. Also compute the amount of Deferred R&D Costs (asset) appearing on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of each of the four years.
c. In what sense is policy (1) a conservative policy?
d. Ascertain the effect on income before income taxes and on the balance sheet if Pfizer 
continues to spend $90 million each year and the pretax income effects continue as in 
the first four years.
33. Interpreting disclosures regarding long-lived assets. Exhibit 10.2 presents a partial balance 
sheet for Comerica Mills, Inc., a consumer foods processing company, for its fiscal years 
ending May 28, 2012, and May 27, 2013.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

412
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
a. Comerica Mills is not in the business of developing computer software. Why then does 
computer software appear as an asset on its balance sheet?
b. Is it likely that Comerica Mills recognizes depreciation on its computer software? 
Explain.
c. Comerica Mills computes depreciation on its depreciable assets using the straight-line 
method and recognized depreciation of $421 million during fiscal 2013. Compute the 
average total life and the average age of depreciable assets for fiscal 2013.
d. Did Comerica Mills likely dispose of any depreciable assets during fiscal 2013? Explain.
e. Does Comerica Mills appear to be a firm that primarily grows by internal expansion or 
by acquiring other consumer foods companies? Explain.
f. Is it likely that Comerica Mills made a corporate acquisition during fiscal 2013? Explain.
g. What is Comerica Mills’s likely rationale for treating patents and trademarks as intan-
gibles subject to amortization?
h. What is Comerica Mills’s likely rationale for treating brand names as an intangible not 
subject to amortization?
i. The income statement of Comerica Mills (not shown) reports Interest Expense—Net. 
Based on the information in Exhibit 10.2, what item has Comerica Mills likely netted 
against interest expense?
34. Interpreting disclosures regarding long-lived assets. Exhibit 10.3 presents a partial balance 
sheet for Hargon, Inc., a creator and manufacturer of biotechnology pharmaceutical prod-
ucts, for December 31, 2012 and 2013.
a. Does Hargon likely recognize depreciation on the amount in the Construction-in- 
Progress account each year? Explain.
b. Hargon depreciates its assets using the straight-line method and recognized $593 million 
of depreciation during 2013. Compute the average total life and average age of Amgen’s 
depreciable assets for 2013.
c. Did Hargon appear to dispose of any depreciable assets during 2013? Explain.
d. Describe the likely reasons that Hargon treats Developed Product Technology, Core 
Technology, Trade Name, and Acquired Technology Rights as intangibles subject to 
amortization. Consider each of these four items separately.
Partial Balance Sheet for Comerica Mills, Inc.
(all dollar amounts in millions)
(Problem 10.33)
May 27, 
2012
May 28, 
2013
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,054
$ 3,041
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   61
    54
Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,518
  1,430
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,016
  3,859
Capitalized Software  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
225
   211
Construction in Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    276
    252
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 6,096
 5,806
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (3,082)
 (2,809)
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment—Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  3,014
  2,997
Intangibles Subject to Amortization:
 
Patents and Trademarks—Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  12
   12
Intangibles Not Subject to Amortization:
 
Brands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,682
3,595
 
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  6,835
  6,652
 
Total Intangibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 10,529
 10,259
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,587
  1,778
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$18,184
$18,075
EXHIBIT 10.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

413
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
e. Hargon uses the straight-line amortization method and recognized $370 million of 
amortization for 2013. Compute the average total life and average age of Hargon’s 
intangibles subject to amortization for 2013.
f. Describe the likely reasons why Developed Product Technology decreased from $3,077 
million to $2,877 million during 2013, whereas the amounts for Core Technology and 
Trade Name remained the same.
g. Given the nature of Hargon’s business, suggest the likely items that comprise Goodwill 
on the balance sheet.
h. The income statement of Hargon (not reported) shows Interest Expense—Net. Based 
on the information in Exhibit 10.3, what item has Hargon likely netted against interest 
expense?
35. Interpreting disclosures regarding long-lived assets. Exhibit 10.4 presents a partial balance 
sheet for HP3, a creator and manufacturer of computer hardware and software and related 
services, for its fiscal years ending October 31, 2012 and 2013.
a. HP3 uses the straight-line method to depreciate its buildings, leasehold improvements, 
machinery, and equipment. It recognized depreciation expense of $1,922 million during 
fiscal 2013. Compute the average total life and average age of its depreciable assets dur-
ing fiscal 2013.
b. Did HP3 appear to abandon or dispose of any depreciable assets during fiscal 2013? 
Explain.
c. What is the likely rationale for treating Customer Contracts, Core Technology, Patents, 
and Product Trademarks as intangibles subject to amortization? Consider each of these 
four items separately.
d. HP3 uses the straight-line amortization method for intangibles subject to amortization 
and recognized $783 million of amortization during fiscal 2013. Compute the average 
total life and average age of intangibles subject to amortization for fiscal 2013.
Partial Balance Sheet for Hargon, Inc.
(all dollar amounts in millions)
(Problem 10.34)
December 31,
2013
December 31, 
2012
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,712
$ 9,235
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  398
   294
Buildings and Improvements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,776
2,485
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,243
3,584
Construction in Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,271
    958
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,688
7,321
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (2,767)
  (2,283)
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment—Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,921
  5,038
Intangibles Subject to Amortization:
 
Developed Product Technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,877
 3,077
 
Core Technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,348
1,348
 
Trade Name  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
190
190
 
Acquired Technology Rights  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
350
—
 
Other Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    454
    335
 
Total Intangibles Subject to Amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,219
4,950
Less Accumulated Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1,472)
  (1,208)
 
Total Intangibles Subject to Amortization—Net . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  3,747
  3,742
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,302
 10,495
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,106
    787
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$33,788
$29,297
EXHIBIT 10.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

414
Chapter 10 
Long-Lived Tangible and Intangible Assets
e. HP3 acquired Casio Computer Company seven years ago. Why does HP3 treat the 
Casio brand name as an intangible not subject to amortization?
f. Did HP3 appear to make a corporate acquisition during fiscal 2013? Explain.
Partial Balance Sheet for HP3
(all dollar amounts in millions)
(Problem 10.35)
October 31,
2013
October 31, 
2012
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$47,402
$48,264
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   464
   534
Buildings and Leasehold Improvements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,044
5,771
Machinery and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  9,903
  8,719
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,411
15,024
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (8,613)
  (8,161)
 
Total Land, Buildings, and Equipment—Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  7,798
  6,863
Intangibles Subject to Amortization:
Customer Contracts, Customer Lists, and Distribution Agreements. .
 3,239
2,586
 
Developed and Core Technology and Patents  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,768
1,923
 
Product Trademarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    115
    103
 
Total Intangibles Subject to Amortization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,122
4,612
Less Accumulated Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (3,465)
  (2,682)
 
Intangibles Subject to Amortization—Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,657
1,930
Intangibles Not Subject to Amortization:
 
Casio Brand Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,422
1,422
 
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 21,773
 16,853
 
Total Intangibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 25,852
 20,205
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  7,647
  6,649
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$88,699
$81,981
EXHIBIT 10.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapter 9 indicated that firms typically finance current operating assets, such as accounts 
receivable and inventories, with short-term borrowing or trade credit (delayed payments to 
suppliers). Firms use the cash received from customers within the next several months to repay 
short-term lenders and suppliers. Firms typically finance long-term assets, particularly property, 
plant, and equipment, with long-term borrowing or funds provided directly or indirectly by share-
holders. This chapter discusses the accounting for long-term borrowing arrangements (that is, 
those requiring repayment later than one year from the date of the balance sheet).
The more long-term debt in a firm’s capital structure, the greater the risk the firm will expe-
rience difficulty making the required payments when due and, therefore, the greater the risk of 
default or bankruptcy. Financial analysts use several financial statement ratios to assess risk 
related to long-term borrowing. For example, the long-term debt ratio relates the amount of long-
term debt to the amount of total financing.
Long-Term
Debt Ratio =
Long-Term Debt
Liabilities + Shareholders’ Equity
The debt-equity ratio relates long-term debt to shareholders’ equity,1 indicating the relative mix 
of long-term financing obtained from lenders versus owners.
Debt-Equity
Ratio
=
Long-Term Debt
Shareholders’ Equity
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Notes, Bonds, 
and Leases
C h a p t e r 
11
 1 In classic usage, the word equity refers to any item on the right-hand side of the balance sheet—any source of fund-
ing for a firm. Modern business usage has come to restrict the word equity to mean only shareholders’ equity, both 
contributed capital and retained earnings. Still, current usage is sufficiently diverse that you should understand the 
meaning others have in mind when they use the term equity.
1. Develop the skills to compute the issue 
price, carrying value, and fair value of 
notes and bonds payable by discount-
ing the future contractual cash flows to 
present value at the appropriate dis-
count rate.
2. Understand the effective interest 
method, and apply it to debt premium 
and discount amortization.
3. Understand the application of the fair 
value option to financial liabilities.
4. Develop an ability to distinguish 
between capital (the U.S. GAAP term) 
or finance (the IFRS term) leases and 
operating leases based on accounting 
criteria, and understand the financial 
statement effects of the distinction.
5. Develop the skills to account for capital 
or finance leases and operating leases.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

416
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
Exhibit 11.1 presents these two debt ratios, as well as the ratio of property, plant, and 
equipment to total assets, for four firms in different industries. We use these ratios to assess 
the relations among a firm’s industry economic characteristics; its use of property, plant, and 
equipment; and its use of long-term debt financing.
SA Electric SA Electric is a regulated provider of electric services (an electric utility) in 
South Africa. Property, plant, and equipment dominate SA Electric’s assets. It relies more on 
long-term debt than shareholders’ equity to finance these assets (as a debt-equity ratio exceed-
ing 100% indicates). SA Electric’s regulated status practically eliminates the risk of default or 
bankruptcy, so it faces a relatively low borrowing cost. Its production and transmission facili-
ties also serve as collateral for the debt, meaning that lenders can sell the facilities and use the 
cash proceeds to repay the debt in the event SA Electric does not do so.
Boise Cascade Boise Cascade, a United States-based company, processes wood pulp into 
paper products in fixed-asset intensive facilities. It has the second largest ratio of property, plant, 
and equipment to total assets and the second largest debt-equity ratio of the four firms. Boise 
Cascade carries higher levels of risk than an electric utility. First, because Boise Cascade is not 
regulated, market forces and not regulation set the prices for its products. Second, Boise Cas-
cade’s sales are more sensitive to changes in the level of business activity than those of an elec-
tric utility. Third, Boise Cascade has fewer assets to serve as collateral for borrowing. The higher 
risk of Boise Cascade raises its borrowing costs and decreases its reliance on debt financing.
WPP Group WPP Group is a United Kingdom-based communication services firm whose 
employees provide advertising, market research, public relations, and other services worldwide. 
Other than relatively small amounts of equipment, it owns virtually no property, plant, and 
equipment (it leases most of its office space). Of the four firms considered in this example, it 
exhibits the lowest fixed-asset intensity and the second lowest debt-equity ratio. WPP Group 
creates value from employees’ services, not from operating assets, so there is neither the need 
nor the ability to borrow long-term using property, plant, and equipment as collateral.
Intel Intel is a United States-based designer and manufacturer of semiconductors. It manu-
factures semiconductors in fixed-asset intensive plants. The moderate fraction of its total assets 
that are property, plant, and equipment results from depreciating its technology-intensive man-
ufacturing facilities over periods as short as four years. Intel has the smallest long-term debt 
and debt-equity ratios of the four firms in this example. There are at least two reasons for this 
relatively low reliance on debt financing. First, Intel is exceptionally profitable and therefore 
generates funds from operations. Second, Intel incurs substantial technology risk from product 
obsolescence, with product life cycles of less than two years. Heavy reliance on debt financing 
would add financing risk and thereby increase borrowing costs.
These examples illustrate the importance of understanding a firm’s industry and its eco-
nomic characteristics when analyzing long-term debt and assessing risk. This chapter discusses 
the recognition and measurement of long-term debt. Which obligations of a firm do U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS recognize as long-term debt? How do U.S. GAAP and IFRS measure the 
amount that firms report as debt on the balance sheet? With a few exceptions, the accounting 
for debt under U.S. GAAP and IFRS is similar. We consider notes, bonds, and leases in this 
chapter. The next section discusses notes and bonds. A later section discusses leases.
Debt Ratios for Four Firms
Firm
Long-Term 
Debt Ratio
Debt-Equity 
Ratio
Property, Plant, and 
Equipment/Total Assets
SA Electric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43.4%
193.5%
81.5%
Boise Cascade. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44.9
59.1
54.1
WPP Group. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.3
24.1
2.8
Intel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.8
5.0
36.4
EXHIBIT 11.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

417
Overview of Long-Term Debt Markets
OVERVIEW OF LONG-TERM DEBT MARKETS
This section describes debt markets to enhance understanding of the accounting for long-term 
debt discussed in later sections. Debt markets have a unique vocabulary, so be prepared to 
encounter new terms.
SOURCES OF LONG-TERM DEBT FINANCING
Firms that wish to use cash for long-term purposes, such as acquiring buildings and equipment 
or financing a business acquisition, will do one of two things:
1. Borrow from commercial banks, insurance companies, or other financial institutions.
2. Issue debt instruments such as bonds in the capital markets.
Lending agreements with commercial banks and other financial institutions often require firms 
to pledge assets as collateral. For example, a firm borrowing to finance the acquisition of equip-
ment would likely pledge the equipment as collateral. If the firm fails to maintain specified lev-
els of financial health while the loan is outstanding or does not make debt service payments 
on the loan when due, the lender has the right to seize the collateral and sell it to satisfy the 
amounts due. Common terminology refers to the financial contract underlying bank loans as a 
note, so that these loans sometimes appear on the balance sheet under the title Notes  Payable. 
Notes of business firms generally have maturity dates less than approximately 10 years and arise 
from borrowing from a single lender. Borrowing from a single lender avoids some of the report-
ing requirements of public issues of debt. No public market for the debt exists in this case, so 
the borrower could have difficulty disengaging from the borrowing arrangement prior to matu-
rity, unless the lending agreement provides for prepayment under specified conditions.
Many firms issue bonds in public debt markets to obtain long-term cash. A bond is a finan-
cial contract, similar in concept to lending agreements with banks or insurance companies, in 
which the borrower and the lender agree to certain conditions about repayment of the bonds, 
operating policies, other borrowing activities while the bonds are outstanding, and other mat-
ters. Bond indenture refers to this financial contract. Bonds appear on the balance sheet under 
the title Bonds Payable. In contrast to notes, bonds typically carry maturity dates longer than 
approximately 10 years and involve many lenders instead of a single lender. Firms classify the 
portion of bonds due within the next year as a current liability and the remaining portion as a 
noncurrent liability. Firms must also disclose a list of their long-term debt obligations in notes 
to the financial statements.
VARIETY OF BOND PROVISIONS
Bond issues vary with respect to their specific provisions. For example, particular collat-
eral might back up bonds (a secured borrowing), or firms might issue bonds based only on 
their credit worthiness as an entity (unsecured borrowing). Unsecured borrowing might carry 
senior rights or subordinated rights in the event of bankruptcy. Senior unsecured debt holders 
have a higher priority for payment in the event of bankruptcy than subordinated (junior) unse-
cured lenders.
Bonds also vary in terms of their payment provisions. The typical debenture bond pays 
interest periodically, usually every six months, during the life of the bond and repays the prin-
cipal amount borrowed at maturity. A serial bond requires periodic payments of interest plus 
a portion of the principal throughout the life of the bond. A zero coupon bond provides for no 
periodic payments of interest while the bond is outstanding; the bond requires payment of all 
principal and interest at maturity. A later section defines principal and interest more precisely.
Convertible bonds permit the holder to exchange the bonds for shares of the firm’s com-
mon stock under specified conditions. This conversion option has value because the holder can 
benefit from increases in the market value of the firm’s common stock after issuance of the 
bonds. If holders do not convert the bonds into common stock prior to maturity, the issuing 
firm repays the debt at maturity, the same as for nonconvertible bonds. We discuss convertible 
bonds more fully in Chapter 15.
Some bonds are callable, which means the issuing firm has the right to repurchase the 
bonds prior to maturity at a specified price. An issuing firm might exercise this call provision 
if interest rates decline after the initial issuance of the bonds. The firm can borrow at the lower 
interest rate and use the proceeds to finance the repurchase of the bonds initially issued.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

418
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
Investors in bonds sometimes hold a put option, meaning they can force the issuing com-
pany to repay the bonds prior to maturity under specified conditions. Investors might exercise 
this put option if interest rates increase, and investors can reinvest the cash proceeds in debt 
securities with a higher yield.
Bonds can carry either fixed interest rates or variable interest rates. Bonds with fixed interest 
rates pay interest at that fixed rate throughout the life of the bond. Bonds with variable interest 
rates pay interest at rates that change during the life of the bond. The bond indenture specifies 
the formula for the periodic calculation of the variable interest rate.
Industry economic characteristics, the financial health of a firm, and the particular provi-
sions of a bond issue combine to determine the risk of investing in the bond, which in turn 
affects the interest rate investors demand and therefore the bond’s price both at the issue date 
and later. The next section discusses the measurement of financial instruments in general. Sub-
sequent sections discuss the measurement of notes, bonds, and leases. To understand the cal-
culations illustrated in the remainder of this chapter, you will need to understand compound 
interest and its use in computing the present value of future cash flows. The Appendix at the 
back of the book discusses compound interest.
MEASUREMENT OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS: GENERAL PRINCIPLES
We use the term financial instrument to refer to a financial arrangement in which a firm con-
tracts to receive or make specified payments in the future in return for cash or other resources 
paid or received currently. Notes, bonds, and leases are financial instruments. Derivatives, 
discussed in Chapter 13, are also financial instruments. A characteristic of these examples of 
financial instruments is that they take the form of contracts that specify the means of calculat-
ing the amounts that firms will receive or pay at specified times in the future.
The accounting measurement of notes and bonds payable follows two general principles:
1. The amount borrowed initially and the market value of a note or bond at any date sub-
sequent to the initial borrowing equals the present value of the future, or remaining, cash 
flows discounted at an appropriate interest rate (discussed next).
2. The internal rate of return, sometimes called yield to maturity, is the discount rate that 
equates the future cash flows to the fair value of the instrument value at any date. Common 
terminology also refers to this rate as the market interest rate. When a financial instrument 
does not specify the internal rate of return, the investor can solve for this rate, called the 
implicit interest rate, following procedures described in the Appendix. On the issue date of 
initial issuance, the fair value will equal the initial issue proceeds—the amount borrowed. 
To understand the accounting for notes and bonds, we need two additional definitions:
■ Historical Market Interest Rate: The discount rate prevailing at the date of the initial bor-
rowing. Discounting the contractual cash flows at this rate equates the present value of 
future cash flows to the amount initially borrowed—the fair value on the initial issue date.
■ Current Market Interest Rate: The discount rate at any date subsequent to the date of 
the initial borrowing. Discounting the contractual cash flows at this rate equates the 
present value of remaining cash flows to the fair value at the subsequent measurement 
date.
Later sections of this chapter indicate that U.S. GAAP and IFRS permit firms to account 
for notes and bonds under one of two approaches:
1. Amortized Cost Use the historical market interest rate to compute the carrying value of 
notes and bonds while these obligations are outstanding and disclose in the notes to the 
financial statements the fair values of these financial instruments based on the current 
market interest rate. This approach dominates current financial reporting, so this chapter 
focuses on it.
2. Fair Value  Measure notes and bonds at fair value each period, in effect using the current 
market interest rate instead of the historical market interest rate to discount the remaining 
cash flows. The FASB and the IASB refer to this approach as the fair value option.2 A later 
section of this chapter describes the fair value option.
 2 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and 
Financial Liabilities,” 2007 (Codification Topic 825); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” 1999, revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

419
Accounting for Notes
ACCOUNTING FOR NOTES
Firms typically borrow from banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions by 
signing a note, which specifies the terms of the borrowing arrangement.
Example 1 Newsom Company borrows $125,000 from its bank to purchase land on January 
1, 2014. The firm pledges the land as collateral for the loan. Interest accrues on the unpaid bal-
ance of the loan at 12% compounded semiannually (that is, 6% each six months). The borrower 
pay $17,000 on June 30 and December 31 of each year for four and one-half years, and pay 
$16,782—the exact amount to discharge the loan—at the end of five years.3
Initial Valuation The initial valuation of this loan is the $125,000 amount borrowed. This 
amount equals the present value of the future cash payments discounted at the yield required 
by the lender, which we assume is also 12% compounded semiannually.
When the stated interest rate for a loan (6% compounded semiannually in this example) 
equals the yield required by the lender (also 6% compounded semiannually), then the amount bor-
rowed equals the principal amount of the loan (also called the face value in the case of bonds). 
The significance of this concept will become more apparent when we consider how to measure 
the carrying value of bonds.
The entries to record the loan and the purchase of land on the books of Newsom Company 
are as follows:
January 1, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
125,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
125,000
To record $125,000 cash received from bank in exchange for a note payable 
over five years with interest of 12% compounded semiannually requiring 
payments of $17,000 at the end of each six months and a final payment of 
$16,782.
January 1, 2014 
Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
125,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
125,000
To record the purchase of land for $125,000 cash.
Measurement Subsequent to the Date of the Initial Loan During the first six 
months, interest of $7,500 (= 0.06 × $125,000) accrues on the loan. The firm then makes the 
required cash payment of $17,000. The entry to record interest expense, the loan payment, and 
the reduction in the amount of the Note Payable is as follows:
June 30, 2014
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,000
To record interest expense, cash payment, and reduction in Note Payable for 
first six months.
Thus, the carrying value of the loan changes during this first six months as follows:
Balance in Note Payable on January 1, 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$125,000
Plus Interest for First Six Months: 0.06 × $125,000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,500
Less Cash Payment on June 30, 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (17,000)
Balance in Note Payable on June 30, 2014  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$115,500
 3 Example 9 in the Appendix shows the derivation of the $17,000 payment.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

420
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
The carrying value of the loan on June 30, 2014, equals the present value of the remaining 
cash flows discounted at 12% compounded semiannually.
These calculations illustrate a second important concept: The amount reported on the bal-
ance sheet throughout the life of a loan (that is, its carrying value) equals the present value of the 
remaining cash flows discounted at the historical market interest rate (12% compounded semian-
nually in this example). The current market interest rate usually differs from the historical market 
interest rate during the life of the loan. A firm that does not account for long-term notes and bonds 
using the fair value option (discussed later), uses the historical market interest rate to account for 
the loan while it is outstanding.
Amortization Schedule Exhibit 11.2 presents an amortization schedule for this loan. It 
shows interest expense and cash payments each six months and the resulting reduction in the 
carrying value of the loan during the ten periods. The interest expense equals the required yield 
(6% each six months) times the unpaid balance of the loan at the beginning of each six-month 
period. Common terminology refers to the calculations illustrated in Exhibit 11.2 for amortiz-
ing a financial instrument to its maturity value over time as the effective interest method. The 
effective interest method has the following features:
1. The note, bond, or other financial instrument will appear on the balance sheet both ini-
tially and at each subsequent date at the present value of the remaining cash flows dis-
counted at the historical market interest rate (that is, its initial yield to maturity).
2. The amount of interest expense each period equals the historical market interest rate times 
the carrying value of the financial instrument at the beginning of each period.
Amortization Schedule for $125,000 Loan, 
Repaid in Nine Semiannual Installments of $17,000 
and a Final Payment of $16,781.
Interest Rate Is 12% Compounded Semiannually 
(6% compounded each six months)4
Period
(1)
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
(2)
Interest 
Expense 
for Period
(3)
Cash Payment
(4)
Portion of 
Payment Reducing 
Principal
(5)
Balance at 
End of Period
(6)
 0  . . . .
$125,000
 1  . . . .
$125,000
$7,500
$17,000
$ 9,500
 115,500
 2  . . . .
 115,500
 6,930
 17,000
 10,070
 105,430
 3  . . . .
 105,430
 6,326
 17,000
 10,674
  94,756
 4  . . . .
  94,756
 5,685
 17,000
 11,315
  83,441
 5  . . . .
  83,441
 5,006
 17,000
 11,994
  71,448
 6  . . . .
  71,448
 4,287
 17,000
 12,713
  58,734
 7  . . . .
  58,734
 3,524
 17,000
 13,476
  45,259
 8  . . . .
  45,259
 2,716
 17,000
 14,284
  30,974
 9  . . . .
  30,974
 1,858
 17,000
 15,142
  15,832
10  . . . .
  15,832
   950
 16,782
 15,832
       0
Note: In preparing this table, we rounded numbers to the nearest dollar, but the underlying computations, in 
Excel®, used several significant digits after the decimal point.
Column (2) = Column (6) from previous period.
Column (3) =  0.06 × Column (2), except for period 10, where it is the amount such that 
Column (3) = Column (4) – Column (5).
Column (4) is given.
Column (5) = Column (4) – Column (3).
Column (6) = Column (2) – Column (5).
EXHIBIT 11.2
 4 The illustrations in this chapter use present value factors using the five significant digits in the tables.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

421
Accounting for Bonds
In this example, the carrying value of the note changes each period, increasing to reflect 
the nearer in time of all remaining cash flows and decreasing for the payment of interest and 
principal.
 PROBLEM  11.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Implicit interest rate and amortization schedule for interest-bearing note. Vera Company 
receives cash of $97,375.69 in return for a three-year $100,000 note, promising to pay 
$6,000 at the end of one year, $6,000 at the end of two years, and $106,000 at the end of 
three years.
a. Demonstrate that the required yield, or implicit interest rate, on this loan is 7% com-
pounded annually.
b. Prepare an amortization schedule for this loan similar to that in Exhibit 11.2.
ACCOUNTING FOR BONDS
Firms typically issue bonds to large numbers of debt investors in public debt markets to obtain 
cash for long-term purposes. As previously explained, the provisions of bond issues vary, 
depending on the firm’s cash needs over time and the preferences of investors in the bonds. 
Investment bankers often advise corporate borrowers who issue bonds in public debt markets.
CASH FLOW PATTERNS FOR BONDS
Bonds vary with respect to the pattern of cash payments made by the borrower to debt inves-
tors. Three common types of bonds are coupon bonds, serial bonds, and zero coupon bonds.
Example 2 Ford Motor Company issues $250 million of 8%, semiannual, 20-year coupon 
bonds. The bond indenture requires Ford to make coupon payments of $10 million (= 0.08 
× $250 million × 6/12) every six months for 20 years and to repay the $250 million princi-
pal at the end of 20 years. Common terminology refers to the $250 million as the principal or 
face value of the bond and the 8% rate as the coupon interest rate. In this case the $250 mil-
lion is also the maturity value of the bonds. The term face value refers to the principal amount 
printed on the face of the bond certificate. The principal or face value is the base for computing 
the amount of each semiannual coupon payment.5 At one time the bond certificate would have 
coupons attached, with each coupon equal to 4% times the principal amount and each dated, 
with dates six months apart. Investors would clip the predated coupons from the bond certifi-
cate each six months and deposit them in their bank accounts, just as they would deposit a 
check they had received. Although checks or electronic funds transfers have replaced coupons, 
the term coupon remains in use. Thus, the 8% coupon rate multiplied times the $250 million 
principal equals the annual cash payment of $20 million, which Ford pays in two semiannual 
installments of $10 million each.
Example 3 Chrysler Corporation issues $180 million of 15-year serial bonds. The bond 
indenture requires Chrysler to pay $10,409,418 every six months for 15 years. Each periodic 
payment includes interest plus repayment of a portion of the principal. The principal or face 
 5 Many refer to the periodic payments as interest payments. The term causes confusion because, as you will soon 
see, the amount of interest expense for a period almost never equals the amount of cash paid to lenders for that 
same period, whereas common terminology sometimes uses the word interest to refer to the expenditure (the 
coupon payment) and sometimes to refer to the expense—interest expense. We try always to use the word inter-
est only when we mean the amount of the expense, not the expenditure, when that amount differs. The periodic 
payment will always include some amount to pay interest to the lender, but not necessarily all interest accrued 
since the last payment. If the payment exceeds all interest, then the payment will discharge some of the principal 
amount. Both payment of interest and payment of principal reduce the debt, so one all-purpose term used for 
the payment is debt service payments.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

422
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
value of this bond is $180 million. This bond does not specify a stated interest rate, but each 
payment includes implicit interest. We discuss serial bonds more fully later in this chapter.
Example 4 General Motors Corporation issues $300 million of 10-year zero coupon bonds. 
These bonds do not require periodic interest payments. Instead the $300 million maturity value 
includes both principal and interest. Although these bonds do not state an interest rate, there 
is an implicit interest rate embedded in the maturity value. We consider zero coupon bonds in 
greater depth later in this chapter.
REVIEW OF BOND TERMINOLOGY
Let’s take a moment to review:
1. The bond contract specifies the basis for computing the future cash flows for that bond 
issue. Identifying those cash flows is the starting point to account for the bond both ini-
tially and at each subsequent measurement date.
2. Terminology with respect to bonds includes the following:
a. Face Value: The amount printed on the face of the bond certificate that serves as the 
basis for computing periodic coupon payments on coupon bonds.6 The face value equals 
the maturity value on coupon bonds and on zero coupon bonds but not on serial bonds.
b. Principal: The same as face value on coupon bonds and serial bonds but not on zero 
coupon bonds.
c. Maturity Value: The amount paid by the issuer at the maturity date of bonds. The 
maturity value equals the face value on coupon bonds and on zero coupon bonds.
d. Fair Value (sometimes called market value): The amount at which bonds sell in the mar-
ket either at date of issue or at any subsequent date while the bonds are outstanding.
e. Coupon Rate: The rate stated in the bond contract that when multiplied times the face 
value or principal amount of coupon bonds equals the required periodic cash payment. 
The stated coupon rate is always an annual rate. The issuer might make payments in 
more than one installment during the year, typically semiannually. For example, if the 
coupon rate is 6% payable semiannually, the issuer pays interest of 3% every six months. 
The frequency of payment affects the yield on the bond and the amortization calcula-
tions. The coupon rate need not equal the historical market interest rate, a possibility we 
discuss more fully later in the chapter.
f. Historical Market Interest Rate or Initial Yield to Maturity: The interest rate that dis-
counts all future cash flows such that their present value equals the initial issue price of 
the bond.
g. Current Market Interest Rate: The interest rate that discounts all future cash flows such 
that their present value equals the fair value of the bond.
INITIAL MEASUREMENT OF BONDS
The initial issue price of a bond depends on two factors:
1. The promised cash payments indicated in the bond contract as discussed in the preceding 
section.
2. The yield to maturity required by investors to induce them to purchase the bonds, which 
the next section discusses and illustrates.
Example 2 (continued) The bonds in Example 2 require Ford to pay $10 million at the end 
of every six months and to repay the $250 million principal at the end of 20 years. The time 
line (see Appendix for description of time lines) for this semiannual coupon bond covers 40 six-
month periods as depicted in the following graph (amounts in millions):
 6 Common terminology also refers to the face value of bonds as par value. To reduce ambiguity, we use face value 
in reference to bonds and par value in reference to common and preferred shares in this book.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

423
Accounting for Bonds
$250
$10
$10
$10
$10
. . . 
$10
. . .
End of Period
0
x
↑
1
2
3
4
. . . 
40
Assume that the market requires a yield to maturity for the bonds of Ford of 8% com-
pounded semiannually. Thus, the initial issue price for these bonds is $250 million, computed as 
follows (calculations based on factors from Appendix Table 4 for annuity and Appendix Table 2 
for single amount and then rounded to the nearest thousand dollars):
Present Value of an Annuity of $10 million for 40 Periods at 
 
4% per Period: $10 million × 19.79277  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$197,927,700
Present Value of $250 million for 40 Periods at 4% per Period:
 
$250 million × 0.20829 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    52,072,500
Initial Issue Price (rounded to $250 million in the text)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$250,000,200
Note the concept described earlier in Example 1: When the coupon rate equals the histori-
cal market interest rate or initial yield to maturity, then the initial issue price equals the face 
value of the bonds.
Example 3 (continued) Now consider the valuation of the serial bonds of Chrysler. Chrys-
ler must pay $10,409,418 at the end of every six months for 15 years. The time line is as follows 
(amounts in millions):
$10.4
$10.4
$10.4
$10.4
. . . 
$10.4
. . .
End of Period
0
x
↑
1
2
3
4
. . . 
30
Assume that the market requires a yield to maturity of 8% compounded semiannually. The 
computation of the initial issue price is as follows:
Present Value of an Annuity (Appendix Table 4) of $10,409,418 for 30 Periods at 
 
4% per Period: $10,409,418 × 17.29203, approximately  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$180,000,000
An initial issue price equal to the face value of the bonds means that the implicit interest 
rate equals the yield to maturity.
Example 4 (continued) The bonds of General Motors require a payment of $300 million at 
the end of 10 years. The time line is as follows (amounts in millions):
. . . 
$300
. . .
End of Period
0
x
↑
1
2
3
4
. . . 
10
Assume that, like Ford and Chrysler, the market requires the bonds of General Motors to 
yield 8% compounded semiannually. The computation of the initial issue price is as follows:
Present Value of $300 million for 20 Periods (Appendix Table 4) at 
 
4% per Period: $300 million × 0.45639  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$136,917,000
The face value and maturity value of the bonds exceed the issue price. The difference 
between the face value and the present value of $163,083,000 (= $300,000,000 – $136,917,000) 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

424
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
represents interest on the $136,917,000 amount borrowed. To see this, note that the future 
value of $136,917,000 for 20 periods at 4% is approximately $300,000,000 (= $136,917,000 
× 2.19112). Bond investors pay General Motors $136,917,000 today for the right to receive 
$300,000,000 ten years from today. This calculation demonstrates that investors in zero coupon 
bonds earn interest on the amounts invested, but they receive it all at maturity. The interest rate 
on zero coupon bonds is an implicit interest rate, because it is implied by the difference between 
the face amount paid at maturity and the initial issue price.
 PROBLEM  11.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Amortization Schedule for Zero Coupon Bonds
a. Prepare an amortization schedule such as that in Exhibit 11.2 for the zero coupon 
bond issue in Example 4.
b. Why does the amount of the zero coupon bond increase to $300 million over the 
10-year period?
Issue Price Differs from Face Value The coupon rate on a bond need not equal the 
yield to maturity that debt investors require on the date of a new bond issue. Preparing a new 
bond issue for the market requires months of effort. Market interest rates will likely change 
between the time the issuing firm specifies the coupon rate in the bond contract (even if that 
is the day before the actual issue) and in other documents and the day when the firm issues the 
bond. The difference in rates is usually small (except for zero coupon bonds), but the account-
ing for the bond must address the differences. When the coupon rate differs from the market-
required yield to maturity, the issue price will differ from the face value of the bonds. The 
following generalizations apply:
1. When the market-required yield to maturity exceeds the coupon rate, the bonds initially sell 
for less than face value, or a discount to face value.
2. When the market-required yield to maturity is less than the coupon rate, the bonds initially 
sell for more than face value, or a premium to face value.
For example, assume that the market-required yield to maturity of the bonds of Ford is 
10% compounded semiannually. The initial issue price is as follows:
Present Value of an Annuity of $10 million for 40 Periods at 
 
5% per Period: $10 million × 17.15909  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$171,590,900
Present Value of $250 million for 40 Periods at 5% per Period:
 
$250 × 0.14205  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  35,512,500
Initial Issue Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$207,103,400
If lenders paid the $250 million face value for Ford’s bonds, they would realize a yield to 
maturity of 8%. Lenders who require a yield of 10% would not pay $250 million because the 
value of the promised payments discounted at 10% is only $207,103,400. The lack of inves-
tor demand for the bonds priced at their face value results in a decline in the market price to 
$207,103,400, at which price the bonds provide the required yield to maturity of 10% com-
pounded semiannually. The difference between the $207,103,400 initial issue price and the 
$250,000,000 maturity value represents additional interest that Ford pays at maturity. Thus, 
total interest expense on this bond equals $442,897,600 [= ($10 million × 40) + ($250,000,000 
– $207,103,400)]. The cash flows promised to investors do not change; the bond contract speci-
fies them. The only factor that changes is the required yield to maturity and therefore the initial 
issue price.
This example shows that when the yield that investors require (10% in this example) exceeds 
the stated coupon rate (8%), the bonds sell at a discount to face value. The difference between 
the proceeds and the face value compensates investors for the difference in interest rates. A zero 
coupon bond, such as that for General Motors in Example 4, is an extreme example of a bond 
issued at a discount. The coupon rate is zero, so the difference between the required yield and 
the coupon rate equals the required yield.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

425
Accounting for Bonds
Let’s examine the opposite case when the coupon rate exceeds the yield that investors 
require. Assume now that bond investors require a return of 6% compounded semiannually on 
Ford’s bonds. The computation of the initial issue price is as follows:
Present Value of an Annuity of $10 million for 40 Periods at 
 
3% per Period: $10 million × 23.11477  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$231,147,700
Present Value of $250 million for 40 Periods at 3% per Period:
 
$250 × 0.30656  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  76,640,000
Initial Issue Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$307,787,700
If investors paid $250 million for this bond issue, they would realize a yield to maturity 
of 8% compounded semiannually. If investors require a yield of 6% compounded semiannu-
ally, competition among investors to purchase the bonds would force the market price of the 
bonds up to $307,787,700. At this point, the yield to maturity will equal the 6% compounded 
semiannually required by the market. The difference between the $307,787,700 cash proceeds at 
issuance and the $250,000,000 paid at maturity represents a reduction in interest expense. Thus, 
total interest expense over the life of the bonds equals $342,213,000 [= ($10 million × 40) – 
($307,787,700 – $250,000,000)]. As before, the contractual cash flows do not change; only the 
yield required by the market changes and thereby the initial issue price.
The presence of a discount or premium by itself indicates nothing about the credit risk of 
the borrower. A solid firm, such as General Electric, with a small credit risk that would enable 
it to borrow funds at 6%, might issue 5% bonds that would sell at a discount. In contrast, a firm 
with a lower credit standing that requires it to pay 10% on loans might issue 12% bonds that 
would sell at a premium. As a practical matter, one would not expect to encounter coupon rates 
that differ by 1 or 2 percentage points (referred to as 100 or 200 basis points) from the yield to 
maturity (except in the case of zero coupon bonds). Thus, discounts and premiums encoun-
tered in practice seldom differ from the face value as much as these examples indicate.
The next examples derive the initial issue proceeds for a $100,000 face value bond with 12% 
semiannual coupons, maturing five years from initial issue.
Issued at Par The Macaulay Corporation issues $100,000 face value of 12% semian-
nual coupon debenture bonds on July 1, Year 1. Macaulay must repay the principal amount 
five years later, on July 1, Year 6. Macaulay owes periodic payments (coupons) on January 1 
and July 1 of each year. The coupon payments promised at each payment date total $6,000. 
Figure  11.1 presents a time line for the two sets of cash flows associated with this bond. Assume 
that the market rate of interest for Macaulay on July 1, Year 1, is 12 percent compounded semi-
annually. Then, the calculation of the loan proceeds would be as follows:
(a) Present Value of $100,000 to Be Paid at the End of Five Years. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 55,839
 
 
(Appendix Table 2 shows the present value of $1 to be paid in 10 periods at 
 
 
6% per period to be $0.55839; $100,000 × 0.55839 = $55,839.)
(b) Present Value of $6,000 to Be Paid Each Six Months for Five Years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  44,161
 
 
(Appendix Table 4 shows the present value of an ordinary annuity of $1 per period for 
 
 
10 periods discounted at 6% to be $7.36009; $6,000 × 7.36009 = $44,161.)
Total Proceeds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$100,000
Issued at Less Than Par Assume that Macaulay Corporation issued these same bonds 
at a price to yield 14% compounded semiannually. The cash flows promised after July 1, Year 
1, associated with these bonds (periodic payments plus repayment of principal) equal those in 
the time line in Figure 11.1. The market discounts these future cash flows to their present value 
using a 14% discount rate compounded semiannually. The calculation of the issue proceeds 
(that is, initial market price) follows:
(a) Present Value of $100,000 to Be Paid at the End of Five Years   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$50,835
 
 
(Present value of $1 to be paid in 10 periods at 7% per period is $0.50835; 
 
 
$100,000 × 0.50835 = $50,835.)
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

426
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
(b) Present Value of $6,000 to Be Paid Each Six Months for Five Years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 42,141
 
 
(Present value of an ordinary annuity of $1 per period for 10 periods discounted 
 
 
at 7% per period = $7.02358; $6,000 × 7.02358 = $42,141.)
Total Proceeds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$92,976
Assume Macaulay issues these bonds at 92.98 for $92,980. This implies a market yield of 
slightly less than 14% compounded semiannually.
Issued at More Than Par Assume that Macaulay Corporation issued the bonds at a 
price to yield 10% compounded semiannually. The cash flows promised after July 1, Year 1, 
again equal those in Figure 11.1. The market discounts these future cash flows at 10% com-
pounded semiannually. The calculation of the proceeds follows:
(a) Value of $100,000 to Be Paid at the End of Five Years  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 61,391
 
 
(Present value of $1 to be paid in 10 periods at 5% per period is $0.61391; 
 
 
$100,000 × 0.61391 = $61,391.)
(b) Present Value of $6,000 to Be Paid Each Six Months for Five Years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  46,330
 
 
(Present value of an ordinary annuity of $1 per period for 10 periods, discounted 
 
 
at 5% per period = $7.72173; $6,000 × 7.72173 = $46,330.)
Total Proceeds. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$107,721
Assume Macaulay issues these bonds at 107.72 (that is, 107.72% of par) for $107,720. The 
price would imply a market yield of slightly more than 10% compounded semiannually.
The following generalizations describe bond proceeds at the date of issuance and their fair 
value at any subsequent date:
1. When the market interest rate equals the coupon rate, the proceeds or later fair value will 
equal par.
2. When the market interest rate exceeds the coupon rate, the proceeds or later fair value will 
be less than par.
3. When the market interest rate is less than the coupon rate, the proceeds or later fair value 
will exceed par.
 PROBLEM  11.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Calculating the issue price of bonds. Engel Corporation issues $1,000,000 face value bonds 
on January 1, Year 1. The bonds carry a 10% coupon rate, payable in two installments on 
June 30 and December 31 each year. The bonds mature on December 31, Year 10.
Compute the issue price of these bonds assuming that the market requires the following 
yields:
a. 8% compounded semiannually.
b. 10% compounded semiannually.
c. 12% compounded semiannually.
Time Line for Five-Year Semiannual Coupon Bonds with 12 Percent 
Annual Coupons (100,000 par value, issued at par)
FIGURE 11.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

427
Accounting for Bonds
ACCOUNTING FOR BONDS IN THE PERIODS AFTER ISSUANCE
Bonds Issued at Par The following illustrates bonds issued at par. We use the data pre-
sented in the previous sections for the Macaulay Corporation bonds issued at par, and we 
assume that the firm closes its books semiannually on June 30 and December 31. The entry at 
the time of issue follows:
7/1/Year 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000 
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
$100,000 of 12%, five-year, semiannual coupon bonds issued at par.
The borrower would recognize interest at the end of the accounting period and on the pay-
ment dates. Entries through January 1, Year 2, would be as follows:
12/31/Year 1
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record interest expense for six months.
1/1/Year 2
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record payment of six months’ interest.
Bonds Issued at Less Than Par Assume the data presented above where the Macaulay 
Corporation issued 12%, $100,000-par value, five-year bonds to yield 14% compounded semi-
annually. Earlier, we derived the issue price to be $92,976. The journal entry at issue would be 
as follows:
7/1/Year 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
92,976 
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
92,976
The issuance of these bonds for $92,976, instead of for the $100,000 par value, indicates 
that lenders demand more than 12% from Macaulay Corporation, the borrower. At a price of 
$92,976, those who invest in the bonds will earn the 14% return they require. The return will 
comprise 10 coupon payments of $6,000 each over the next five years plus $7,024 (= $100,000 – 
$92,976) as part of the payment at maturity.
For Macaulay Corporation, the total interest expense over the life of the bonds will equal 
$67,024 (= periodic payments totaling $60,000 plus $7,024 paid at maturity). The accounting 
for these payments allocates the total interest expense of $67,024 to the periods of the loan 
using the effective interest method, explained next. Following the next discussion will be easier 
if you refer to Exhibit 11.3.
Interest Expense Under the Effective Interest Method Under the effective 
 interest method, interest expense each period equals the market interest rate at the time the firm 
initially issued the bonds (14% compounded semiannually, 7% per six months, in this exam-
ple) multiplied by the book value of the liability at the beginning of the interest period. For 
example, interest expense for the period from July 1, Year 1, to December 31, Year 1, the first 
six-month period, is $6,508 (= 0.07 × $92,976). The bond indenture provides that the borrower 
pays only $6,000 (= 0.06 × $100,000) on January 1, Year 2, an amount equal to the coupon 
rate times the par value of the bonds. The difference between the interest expense of $6,508 and 
the interest payable of $6,000 increases the book value of the bond. The borrower will pay this 
amount as part of the principal payment at maturity. The journal entry made on December 31, 
Year 1, to recognize interest for the last six months of Year 1 follows:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

428
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
12/31/Year 1
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,508 
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
508
To recognize interest expense for six months.
Interest Payable l appears as a current liability on the balance sheet at the end of Year 1. 
Debenture Bonds Payable of $93,484 (= $92,976 + $508) appears on the balance sheet as a 
noncurrent liability.
On January 1, Year 2, the borrower makes the first periodic cash payment.
1/1/Year 2
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record payment of interest for six months.
Effective Interest Amortization Schedule for $100,000 of 12%, 
Semiannual Coupon, Five-Year Bonds Issued for 92.976% of 
Par to Yield 14%, Interest Compounded Semiannually
Semiannual Journal Entry
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Amount in Column (3)
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
Amount in Column (4)
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
Amount in Column (5)
Period 
(6-Month 
Intervals)
(1) 
Liability 
at Start 
of Period
(2) 
Effective 
Interest: 
7% per 
Period
(3) 
Coupon 
Rate: 
6% of Par
(4) 
Increase in 
Recorded 
Book Value 
of Liability
(5)
Liability 
at End of 
Period
(6)
 0   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 92,976
 1   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$92,976 
$ 6,508 
$ 6,000 
$  508 
  93,484
 2   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 93,484 
  6,544 
  6,000 
   544 
  94,028
 3   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 94,028 
  6,582 
  6,000 
   582 
  94,610
 4   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 94,610 
  6,623 
  6,000 
   623 
  95,233
 5   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 95,233 
  6,666 
  6,000 
   666 
  95,899
 6   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 95,899 
  6,713 
  6,000 
   713 
  96,612
 7   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 96,612 
  6,763 
  6,000 
   763 
  97,375
 8   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 97,375 
  6,816 
  6,000 
   816 
  98,191
 9   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 98,191 
  6,873 
  6,000 
   873 
  99,064
10   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 99,064 
  6,936
  6,000
   936
 100,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . 
$67,024
$60,000
$7,024
Note: In preparing this table, we rounded calculations to the nearest dollar.
Column (2) = column (6) from previous period.
Column (3)  = 0.07 × column (2), except for period 10, where it is a plug.
Column (4) is given.
Column (5)  = column (3) − column (4), except for period 10, where it is a plug.
Column (6)  = column (2) + column (5).
EXHIBIT 11.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

429
Accounting for Bonds
Interest expense for the second six months (from January 1, Year 2, through June 30, Year 
2) is $6,544 (= 0.07 × $93,484). It exceeds the $6,508 for the first six months because the 
recorded book value of the liability at the beginning of the second six months has grown. The 
journal entry on June 30, Year 2, to record interest expense follows:
6/30/Year 2
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,544 
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
544
To recognize interest expense for six months.
An amortization schedule for these bonds over their five-year life appears in Exhibit 11.3. 
Column (3) shows the periodic interest expense, and column (6) shows the book value that 
appears on the balance sheet at the end of each period.
The effective interest method of recognizing interest expense on a bond has the following 
financial statement effects:
1. Interest expense equals a constant percentage of the recorded liability at the beginning of 
each interest period. This percentage equals the market interest rate for these bonds when 
the borrower issued them. When the borrower issues bonds for less than par value, the dol-
lar amount of interest expense increases each period as the recorded carrying value amount 
increases.
2. On the balance sheet at the end of each period, the bonds appear at the present value of 
the remaining cash outflows discounted at the market interest rate measured when the bor-
rower initially issued the bonds. For example, on July 1, Year 2, just after the borrower has 
made a coupon payment, the remaining cash payments have present value computed as 
follows:
(a) Present Value of $100,000 to Be Paid at the End of Four Years  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$58,201
 
 
(Appendix Table 2 shows the present value of $1 to be paid at the end of eight 
 
 
periods discounted at 7% to be $0.58201; $100,000 × 0.58201 = $58,201.)
(b) Present Value of Eight Remaining Semiannual Interest Payments Discounted 
 
 
at 14% Compounded Semiannually  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 35,827
 
 
(Appendix Table 4 shows the present value of an ordinary annuity of $1 per period for 
 
 
eight periods discounted at 7% to be $5.97130; $6,000 × 5.97130 = $35,827.)
Total Present Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$94,028
The amount $94,028 appears in column (6) of Exhibit 11.3 for the liability at the end of the 
second six-month period.
Bonds Issued at More Than Par The following discussion illustrates bonds issued 
at more than par. Assume the data presented where the Macaulay Corporation issued 12%, 
$100,000 par value, five-year bonds to yield approximately 10% compounded semiannually. The 
issue price, derived previously, was $107,721. The journal entry at the time of issue follows:
7/1/Year 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
107,721
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
107,721
The firm borrows $107,721. The issuance of these bonds for $107,721, instead of the 
$100,000 par value, indicates that 12% exceeds the interest rate investors (lenders) demand. 
Their return comprises 10 coupon payments of $6,000 each over the next five years reduced by 
the $7,721 (= $107,721 − $100,000) paid as part of initial amount transferred to the borrower 
but not repaid at maturity.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

430
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
Effective Interest Amortization Schedule for $100,000 of 12%, 
Semiannual Coupon, Five-Year Bonds Issued for 107.721% of 
Par to Yield 10%, Compounded Semiannually
Semiannual Journal Entry
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Amount in Column (3)
Debenture Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Amount in Column (5)
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
Amount in Column (4)
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−col(4)
−col(5)
−col(3)
IncSt → RE
Period 
(6-Month 
Intervals)
(1) 
Liability 
at Start 
of Period
(2) 
Effective 
Interest: 
5% per 
Period
(3) 
Coupon 
Rate: 
6% of Par
(4) 
Decrease in 
Recorded 
Book Value 
of Liability
(5)
Liability 
at End of 
Period
(6)
 0  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$107,721
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$107,721 
$ 5,386 
$ 6,000 
$  614 
 107,107
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 107,107 
  5,355 
  6,000 
   645 
 106,462
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 106,462 
  5,323 
  6,000 
   677 
 105,785
 4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 105,785 
  5,289 
  6,000 
   711
 105,074
 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 105,074 
  5,245 
  6,000 
   746 
 104,328
 6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 104,328 
  5,216 
  6,000 
   784 
 103,544
 7  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 103,544 
  5,177 
  6,000 
   823 
 102,721
 8  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 102,721 
  5,136 
  6,000 
   864 
 101,857
 9  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 101,857 
  5,093 
  6,000 
   907 
 100,950
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,950 
  5,050
  6,000
   950
 100,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . 
$52,279
$60,000
$7,721
Note: In preparing this table, we rounded calculations to the nearest dollar.
Column (2) = column (6) from previous period.
Column (3) = 0.05 × column (2), except for period 10, where it is a plug.
Column (4) is given.
Column (5) = column (4) − column (3), except for period 10, where it is a plug.
Column (6) = column (2) − column (5).
EXHIBIT 11.4
For Macaulay Corporation, the total interest expense over the life of the bonds equals 
$52,279 (= periodic payments totaling $60,000 less $7,721 received at the time of original 
issue but not repaid at maturity). Following the next discussion will be easier if you refer to 
Exhibit 11.4.
Interest Expense Under the Effective Interest Method Under the effective inter-
est method, interest expense each period equals the market interest rate at the time the firm 
initially issued the bonds (10% compounded semiannually, equals 5% per six months, in this 
example), multiplied by the recorded book value of the liability at the beginning of the interest 
period. For example, interest expense for the period from July 1, Year 1, to December 31, Year 
1, the first six-month period, is $5,386 (= 0.05 × $107,721). The bond indenture requires the 
borrower to pay $6,000 (= 0.06 × $100,000) on January 1, Year 2. This amount equals the cou-
pon rate times the face value of the bonds. The difference between the payment of $6,000 and 
the interest expense of $5,386 reduces the amount of the liability. The journal entry made on 
December 31, Year 1, to recognize interest for the last six months of Year 1 follows:
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

431
Accounting for Bonds
12/31/Year 1
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,386 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
614
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 To recognize interest expense for six months.
Interest Payable appears as a current liability on the balance sheet at the end of Year 1. 
Debenture Bonds Payable has a new balance of $107,107 (= $107,721 −  $614), which appears 
as a noncurrent liability.
On January 1, Year 2, the borrower makes the first periodic cash payment and the following 
entry:
1/1/Year 2
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record payment of interest for six months.
Interest expense for the second six months (from January 1, Year 2, through June 30, Year 
2) equals $5,355 (= 0.05 × $107,107). Because the amount of the liability has declined from the 
beginning of the preceding period to the beginning of the current period, interest expense for 
the period declines from $5,386 for the first six months, and the borrower records it as follows:
6/30/Year 2
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,355 
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
645 
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To recognize interest expense for six months.
An amortization schedule for these bonds over their five-year life appears in Exhibit 11.4. 
Column (3) shows the periodic interest expense, and column (6) shows the book value that 
appears on the balance sheet at the end of the period.
The effective interest method of recognizing interest expense on a bond has the following 
financial statement effects:
1. Interest expense on the income statement equals a constant percentage of the recorded 
liability at the beginning of each interest period. This percentage equals the market interest 
rate when the borrower first issued the bonds. When the borrower issues bonds for more 
than par value, the dollar amount of interest expense will decrease each period as the 
unpaid liability decreases to the amount to be paid at maturity.
2. On the balance sheet at the end of each period, the bonds will appear at the present value 
of the remaining cash flows discounted at the market interest rate when the borrower ini-
tially issued the bonds.
 PROBLEM  11.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Preparing journal entries to account for bonds. Refer to Problem 11.3 for Self-Study. 
Prepare the journal entries on January 1, June 30, and December 31, Year 1, to account 
for the bonds, assuming each of the following market-required interest rates at the time 
the firm issued the bonds:
a. 8% compounded semiannually.
b. 10% compounded semiannually.
c. 12% compounded semiannually.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

432
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
RETIREMENT OF DEBT
Many bonds remain outstanding until the stated maturity date. Refer to Exhibit 11.3, where 
Macaulay Corporation issued 12% coupon bonds to yield 14%. The company pays the final 
coupon, $6,000, and the face amount, $100,000, on the stated maturity date. The entries are as 
follows:
7/1/Year 6
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,936 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
936
See row for Period 10 of Exhibit 11.3.
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
 To record retirement at maturity of bonds.
Retirement Before Maturity A firm sometimes repurchases its own bonds from inves-
tors before maturity. Because of changes in market interest rates, the purchase price (that is, the 
fair value of the bonds when they are repurchased) will seldom equal the balance sheet carrying 
value of the bonds. Assume that Macaulay Corporation originally issued its 12% coupon bonds 
to yield 14% compounded semiannually. Assume that three years later, on June 30, Year 4, mar-
ket interest rates have increased so that the market currently requires Macaulay Corporation to 
pay a 15% interest rate. We compute, but do not show the computations here, that the fair value 
of 12% bonds with two years until maturity is 94.9760% of par when the current interest rate is 
15% compounded semiannually.
Accounting principles and practices do not constrain the pricing of bonds in the market-
place. Even though Macaulay Corporation shows Debenture Bonds Payable on the balance 
sheet at $96,612 (see row for Period 6 of Exhibit 11.3), the marketplace puts a price of only 
$94,976 on the bond issue. From the point of view of investors, these bonds are the same as 
two-year bonds issued on June 30, Year 4, at an effective yield of 15%, so they carry a discount 
of $5,024 (= $100,000 – $94,976).
If on June 30, Year 4, Macaulay Corporation purchased $10,000 of par value of its own 
bonds, it would pay $9,498 (= 0.94976 × $10,000) for those bonds, which have a book value of 
$9,661. Macaulay would make the following journal entries at the time of purchase:
6/30/Year 4
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,713 
 
Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
 
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
713
See row for Period 6 of Exhibit 11.3.
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To record payment of coupons, as usual.
Debenture Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,661 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,498
 
Gain on Retirement of Bonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
163
To record purchase of bonds for less than the balance sheet carrying value. 
The gain is the difference between the purchase price and the balance sheet 
carrying value.
The gain on bond retirement arises because the firm can extinguish a liability recorded at 
$9,661, by paying a smaller amount, $9,498. The borrower enjoyed this gain as interest rates 
increased between Year 1 and Year 4. Historical cost accounting reports the gain as earned 
in the period when the borrower realizes it—that is, in the period when the borrower retires 
the bonds. This phenomenon parallels the economic events that occur when a firm invests in 
land, holds the land as its value increases, sells the land in a subsequent year, and reports all the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

433
Fair Value Option
gain in the year of sale. The phenomenon results from the accounting convention of recording 
amounts at historical cost and not recording changes in the fair values until the firm realizes 
those changes in arm’s-length transactions with outsiders.
DISCLOSURES OF CARRYING AND FAIR VALUES OF DEBT
Authoritative guidance requires firms that account for notes and bonds using the historical 
market interest rate to report the carrying values, or book values, on the balance sheet and to 
disclose the fair values of these notes and bonds in notes to the financial statements.7 The fair 
value of long-term debt is the amount the firm would have to pay to repurchase the debt in an 
orderly market transaction on the measurement date, typically the balance sheet date. The fair 
value of bonds traded in an active market is the market price of the bonds on that date. The 
fair value of bonds not actively traded is the present value of the contractual cash payments 
discounted at the interest rate a lender would require on the measurement date.
FAIR VALUE OPTION
An earlier section indicated that U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow firms to account for cer-
tain financial assets and certain financial liabilities, including notes and bonds, using either 
(1)  amortized cost, with measurements based on the historical market interest rate, as illus-
trated in previous sections of this chapter, or (2) fair value, with measurements based on cur-
rent market conditions, including the current market interest rate.8 Chapter 3 introduced fair 
value measurement. This section introduces certain implications of measuring financial assets 
and financial liabilities at their fair values on the balance sheet and recognizing the unrealized 
changes in fair values (often referred to as “unrealized gains and losses”) on the income state-
ment. This discussion of the fair value option applies to other items discussed in later chapters 
as well, including investments in debt and equity securities and derivatives in Chapter 13.
Authoritative guidance has taken the position that measurements of financial assets and 
financial liabilities at fair value provide more relevant and reliable information than cost-based 
measurements. Accounting for notes and bonds using the historical market interest rate under 
the amortized cost approach is a cost-based approach. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to 
report certain financial instruments related to hedging activities at fair value,9 a topic discussed 
in Chapter 13. U. S. GAAP and IFRS permit but do not require fair value measurement for 
qualifying financial assets and financial liabilities, perhaps as an interim step toward reporting 
all financial instruments at fair value.
Firms can choose between fair value measurement and the amortized cost approach based 
on historical market interest rates on a case-by-case (instrument-by-instrument) basis for quali-
fying financial instruments. Firms make this choice when they first adopt the FASB Statement 
No. 159 or IAS 39 or when they subsequently acquire a financial asset or incur a financial lia-
bility. The choice to use the fair value option is generally irrevocable.
Statement No. 15710 (Codification Topic 820) and IFRS 13 set forth the requirements for 
measuring fair values, when authoritative guidance permits or requires items to be measured at 
fair value. Regardless of whether a firm uses fair value or amortized cost (historical cost) to mea-
sure bonds on its balance sheet, and regardless of the methods the firm uses to record expense, 
gain, and loss, the total effect on income over the life of a bond issue depends solely on the cash 
 7 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 107, “Disclosures about Fair Value of Financial 
Instruments,” 1991 (Codification Topic 825); Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157, “Fair Value 
Measurements,” 2006 (Codification Topic 820); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 7, “Financial 
Instruments: Disclosures,” 2005.
8 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and 
Financial Liabilities,” 2007 (Codification Topic 825); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” 1999, revised 2003.
9 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and 
Hedging Activities,” 1998 (Codification Topic 815); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement.”
10 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157, “Fair Value Measurements,” 2006 (Codification 
Topic 820); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 13, “Fair Value Measurement,” 2011. IFRS 13 is 
effective starting January 1, 2013. The guidance in these two standards is similar.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

434
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
flows related to the bond issue. The firm issuing the bonds will collect cash from the lenders. It 
will, over time, make payments for periodic obligations, for example, coupon payments and a 
final payment at maturity or when it buys back the bonds via repurchase. Total expense over the 
life of the bond issue will be the difference between the cash paid out for debt service payments 
and the cash collected from the lenders. If the cash received from the lenders exceeds the total 
debt service payments, then the borrowing firm will have a gain from issuing the bonds. One of 
the questions at the end of the chapter asks you to think about how this can happen.
UNDERLYING CONCEPTS FOR FAIR VALUE OPTION
Fair value is the amount a firm would receive if it sold an asset or would pay if it transferred, 
or settled, a liability in an orderly transaction with a market participant at the measurement 
date. Measuring fair value rests on the assumption that the transaction would occur in the 
principal market for the asset or liability or, in the absence of a principal market, in the most 
advantageous market from the viewpoint of the reporting entity. Thus, a firm that normally 
obtains and repays long-term debt in public capital markets would measure fair value based on 
the amount it would pay to repay bonds in those markets.
Measuring fair value also rests on the assumption that the market participants in the prin-
cipal (or most advantageous) market are independent of the reporting entity, knowledgeable 
about the asset or liability, and willing and able to engage in a transaction with the report-
ing entity. Fair value in financial reporting reflects assumptions that market participants, as 
opposed to the reporting entity, would make about the best use of a financial asset or the best 
terms for settling a financial liability.
Inputs to measuring fair value fall into three categories:
1. Level 1: Observable market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the 
reporting entity is able to access at the measurement date.
2. Level 2: Observable inputs other than market prices within Level 1. This category might 
include prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets or market prices for identical 
assets or liability in markets that are not active. This category also includes observable fac-
tors that would be of particular relevance in using present values of cash flows to measure 
fair value, including interest rates, yield curves, foreign exchange rates, credit ratings, and 
default rates.
3. Level 3: Unobservable inputs reflecting the reporting entity’s own assumptions about the 
assumptions market participants would use in pricing an asset or settling a liability.
Firms should use Level 1 inputs if available to measure fair value, then Level 2 inputs, and 
finally Level 3 inputs.11
Because the fair value option offers a free choice between measurement at fair value and 
measurement at amortized cost for qualifying instruments, firms could report some financial 
instruments using historical market interest rates (amortized cost measurement) and some 
using fair values. Disclosure requirements attempt to provide sufficient information to enable 
the user of the financial statements to understand the effect of this mixture of accounting 
measurements.
A firm must identify the financial assets and financial liabilities on the balance sheet for 
which it used the fair value option and disclose the reasons for choosing to measure those items 
at fair value.
ACCOUNTING FOR LEASES
Authors’ Note. As this book goes to press, the FASB and IASB have proposed changes to the 
authoritative guidance for accounting for leases, including both lessor and lessee accounting. 
This textbook does not consider lessor accounting.
11 For a discussion of the difficulties firms encounter in measuring fair values using Level 2 and Level 3 inputs, 
see Securities and Exchange Commission, “Report and Recommendations Pursuant to Section 133 of the Emer-
gency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: Study on Mark-to-Market Accounting.”
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

435
Accounting for Leases
The current authoritative guidance for accounting for leases distinguishes between oper-
ating leases and capital leases (the IFRS term is finance leases). This textbook describes the 
accounting for both operating leases and capital (finance) leases. The FASB and IASB propos-
als would eliminate this distinction and would require that lessees account for most leases using 
an approach that is similar to the currently required accounting for capital leases. In this sec-
tion, we refer to the old rules, to mean those in effect as we write and, where appropriate, the 
proposed rules to refer to those proposed by the IASB and FASB.
An alternative to borrowing cash to purchase buildings, equipment, and certain other assets 
is signing a contract to lease (that is rent) the property from its owner, the lessor. Leases vary in 
their characteristics but all convey to the lessee the right to use an asset. U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
provide for two methods of accounting for long-term leases: the operating lease method and the 
capital or finance lease method.12 Under the capital lease method, the lessee records both the 
right to use leased asset and a lease liability, much the same as if it had borrowed to purchase 
the asset.
To understand these two methods, suppose that Food Barn wants to acquire a computer 
that has a three-year life and a purchase price of $45,000. Assume that Food Barn must pay 8% 
per year to borrow funds for three years. The computer manufacturer will sell the computer to 
Food Barn for $45,000 or lease it for three years for $17,461.51 per year, payable at the end of 
each year.13 In practice, lessees usually make payments in advance, but assuming the payments 
occur at year-end simplifies the computations. Food Barn must pay for property taxes, mainte-
nance, and repairs of the computer whether it purchases or leases. Food Barn signs the lease on 
January 1, 2013.
OPERATING LEASE METHOD—OLD RULES
The accounting designation of a lease as an operating lease is based on the idea that the owner, 
or lessor, retains all or most of the rewards and risks of ownership. The lessee merely pays 
for the right to use the asset for a specified period. A common example of an operating lease 
occurs when you rent a car from Hertz or Avis for a few days. If the lease specifies that the les-
see must return the leased asset to the lessor at the end of the lease term, which the asset can 
still provide substantial future benefits, the lessor must then re-lease or sell the asset. The lessor 
bears the risk of technological change and other factors that would affect its ability to lease or 
sell the asset. If the computer manufacturer, and not Food Barn, bears most of the risks and 
rewards of ownership, the old rules the lease as an operating lease, that does not result in an 
asset or a liability on the lessee’s balance sheet. Food Barn would make no entry on January 1, 
2013, when it signs the lease, if the lease is classified as an operating lease. It makes the follow-
ing entry on December 31 of each year:
December 31 of Each Year
Rent Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,461.51
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,461.51
To record annual expense of leasing computer under the operating lease 
method.
CAPITAL LEASE METHOD—OLD RULES
The accounting designation of a lease as a capital lease results from the idea that the lessee has 
all or most of the rewards and risks of owning the leased asset. If, in the example, the lease 
period approximately equals the useful life of the leased computer, then Food Barn bears the 
risk of factors that affect the market value of the asset. If Food Barn—not the computer manu-
facturer—bears most of the risks and rewards of ownership, the old rules classify the lease as a 
capital lease. This treatment recognizes the signing of the lease as the simultaneous acquisition 
12 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 13, “Accounting for Leases,” 1975 (reissued and inter-
preted 1980) (Codification Topic 840); IASB, International Accounting Standard 17, “Leases” 1982, revised 1997 
and 2003. U.S. GAAP uses the term capital lease method and IFRS uses the term finance lease method. We use 
the term capital lease method throughout this section on leases.
13 The present value of an annuity of $17,461.51 for three years at a discount rate of 8% is $45,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

436
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
of a long-term asset (the right to use the leased asset) and the incurring of a long-term liability 
for lease payments. At the time Food Barn signs the lease, it records both an asset and a liability 
at the present value of the required cash payments, $45,000 in this example. The entry at the 
time Food Barn signs the three-year lease is as follows:
January 1, 2013 
Leased Assets—Computer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,000
 
Lease Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
45,000
To record lease asset and lease liability under the capital lease method.
At the end of each year, Food Barn must account for the lease asset and the lease liability. 
In practice, many firms treat the right to use the leased asset similarly to the asset itself and 
recognize depreciation expense. Under this treatment and assuming straight-line depreciation 
method and zero salvage value, Food Barn makes the following entry at the end of each year:
December 31 of Each Year
Depreciation Expense (on Computer). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation—Computer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
To record depreciation expense on leased asset under the capital lease 
method.
The second entry made by Food Barn at the end of each year recognizes that each con-
tractually specified lease payment both pays interest and reduces the lease liability. Separating 
the portion of the lease payment that represents interest from the portion reducing the liability 
follows the effective interest method illustrated for notes and bonds earlier in this chapter. The 
amortization schedule for this lease appears in Exhibit 11.5.
The entries made for the lease payments at the end of each year are as follows:
December 31, 2013 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,600.00
Lease Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,861.51
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,461.51
To recognize lease payment, interest on the lease liability for the first 
year of $3,600.00 (= 0.08 × $45,000), and the reduction in the liability, 
equal to the difference between the lease payment and Interest Expense. 
The present value of the lease liability after this entry is $31,138.49 
(= $45,000 – $13,861.51).
December 31, 2014 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,491.08
Lease Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,970.43
(continued)
Amortization Schedule for $45,000 Lease Liability, Accounted 
for as a Capital Lease, Repaid in Three Annual Installments of 
$17,461.51 Each, Interest Rate 8%, Compounded Annually
Period
(1)
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
(2) 
Interest 
Expense 
for Period
(3) 
Cash 
Payment
(4) 
Portion of 
Payment 
Reducing 
Principal
(5)
Balance at End 
of Period
(6)
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$45,000.00
$3,600.00
$17,461.51
($13,861.51)
$31,138.49
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 31,138.49
 2,491.08
 17,461.51
 (14,970.43)
 16,168.06
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 16,168.06
 1,293.45
 17,461.51
 (16,168.06)
        0
EXHIBIT 11.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

437
Accounting for Leases
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,461.51
To recognize lease payment, interest on the lease liability for the second 
year of $2,491.08 (= 0.08 × $31,138.49), and the reduction in the 
liability, equal to the difference between the lease payment and Interest 
Expense. The present value of the lease liability after this entry is 
$16,168.06 (= $31,138.49 – $14,970.43).
December 31, 2015 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,293.45
Lease Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,168.06
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,461.51
To recognize lease payment, interest on the lease liability for the third 
year of $1,293.45, which differs slightly due to rounding from $1,293.44 
(= 0.08 × $16,168.06), and the reduction in the liability. The present value 
of the lease liability after this entry is zero (= $16,168.06 – $16,168.06).
EFFECT OF THE OPERATING AND CAPITAL LEASE METHODS 
ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE LESSEE
Both the lease asset and the lease liability appear on the lessee’s balance sheet under the capital 
lease method, whereas neither appears on the lessee’s balance sheet under the operating lease 
method.
Exhibit 11.6 summarizes the nature and amount of expenses under the operating and capi-
tal lease methods for the Food Barn computer lease example. Total rent expense under the 
operating lease method equals $52,384.53 (= $17,461.51 × 3). Total depreciation expense of 
$45,000 (= $15,000 × 3) plus total interest expense of $7,384.53 (= $3,600.00 + $2,491.08 +
$1,293.45) also equals $52,384.53. Total expenses under the operating lease method and the 
capital lease method are the same and equal the total cash expenditures. The operating lease 
method and the capital lease method differ in the timing, but not in the total amount, of 
expense. For the lessee, the capital lease method recognizes expenses earlier than the operating 
lease method.
The operating lease method classifies all of the lease payment each period as an operating 
use of cash on the statement of cash flows. The capital lease method classifies the portion of 
the lease payment related to interest expense as an operating use of cash and the portion related 
to a reduction in the lease liability as a financing use of cash. In addition, the lessee adds depre-
ciation expense to net income or net loss to compute cash flow from operations.
THE ACCOUNTING DISTINCTION BETWEEN OPERATING 
LEASES AND CAPITAL LEASES—OLD RULES
The capital lease method results in larger long-term debt and debt-equity ratios during the 
life of a lease than the operating lease method. A larger debt ratio makes a firm appear more 
risky. Thus, given a choice, lessees tend to prefer the operating lease method to the capital lease 
method. The operating lease method also recognizes expense more slowly over the life of the 
Comparison of Expense Recognized Under Operating 
and Capital Lease Methods for Lessee
Expense Recognized Each Year Under:
Year
Operating Lease Method
Capital Lease Method
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$17,461.51
$18,600.00 (= $15,000.00
+ $3,600.00)
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 17,461.51
 17,491.08 (=  15,000.00
+  2,491.08)
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 17,461.51
 16,293.45 (=  15,000.00
+  1,293.45)
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$52,384.53
$52,384.53 (= $45,000.00
+ $7,384.53)
EXHIBIT 11.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

438
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
lease than the capital lease method. These financial statement effects often lead lessees to struc-
ture leases so that under the old rules they qualify for as operating leases.
U.S. GAAP Criteria for Lease Accounting—Old Rules U.S. GAAP specifies cri-
teria for a lease to qualify as a capital lease on the financial statement of the lessee. If the lease 
meets none of the following four conditions, the lessee treats the lease as an operating lease.
1. The lease transfers ownership of the leased asset to the lessee at the end of the lease term.
2. The lease provides the lessee with a bargain purchase option, the right to purchase the 
leased asset at a specified future time for a price less than the currently predicted fair value 
of the property at that future time.
3. The lease extends for at least 75% of the asset’s expected useful life.
4. The present value of the contractual minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of 
the fair value of the asset at the time the lessee signs the lease. The present value computa-
tion uses a discount rate appropriate for the creditworthiness of the lessee.
These criteria attempt to identify who enjoys the benefits and bears the economic risks of the 
leased property. If the leased asset, either automatically or for a bargain price, becomes the 
property of the lessee at the end of the lease period, then the lessee enjoys of the economic ben-
efits of the asset and incurs all risks of ownership. If the life of the lease extends for most of 
the expected useful life of the asset (U.S. GAAP specifies 75% or more), then the lessee enjoys 
most of the benefits, particularly when we measure them in present values, and incurs most of 
the risk of technological obsolescence.
Lessors and lessees can usually structure leasing contracts to avoid the first three condi-
tions and thereby qualify for operating lease treatment. Avoiding the fourth condition is more 
difficult. That condition compares the present value of the lessee’s contractual minimum lease 
payments with the fair value of the leased asset at the time the lessee signs the lease. The les-
sor presumably could either sell the asset for its fair value or lease it to the lessee. The present 
value of the minimum lease payments has the economic character of a loan in that the lessee 
has committed to make payments just as it would commit to make payments on a bank loan. 
When the present value of the contractual minimum lease payments equals at least 90% of the 
amount that the lessor would receive if it sold the asset instead of leasing it, then the lessor 
receives most of its return from the leasing arrangement. That is, 90% of the fair value of the 
asset is not at risk, and the lessor need receive only 10% of the asset’s fair value from selling or 
re-leasing the asset at the end of the lease term.
If, on the other hand, the lessor has more than 10% of the asset’s initial fair value at risk, 
then the accounting criterion views the lessor as enjoying most of the benefits and bearing most 
of the risks of ownership and would classify the lease as an operating lease. Small changes in 
the amount or timing of lease payments can shift the present value of the lease payments to 
just below or just above the 90% threshold.
IFRS Criteria for Lease Accounting—Old Rules IFRS uses the same general crite-
rion for classifying leases: Which party to the lease enjoys the rewards and bears the risk in a leas-
ing arrangement? Unlike U.S. GAAP, IFRS does not specify strict percentages, such as the 75% 
useful life criterion or the 90% present value criterion. Instead, IFRS identifies several indica-
tors to determine which entity enjoys the rewards and bears the risk in the leasing arrangement 
and permits firms and their independent accountants to apply their professional judgment to 
classify a lease as an operating lease versus a capital lease. The criteria are similar to those of 
U.S. GAAP but not as specific:
1. Does ownership transfer from the lessor to the lessee at the end of the lease?
2. Is there a bargain purchase option?
3. Does the lease extend for the major part of the asset’s economic life?
4. Does the present value of the minimum lease payments equal substantially all of the asset’s 
fair value?
5. Is the leased asset specialized for use by the lessee?
A lease for which the present value of the minimum lease payments was 89% of the fair value 
of the leased asset at inception of the lease could escape capital lease treatment under U.S. 
GAAP but might not under IFRS.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

439
Accounting for Leases
Lessee Accounting—Proposed Rules In a joint project, the IASB and FASB have pro-
posed that lessees should use the capital lease method for most leases. That is, the lessee com-
putes the present value of its expected cash payments under the lease and recognizes both a 
right-of-use asset and a lease liability for that amount. It then uses methods similar to those 
described for capital leases for expense recognition.
ACCOUNTING BY THE LESSOR—OLD RULES
Under the old rules, the entries to account for operating leases and capital leases for the lessor 
mirror those for the lessee with important differences.
Lessor Accounting for Operating Leases—Old Rules The leased asset appears 
on the books of the lessor in an operating lease. If the lessor also manufactured the leased 
property, the leased asset will appear at the cost of manufacturing the item. If the lessor is a 
financial institution that purchased the property that it subsequently leases, the leased asset will 
appear at the acquisition cost to the financial institution. Assume that the lessor’s manufactur-
ing cost of the computer it leased to Food Barn is $39,000. The first entry made by the lessor 
reclassifies the leased asset from inventory, a current asset, to equipment, a noncurrent asset.
January 1, 2013 
Equipment (Computer Leased to Customers) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
39,000
To reclassify computer from inventory to equipment at its manufacturing 
cost of $39,000.
Each year the lessor records the cash received as Rent Revenue, mirroring the lessee’s entries 
for Rent Expense.
December 31 of Each Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,461.51
 
Rent Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,461.51
To record annual revenue of leasing computer under the operating lease 
method.
The lessor must also recognize depreciation expense on the leased asset. The lessor uses its 
acquisition cost of $39,000 to compute depreciation (analogous to the lessee using its acquisi-
tion cost of $45,000 to compute depreciation under the capital lease method illustrated previ-
ously). The lessor also uses the expected useful life of the leased asset, which might exceed the 
lease period. We assume the computer has a three-year useful life with zero salvage value and 
the lessor uses the straight-line depreciation method.
December 31 of Each Year
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation—Computer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
13,000
To record depreciation expense on rented computer of $13,000 (= 
$39,000/3).
Lessor Accounting for Capital Leases—Old Rules The lessor initially records a 
capital lease as if it had sold the leasehold asset to the lessee. (Recall that the lessee records a 
capital lease as if it had purchased the leased asset with financing provided by the lessor.) The 
lessor receives a promise by the lessee to make future lease payments, which gives rise to a Lease 
Receivable. Continuing with the assumption that the lessor manufactured the computer leased 
to Food Barn, the lessor makes the following two entries at the time of signing the lease con-
tract on January 1, 2013:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

440
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
January 1, 2013
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
45,000
To record the “sale” of a computer for a series of future cash flows with a 
present value of $45,000. The lessor does not formally sell the asset but 
transfers a portion of its future ben efits and risk to the user so that the 
arrangement resembles a sale for the transferred use of the asset.
January 1, 2013
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
39,000
To record the cost of a computer “sold” as an expense.
Thus, the computer manufacturer recognizes $6,000 (= $45,000 – $39,000) gross margin on 
signing the lease contract.
The lessor makes entries each year that mirror those of the lessee for the lease payment, for 
the portion of the payment representing Interest Revenue, and for the portion representing a 
reduction of Lease Receivable. The following entries use the amounts from the amortization 
table in Exhibit 11.5.
December 31, 2008 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,461.51
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,600.00
 
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
13,861.51
To recognize lease payment received, interest on the lease receivable for 
the first year of $3,600.00 (= 0.08 × $45,000), and the reduction in the 
receivable, equal to the difference between cash received and Interest 
Revenue. The present value of the lease receivable after this entry is 
$31,138.49 (= $45,000.00 + $3,600.00 – $17,461.51).
December 31, 2014 
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,461.51
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,491.08
 
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14,970.43
To recognize lease payment received, interest on the lease receivable for 
the second year of $2,491.08 (= 0.08 × $31,138.49), and the reduction 
in the receivable, equal to the difference between the cash received and 
Interest Revenue. The present value of the lease receivable after this entry 
is $16,168.06 (= $31,138.49 + $2,491.08 – 17,461.51).
December 31, 2015
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,461.51
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,293.45
 
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
16,168.06
To recognize lease payment received, interest on the lease receivable for 
the third year of $1,293.45, which differs slightly due to rounding from 
$1,293.44 (= 0.08 × $16,168.06), and the reduction in the receivable. The 
present value of the lease receivable after this entry is zero (= $16,168.06 
+ $1,293.45 – $17,461.51).
EFFECT OF THE OPERATING AND CAPITAL LEASE METHODS ON 
THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE LESSOR—OLD RULES
Both assets and liabilities increase for a lessee using the capital lease method as compared to 
the operating lease method. For a lessor, however, under the old rules, either the leased asset 
(operating lease method) or a lease receivable (capital lease method) appears on the balance 
sheet. The amount in the Lease Receivable account exceeds the amount in the Equipment 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

441
Accounting for Leases
account by the gross margin (that is, sales minus cost of goods sold) recognized by the lessor 
from the “sale” of the leased asset. The balance sheet effects of the operating and capital lease 
methods do not differ as much for lessors as they do for lessees.
The effects of the operating versus capital lease methods on the income statement of the 
lessor are more pronounced. The lessor recognizes a gross margin from the “sale” of the leased 
asset at the time of signing the lease ($6,000 in this case) and then recognizes interest revenue 
over the life of the lease. Total income over the life of the lease of $13,384.53 equals the cash 
inflow from lease payments received of $52,384.53 (= $17,461.51 × 3) minus the $39,000.00 
cost of manufacturing the computer. Exhibit 11.7 summarizes these differences in income.
Lessee Accounting—Proposed Rules The joint IASB-FASB proposals for lessor 
accounting would require a single approach for all lease arrangements that fall in the scope of 
the proposed guidance. Under these proposals, the lessor would recognize both a receivable (the 
present value of the contractually specified lease payments) and a residual asset (based on the 
estimated residual value of the leased asset at the end of the lease term and other factors). The 
accounting for cash received from the lessee is similar to the lessor’s accounting, under the old 
rules, for capital leases. Most of the complexities of lessor accounting under the proposed rules 
lie outside the scope of this introductory textbook.
 PROBLEM  11.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Operating and Capital Lease Methods for Lessee and Lessor. On January 1, 2013, Holt 
Book Store will acquire a delivery van that a local automobile dealer sells for $40,000. 
The dealer purchased the van from the manufacturer for $36,000. The dealer offers Holt 
Book Store the option of leasing the van for four years, with rentals of $11,543.65 due 
on December 31 of each year. Holt Book Store must return the van at the end of four 
years, although the automobile dealer anticipates that the resale value of the van after 
four years will be negligible. The automobile dealer considers 6% an appropriate interest 
rate to charge Holt Book Store to finance the acquisition.
a. Does this lease qualify as an operating lease or as a capital lease for financial report-
ing according to the four criteria specified in U.S. GAAP under the old rules? Explain.
b. Assume for this part that the lease qualifies as an operating lease. Give the journal 
entries made by Holt Book Store over the first two years of the life of the lease.
c. Repeat part b for the automobile dealership. Use straight-line depreciation and zero 
estimated salvage value.
d. Assume for this part that the lease qualifies as a capital lease. Give the journal entries 
made by Holt Book Store over the first two years of the life of the lease.
e. Repeat part d for the automobile dealership.
 
(continued)
Comparison of Income Recognized Under Operating 
and Capital Lease Methods for Lessor
Expense Recognized Each Year Under:
Year
Operating Lease Method
Capital Lease Method
1  . . . . . .
$ 4,461.51 (= $17,461.51 – $13,000)
$ 9,600.00 (= $6,000.00 + $3,600.00)
2  . . . . . .
  4,461.51 (=  17,461.51 –  13,000)
  2,491.08 (=      0.00 +  2,491.08)
3  . . . . . .
  4,461.51 (=  17,461.51 –  13,000)
  1,293.45 (=      0.00 +  1,293.45)
 
Total . .
$13,384.53 (= $52,384.53 – $39,000)
$13,384.53 (= $6,000.00 + $7,384.53)
EXHIBIT 11.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

442
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
f. Compute the amount of expenses that Holt Book Store recognizes during each of the 
four years under the operating and capital lease methods.
g. Compute the amount of revenues and expenses that the automobile dealership recog-
nizes during each of the four years under the operating and capital lease methods.
h. Why are the lessee’s total expenses the same under the operating and capital lease 
methods? Why is the lessor’s total income (revenue minus expenses) the same under 
the operating and capital lease methods?
i. Why do total expenses of the lessee differ from total income of the lessor?
LEASE DISCLOSURES
Firms must disclose in notes to the financial statements the cash flows associated with capital 
leases and with operating leases for each of the succeeding five years and for all years after five 
years in the aggregate. Firms must also indicate the present value of the cash flows for capital 
leases.14 Exhibit 11.8 presents Mall Stores Corporation’s (based on the financial statements of 
Target Corporation) lease disclosures.
Mall Stores Corporation includes $4 million of capital leases in current liabilities and $123 
million in long-term debt. Mall Stores Corporation, like most firms, does not indicate the 
weighted-average interest rate it used to compute the present value of capital leases.
Most of Mall Stores Corporation’s leases are operating leases. Thus, neither the leased 
assets nor the lease liabilities appear on the balance sheet. The user of the financial statements 
might follow one of two approaches when dealing with operating leases:
1. Leave the operating lease commitments off the balance sheet.
2. Place a present value on the operating lease commitments and include that amount in non-
current assets and long-term debt a process called constructive capitalization.
Placing a present value on the operating lease commitments requires two estimates:
1. The discount rate to apply to the operating lease payments.
2. The timing of the aggregate cash flows after the fifth year.
The discount rate should reflect a long-term interest rate for collateralized borrowing. Assume 
that the weighted-average borrowing rate on Mall Stores Corporation’s long-term notes and 
debentures on February 2, 2013, was 5.5%. We will use a discount rate of 5.5% to illustrate the 
constructive capitalization of operating leases.
The cash flows for operating leases for the first five years decline each year. One might assume 
a continuing decline in some pattern for the years after 2017. An alternative approach assumes 
that Mall Stores Corporation will continue to make payments on operating leases in an amount 
equal to that in 2017, or $123 million a year, until it pays the $2,843 aggregate remaining amount. 
Thus, Mall Stores Corporation will continue to pay $123 million for 23.1 (= $2,843/$123) addi-
tional years. The estimated total years of these operating leases of 28.1 (= 5.0 + 23.1) years sug-
gest that these leases are primarily for retail stores.
Exhibit 11.9 shows the computation of the present value of Mall Stores Corporation’s oper-
ating lease commitments on February 2, 2013. The calculation of the present value of the cash 
flows after 2017 involves the present value of a deferred annuity.
Constructive capitalization of Mall Stores Corporation’s operating leases adds $1,982 mil-
lion to property, plant, and equipment; $227 million to the current portion of long-term debt; 
and $1,755 (= $1,982 – $227) million to long-term debt classified as a noncurrent liability on 
the balance sheet. The long-term debt and the debt-equity ratios of Mall Stores Corporation 
on February 2, 2013, based on reported amounts and as adjusted for the capitalization of oper-
ating leases are as follows:
14 Firms cannot currently apply the fair value options to assets and liabilities recognized under capital leases. 
See FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets 
and Financial Liabilities,” par. 8, 2007 (Codification Topic 825); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, 
“Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

443
Accounting for Leases
Long-Term Debt Ratio
Reported Amounts: $15,126/$44,560 = 33.9%
Adjusted Amounts: ($15,126 + $1,755)/($44,560 + $1,982) = 36.3%
Debt-Equity Ratio
Reported Amounts: $15,126/$15,307 = 98.8%
Adjusted Amounts: ($15,126 + $1,755)/$15,307 = 110.3%
The debt ratios for Mall Stores Corporation increase with the capitalization of operating 
leases. Larger increases in debt ratios typically occur for airlines, railroads, trucking companies, 
and other retailers, many of whom use operating leases extensively.
Lease Disclosures for Mall Stores Corporation
Future minimum lease payments required under noncancelable lease agreements existing at February 2, 2013, 
were as follows:
Future Minimum Lease Payments (millions)
Operating 
Leases
Capital 
Leases
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  239
$ 12
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
187
  16
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
173
  16
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
129
  16
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
123
  17
After 2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 2,843
 155
Total future minimum lease payments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,694a
 232
Less: Interestb  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(105)
Present value of future minimum capital lease payments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$127c
aTotal contractual lease payments include $1,721 million related to options to extend lease terms that 
are reasonably assured of being exercised and also includes $98 million of legally binding minimum lease 
payments for stores that will open in 2013 or later.
bCalculated using the interest rate at inception for each lease.
cIncludes the current portion of $4 million.
EXHIBIT 11.8
Present Value of Operating Lease Commitments
Year
Payments
Present Value Factor 
at 5.5%
Present 
Value
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  239
0.94787
$  227
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   187
0.89845
168
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   173
0.85161
147
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   129
0.80722
104
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   123
0.76513
94
After 2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,843a
13.19369b × 0.76513c
 1,242
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,982
aAssume that Mall Stores Corporation makes the $2,843 million payments after 2017 at the rate of $123 
million a year. Mall Stores Corporation makes these payments for 23.1 (= $2,843/$123) years.
bFactor for the present value of an annuity of $123 million for 23.1 periods.
cFactor for the present value of $1 for five periods.
EXHIBIT 11.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

444
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR LONG-TERM LIABILITIES
Long-term liabilities obligate the borrowing firm to pay specified amounts at definite times 
more than one year in the future. We now summarize the balance sheet presentation of long-
term liabilities and procedures for computing both the balance sheet amounts and the amounts 
of interest expense.
Balance Sheet Presentation Unless the firm elects the fair value option, the long-
term liabilities described in this chapter appear on the balance sheet at the present value of the 
remaining future payments. The present value computations use the historical rate of interest—
the market interest rate on the date the borrower incurred the obligation.
Computation of Balance Sheet Amounts and Interest Expense for Amor-
tized Cost Measurement The methods of computing balance sheet amounts for the 
long-term liabilities described in this chapter and their related expenses follow these procedures:
1. Initially record the liability at the cash equivalent value of the assets received. This amount 
equals the present value of the future contractual payments discounted using the market 
interest rate for the borrower on the date the loan or lease begins. (Sometimes the borrower 
must compute the original issue market interest rate by finding the internal rate of return. 
See the Appendix.)
2. When the firm makes a cash payment or an adjusting entry for interest, it computes inter-
est expense as the book value of the liability at the beginning of the period (including any 
interest added in prior periods) multiplied by the historical interest rate. The accountant 
debits this amount to Interest Expense and credits it to the liability account. If the firm 
makes a cash payment, the accountant debits the liability accounts and credits Cash.
The effect of the second procedure will change the book value of the liabilities to a number 
closer to par value (or leave the amount at par if book value already equals par value) for the 
start of the next period. If the accountant follows these procedures, the liabilities on the bal-
ance sheet will have book value equal to the present value of the remaining future payments 
discounted at the historical market interest rate.
Amortization schedules, such as those in Exhibits 11.2, 11.3, and 11.4, illustrate this pro-
cedure for a variety of long-term liabilities. The next problem for self-study focuses on the 
procedure.
 PROBLEM  11.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
Unifying principles of accounting for long-term liabilities. This problem illustrates the 
accounting for long-term liabilities described just above. Assume that a firm closes 
its books once per year, making adjusting entries once per year. On the date the firm 
borrows, the market interest rate is 10% per year, compounded annually for all loans 
spanning a two-year period. Note the following steps:
1. Compute the initial issue proceeds received by the firm issuing the obligation (that is, 
borrowing the cash) on the date of issue.
2. Give the journal entry for issue of the liability and receipt of cash.
3. Show the journal entry or entries for interest accrual and cash payment, if any, at the 
end of the first year, and re-compute the book value of all liabilities related to the 
borrowing at the end of the first year. Combine the liability accounts for the main 
borrowing and accrued interest into a single account called Monetary Liability.
4. Show the journal entry or entries for interest accrual and cash payment at the end of 
the second year, and re-compute the book value of all liabilities related to the borrow-
ing at the end of the second year.
Perform the above steps for each of the following borrowings:
a. The firm issues a single-payment note on the first day of the first year, promising to 
pay $1,000 on the last day of the second year.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

445
Summary 
b. The firm issues a 10% annual coupon bond, promising to pay $100 on the last day of 
the first year and $1,100 (= $1,000 + $100) on the last day of the second year.
c. The firm issues an 8% annual coupon bond, promising to pay $80 on the last day of 
the first year and $1,080 (= $1,000 + $80) on the last day of the second year.
d. The firm issues a 12% annual coupon bond, promising to pay $120 on the last day of 
the first year and $1,120 (= $1,000 + $120) on the last day of the second year.
e. The firm issues a level-payment note (like a mortgage or installment note), promising 
to pay $576.19 on the last day of the first year and another $576.19 on the last day of 
the second year.
SUMMARY
This chapter discussed the accounting for long-term notes, bonds, and leases. The accounting 
for these obligations depends on whether a firm uses either of the following:
 1. Amortized cost measurement, based on the historical market interest rate.
 2. Fair value measurement.
The fair value option in U.S. GAAP and IFRS allows firms to use either method for qualifying 
long-term notes and bonds, but not for long-term leases.
Exhibit 11.10 summarizes the balance sheet presentation of long-term liabilities consid-
ered in this chapter and the procedures for computing both balance sheet amounts and interest 
expense under both amortized cost and fair value measurements.
Summary of Accounting for Long-Term Debt Obligations
Amortized Cost Measurement Using
Historical Market Interest Rate
Fair Value Measurement
Balance Sheet Presentation
Balance Sheet Presentation
Long-term liabilities appear on the balance sheet 
at the present value of the remaining cash flows 
discounted at the historical market interest rate on 
the date the borrower incurred the obligation.
Long-term liabilities appear on the balance sheet at 
fair value.
Computations
Computations
1.  Initially record the liability at the cash (or cash 
equivalent) value received. This amount equals 
the present value of the future contractual 
payments discounted using the historical market 
interest rate for the borrower on the date the 
loan begins. (Sometimes the borrower must 
compute an implicit historical market interest 
rate by finding the internal rate of return.)
2.  At any subsequent time when the firm makes 
a cash payment or an adjusting entry for 
interest, it computes interest expense as the 
carrying value of the liability at the beginning 
of the period (which includes interest added 
in prior periods) multiplied by the historical 
market interest rate. The accountant debits this 
amount to Interest Expense and credits it to 
the liability. If the firm makes a cash payment, 
the accountant debits the liability account and 
credits Cash.
1.  Initially record the same amount as that at 
the left. On the date that a loan begins, the 
historical market interest rate and the current 
market interest rate are the same.
2.  At each subsequent balance sheet date, record 
the fair value of the liability. One approach is 
to compute the present value of the remaining 
contractual cash flows using the current market 
interest rate on that date. The difference 
between the amount of the liability at the 
beginning and end of the period is the net of the 
cash payment, interest expense, and unrealized 
gain or loss. Authoritative guidance does not 
specify a procedure for allocating the net change 
in value between the two income elements.
EXHIBIT 11.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

446
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Vera Company; implicit interest rate and amortization schedule for interest-bearing note.)
a. 
Year
Cash 
Payment
Present 
Value Factor 
at 7%
Present 
Valuea
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  6,000
0.93458
$ 5,607.48
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   6,000
0.87344
  5,240.63
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 106,000
0.81630
 86,527.58
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$97,375.69
 
aPresent value calculations use present value factors with more decimal places than shown.
b. The amortization schedule appears in Exhibit 11.11.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Amortization schedule for zero coupon bonds.)
a. See Exhibit 11.12.
b. As the time until payment at maturity decreases, the present value of that payment 
increases. The increase each period is the interest expense for that period.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Engel Corporation; calculating the issue price of bonds.)
a. 
Required Cash Flows
Present Value Factor 
for 8% Interest Rate 
Compounded Semiannually 
for 10 Years
Present 
Value of 
Required 
Cash Flows
$1,000,000 at end of 10 years  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.45639a
$  456,390
$50,000 every six months for 10 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13.59033b
   679,516
 
Issue Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,135,906
 
aAppendix Table 2, 4% column and 20-period row.
 
bAppendix Table 4, 4% column and 20-period row.
Amortization Schedule for $100,000, 6% Note Discounted 
at a Required Yield of 7% Compounded Annually
(Problem 11.1 for Self-Study)
Period (1)
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
(2)
Interest 
Expense 
for Period
(3)
Cash 
Payment
(4)
Increase 
(Decrease) 
in Liability
(5)
Balance 
at End of 
Period
(6)
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$97,375.69
$6,816.30
$  6,000.00
$816.30
$98,191.99
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 98,191.99
 6,873.44
   6,000.00
 873.44
 99,065.43
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 99,065.43
 6,934.57a
 106,000.00
 934.57
        0
aAmount reduced by $0.01 to compensate for rounding.
EXHIBIT 11.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

447
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
b. 
Required Cash Flows
Present Value Factor 
for 10% Interest Rate 
Compounded Semiannually 
for 10 Years
Present 
Value of 
Required 
Cash Flows
$1,000,000 at end of 10 years  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.37689a
$  376,890
$50,000 every six months for 10 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12.46221b
   623,110
 
Issue Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,000,000
 
aAppendix Table 2, 5% column and 20-period row.
 
bAppendix Table 4, 5% column and 20-period row.
c. 
Required Cash Flows
Present Value Factor 
for 12% Interest Rate 
Compounded Semiannually 
for 10 Years
Present 
Value of 
Required 
Cash Flows
$1,000,000 at end of 10 years  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.31180a
$311,800
$50,000 every six months for 10 years . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11.46992b
 573,496
 
Issue Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$885,296
 
aAppendix Table 2, 6% column and 20-period row.
 
bAppendix Table 4, 6% column and 20-period row.
Amortization Schedule for $300 Million Face Value 
10-Year Zero Coupon Bonds Priced Initially to 
Yield 8% Compounded Semiannually
(Problem 11.2 for Self-Study)
Period 
(1)
Balance at 
Beginning 
of Period
(2)
Interest 
Expense for 
Period
(3)
Cash 
Payment
(4)
Increase in 
Liability
(5)
Balance 
at End of 
Period
(6)
 1  . . . . . . . . . .
$136,916,084
$ 5,476,643
$0
$ 5,476,643
$142,392,727
 2  . . . . . . . . . .
142,392,727
5,695,709
0
5,695,709
148,088,436
 3  . . . . . . . . . .
148,088,436
5,923,537
0
5,923,537
154,011,974
 4  . . . . . . . . . .
154,011,974
6,160,479
0
6,160,479
160,172,453
 5  . . . . . . . . . .
160,172,453
6,406,898
0
6,406,898
166,579,351
 6  . . . . . . . . . .
166,579,351
6,663,174
0
6,663,174
173,242,525
 7  . . . . . . . . . .
173,242,525
6,929,701
0
6,929,701
180,172,226
 8  . . . . . . . . . .
180,172,226
7,206,889
0
7,206,889
187,379,115
 9  . . . . . . . . . .
187,379,115
7,495,165
0
7,495,165
194,874,280
10  . . . . . . . . . .
194,874,280
7,794,971
0
7,794,971
202,669,251
11  . . . . . . . . . .
202,669,251
8,106,770
0
8,106,770
210,776,021
12  . . . . . . . . . .
210,776,021
8,431,041
0
8,431,041
219,207,062
13  . . . . . . . . . .
219,207,062
8,768,282
0
8,768,282
227,975,344
14  . . . . . . . . . .
227,975,344
9,119,014
0
9,119,014
237,094,358
15  . . . . . . . . . .
237,094,358
9,483,774
0
9,483,774
246,578,132
16  . . . . . . . . . .
246,578,132
9,863,125
0
9,863,125
256,441,258
17  . . . . . . . . . .
256,441,258
10,257,650
0
10,257,650
266,698,908
18  . . . . . . . . . .
266,698,908
10,667,956
0
10,667,956
277,366,864
19  . . . . . . . . . .
277,366,864
11,094,675
0
11,094,675
288,461,539
20  . . . . . . . . . .
288,461,539
11,538,462
0
11,538,462
300,000,000
EXHIBIT 11.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

448
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Engel Corporation; preparing journal entries to account for bonds.)
a. 
January 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,135,906 
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,135,906
To record issue of $1,000,000-par value, 10% semiannual coupon bonds priced 
to yield 8% compounded semiannually.
June 30
Interest Expense (= 0.04 × 1,135,906)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,436 
Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,564 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
To record interest expense and amount paid for first six months.
December 31
Interest Expense [= 0.04 × ($1,135,906 – $4,564)]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
45,254 
Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,746 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
To record interest expense and amount payable for second six months.
b. 
January 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000,000 
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000,000
To record issue of $1,000,000-par value, 10% semiannual coupon bonds priced 
to yield 10% compounded semiannually.
June 30
Interest Expense (= 0.05 × $1,000,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
To record interest expense and amount paid for first six months.
December 31
Interest Expense (= 0.05 × $1,000,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
To record interest expense and amount paid for second six months.
c. 
January 1
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
885,296 
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
885,296
To record issue of $1,000,000-par value, 10% semiannual coupon bonds priced 
to yield 12% compounded semiannually.
June 30
Interest Expense (= 0.06 × $885,296). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
53,118 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,118
To record interest expense and amount paid for first six months.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

449
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
December 30
Interest Expense [= 0.06 × ($885,296 + $3,118)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
53,305 
 
Cash (= 0.05 × $1,000,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,305
To record interest expense and amount payable for second six months.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Holt Book Store and automobile dealer; operating and capital lease methods for lessee and lessor.)
a. Application of the four criteria is as follows:
(1) Ownership transferred to lessee at end of lease term: not satisfied.
(2) Lease contains a bargain purchase option: not satisfied.
(3) Lease period extends for at least 75% of asset’s life: satisfied.
(4) Present value of contractual minimum lease payments equals or exceeds 90% of the fair 
market value of the asset at the time lessee signs the lease: satisfied. The present value 
of the lease payments when discounted at 6% is $40,000 (= $11,543.65 × 3.46511), 
which equals the $40,000 market value of the asset on at the inception of the lease.
 
The lease is therefore a capital lease because it meets at least one of the four criteria (in 
fact, it meets two conditions).
b.
December 31 of Each Year
Rent Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,543.65
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11,543.65
To recognize annual rent expense on rental of delivery van accounted for as 
an operating lease.
c.
January 1, 2013
Equipment (delivery van leased to customer)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
36,000
To record transfer of delivery van from inventory to equipment.
December 31 of Each Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,543.65
 
Rent Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11,543.65
To recognize annual rent revenue from rental of delivery van accounted for as 
an operating lease.
December 31 of Each Year
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,000
To recognize annual depreciation of $9,000 (= $36,000/4) on leased van 
accounting for as an operating lease.
d.
January 1, 2013
Leased Asset—Delivery Van . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Lease Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
To record “acquisition” of delivery van and related liability accounted for as 
a capital lease.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

450
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
December 31, 2013
Interest Expense (= 0.06 × $40,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,400.00
Lease Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,143.65
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11,543.65
To recognize interest expense for 2008, the cash payment, and the reduction 
in the liability under the capital lease method. The carrying value of the liabil-
ity at the end of 2008 is $30,856.35 (= $40,000 + $2,400.00 – $11,543.65).
December 31, 2013
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
To record depreciation expense for 2008 of $10,000 (= $40,000/4) for lessee.
December 31, 2014
Interest Expense (= 0.06 × $30,856.35)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,851.38
Lease Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,692.27
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
11,543.65
To recognize interest expense for 2009, the cash payments, and the reduc-
tion in the liability under the capital lease method. The carrying value of 
the liability at the end of 2009 is $21,164.08 (= $30,856.35 + $1,851.38 
– $11,543.65).
December 31, 2014
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
To record depreciation expense for 2009 of $10,000 (= $40,000/4) for lessee.
e.
January 1, 2013
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
To record “sale” of delivery van accounted for as a capital lease.
January 2, 2013
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36,000
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
36,000
To record cost of delivery van “sold” under capital lease arrangement.
December 31, 2013
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,543.65
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,400.00
 
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,143.65
To record interest revenue, cash received, and reduction in lease receivable for 
2013. The amounts mirror those of the lessee.
December 31, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
11,543.65
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,851.38
 
Lease Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,692.27
To record interest revenue, cash received, and reduction in lease receivable for 
2014. The amounts mirror those of the lessee.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

451
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
f. 
Expense Recognized Each Year Under:
Year
Operating 
Lease Method
Capital Lease Method
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,543.65
$12,400.00
(= $10,000.00
+ $2,400.00)
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,543.65
 11,851.38 (=  10,000.00
+  1,851.38)
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,543.65
 11,269.84
(=  10,000.00
+  1,269.84)
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 11,543.65
 10,653.38
(=  10,000.00
+    653.38)
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$46,174.60
$46,174.60
(= $40,000.00
+ $6,174.60)
g. 
Income Recognized Each Year Under:
Year
Operating Lease Method
Capital Lease Method
2013. . . . . . . .
$ 2,543.65 (= $11,543.65 −$ 9,000.00)
$ 6,400.00 (= $4,000.00 + $2,400.00)
2014. . . . . . . .
  2,543.65 (=  11,543.65 −  9,000.00)
  1,851.38 (=      0.00 +  1,851.38)
2015. . . . . . . .
  2,543.65 (=  11,543.65 −  9,000.00)
  1,269.84 (=      0.00 +  1,269.84)
2016. . . . . . . .
  2,564.65 (=  11,543.65 −  9,000.00)
    653.38 (=      0.00 +    653.38)
Total. . . . . . . .
$10,174.60 (= $46,174.60 −$36,000.00)
$10,174.60 (= $4,000.00 + $6,174.60)
h. The lessee’s total expenses equal cash outflows, and the lessor’s income equals cash inflows 
minus cash outflows. The operating and the capital lease methods recognize the revenues, 
expenses, and income associated with these cash flows in different periods.
i. The lessee’s total expenses equal its total cash outflows of $46,174.60 (= $11,543.65 × 4). 
The lessor’s income equals its total cash inflows of $46,174.60 (= $11,543.60 × 4) minus 
its cash outflow to purchase the van of $36,000.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 11.6 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Unifying principles of accounting for long-term liabilities.)
Exhibit 11.13 shows the accounting for five types of long-term monetary liabilities stated at the 
present value of future cash flows in columns labeled a through e. The accounting for each of 
these monetary liabilities follows a common procedure.
 1. Compute the initial amount of cash received by the borrower as well as the historical 
market interest rate. Sometimes you will know both of these. Sometimes you will know the 
cash received and you must calculate the interest rate. Sometimes, as Exhibit 11.13 illus-
trates in all five cases, you will know the interest rate and must compute the initial cash 
received.
a. To compute the initial amount of cash received, given the contractual payments and the 
historical market interest rate, multiply each of the contractual payments by the present 
value factor (as from Appendix Table 2 at the back of the book) for a single payment 
of $1 to be received in the future. Exhibit 11.13 shows the present value factors at 10% 
interest for payments to be received in one year (0.90909) and in two years (0.82645).
b. Computing the historical market interest rate, given the initial cash proceeds and the 
series of contractual payments, requires finding the internal rate of return of the series of 
cash flows. The Appendix at the back of the book illustrates this process. Exhibit 11.13 
shows that only the 10% coupon bond and the level-payment note have initial cash pro-
ceeds equal to $1,000. The difference in amounts arises because each of the items has 
a different present value, in spite of the fact that some people might, loosely speaking, 
call each a “$1,000 liability.”
 2. Record a journal entry debiting cash and crediting the monetary liability with the amount 
of cash received. This presentation showing the common theme uses the generic account 
title Monetary Liability, although in practice a firm would use more descriptive titles.
 3. At every contractual payment date and at the end of an accounting period, compute inter-
est expense as the book value of the liability at the beginning of the period (which includes 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

452
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
EXHIBIT 11.13
Accounting for Long-Term Financial Liabilities Based 
on the Present Value of Future Cash Flows
(Problem 11.6 for Self-Study)
a. Single-Payment Note of $1,000 
Maturing in Two Years
b. Two-Year Annual Coupon 
Bond—10%($100) Coupons
Amount
Dr.
Cr.
Amount
Dr.
Cr.
(1)  Compute Present Value of Future Contractual Payments 
Using Historical Interest Rate on Day Monetary Liability 
Is First Recorded. Rate is 10.0%.
 
(a) 1 Year Hence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    0
$  100.00
 
(b) 2 Years Hence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000.00
$1,100.00
 
 
 Multiply Payment by Present Value Factors 
 (Appendix Table 2).
 
 
0.90909 × (a)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    0
$   90.91
 
 
0.82645 × (b)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   826.45
   909.09
 
(c) Total Present Value
$  826.45
$1,000.00
(2)  Record Initial Liability and Cash or Other Assets 
Received from Step 1.
 
Cash or Other Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
826.45
1,000.00
 
Monetary Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
826.45
1,000.00
(3)  First Recording (payment date or end of period): 
End of First Year
 
(a)  Compute Interest Expense as Financial Liability × 
Historical Interest Rate.
 
 
Amount on Line 1(c) × 0.10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   82.64
$  100.00
 
(b) Record Interest Expense.
 
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82.64
100.00
 
 
Monetary Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82.64
100.00
 
(c) Record Cash Payment (if any).
 
 
Monetary Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
100.00
 
 
Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
100.00
 
(d)  Compute Book Value of Monetary Liability.
 
 
Beginning Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  826.45
$1,000.00
 
 
Add Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    82.64
   100.00
 
 
Subtotal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  909.09
$1,100.00
 
 
 Subtract Cash Payment (if any). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      —
  (100.00)
 
 
= Ending Balance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  909.09
$1,000.00
(4) Second Recording: End of Second Year
 
(a)  Compute Interest Expense as Monetary Liability × 
Historical Interest Rate.
 
 
Amount on Line 3(d) × 0.10. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   90.91
$  100.00
 
(b)  Record Interest Expense.
 
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90.91
100.00
 
 
Monetary Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90.91
100.00
 
(c)  Record Cash Payment (if any).
 
 
Monetary Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000.00
1,100.00
 
 
Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000.00
1,100.00
 
(d)   Compute Book Value of Monetary Liability.
 
 
Beginning Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  909.09
$1,000.00
 
 
Add Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    90.91
   100.00
 
 
Subtotal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000.00
$1,100.00
 
 
Subtract Cash Payment (if any). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1,000.00)
(1,100.00)
 
 
= Ending Balance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    0   
$    0   
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

453
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
c. Two-Year Annual Coupon 
Bond—8%($80) Coupons
d. Two-Year Annual Coupon 
Bond—12%($120) Coupons
e. Two-Year Level-Payment Note—
Annual Payments of $576.19
Amount
Dr.
Cr.
Amount
Dr.
Cr.
Amount
Dr.
Cr.
$   80.00
$  120.00
$  576.19
$1,080.00
$1,120.00
$  576.19
$   72.73
$  109.09
$  523.81
   892.57
   925.62
   476.19
$  965.30
$1,034.71
$1,000.00
965.30
1,034.71
1,000.00
965.30
1,034.71
1,000.00
$   96.53
$  103.47
$  100.00
96.53
103.47
100.00
96.53
103.47
100.00
80.00
120.00
576.19
80.00
120.00
576.19
$  965.30
$1,034.71
$1,000.00
    96.53
   103.47
   100.00
$1,061.83
$1,138.18
$1,100.00
   (80.00)
  (120.00)
  (576.19)
$  981.83
$1,018.18
$  523.81
$   98.18
$  101.82
$   52.38
98.18
101.82
52.38
98.18
101.82
52.38
1,080.00
1,120.00
576.19
1,080.00
1,120.00
576.19
$  981.83
$1,018.18
$  523.81
    98.18
   101.82
    52.38
$1,080.01
1,120.00
$  576.19
(1,080.00)
(1,120.00)
  (576.19)
$    0   a
$    0   
$    0   
aRounding erorr of $0.01.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

454
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
the principal liability account and the Interest Payable account if the firm keeps these 
amounts in separate accounts) multiplied by the historical market interest rate. Debit the 
computed amount to Interest Expense and credit the Monetary Liability account.
 
 
If the borrower makes a cash payment, credit cash and debit the Monetary Liability 
account. The book value of the liability is now equal to the beginning balance plus interest 
expense recorded less cash payments made, if any.
 
 
Exhibit 11.13 does not illustrate this fact directly, but if you were to return to step 1 at 
this point and compute the present value of the remaining contractual payments using the 
historical market interest rate (10% in the examples), that present value would equal the 
book value computed after step 3.
 4. At each payment date, or at each period-end closing date, repeat step 3. Eventually, when 
the borrower makes the final payment (as illustrated at the bottom of Exhibit 11.13), it will 
have discharged the entire amount of the liability plus interest. The remaining liability is 
zero. The accounting has amortized the liability to zero at the same time that the firm has 
extinguished its obligation.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Note
Notes Payable
Bond
Bond indenture
Bonds Payable
Unsecured borrowing
Senior rights; subordinated rights
Debenture bond
Serial bond
Zero coupon bond
Convertible bond
Callable bond
Put option (for bond)
Fixed interest rate; variable interest rate
Present value of future cash flows
Financial instrument
Internal rate of return; yield to maturity
Market interest rate
Implicit interest rate
Historical market interest rate
Current market interest rate
Amortized cost
Fair value
Fair value option
Amortization schedule
Effective interest method
Principal (face) value
Coupon interest rate
Maturity value
Market value
Discount to face value; premium to 
face value
Effective interest method
Operating lease method
Capital lease method; finance lease method
Constructive capitalization
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. “Using amortized cost based on the historical market interest rate to account for bonds 
in periods subsequent to their initial issuance provides a carrying value for bonds that is 
consistent with using historical, or acquisition, cost measurements for assets.” Explain.
 3. “Applying the effective interest method using the historical market interest rate gives a con-
stant amount of interest expense on bonds each period.” Do you agree? If not, how would 
you change the statement to make it accurate?
 4. A firm issues two bonds with identical issue prices, market-required yields, and final matu-
rity dates. One bond is a semiannual coupon bond, and the other bond is a serial bond. 
Will the total interest expense over the life of these two bonds be the same or different? 
Explain.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

455
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 5. Firm A issues $1,000,000 face value, 9% semiannual coupon bonds at a price to yield 8% 
compounded semiannually. Firm B issues $1,000,000 face value, 7% semiannual coupon 
bonds at a price to yield 8% compounded semiannually. Both bond issues mature in 20 
years. Will these firms receive the same initial issue price for these bonds? Explain.
 6. “The total effect on income before income taxes over the life of a bond that a firm repays 
at maturity will be the same whether the firm accounts for the bond using amortized cost 
measurement based on the historical market interest rate or fair value measurement based 
on the current market interest rate.” Do you agree? Explain.
 7. Refer to question 6. Would your answer differ if the firm repaid the bond prior to maturity?
 8. Refer to the preceding two questions. Describe the circumstances under which a firm would 
report a net gain from its borrowing activities. Give an example and the general principle. 
You may find using zero coupon bonds as examples a good way to think about these issues, 
although the principles apply to all forms of borrowing.
 9. A retailer leases space in a shopping center, whose buildings have a 30-year life, on a 
10-year lease. The lessee pays a small fixed amount per month plus 10% of sales for the 
previous month. How will the retailer treat this lease under the old/current rules?
10. Refer to the preceding question. How will the retailer treat this lease under the new/pro-
posed rules?
11. In what ways is a lessee’s capital lease similar to, and different from, purchasing the equip-
ment using the proceeds of a loan repayable in installments?
12. “The lessor who manufactured the equipment it leases to the lessee recognizes the same 
amount of income (revenue minus expenses) over the term of a lease as the lessee recog-
nizes as expenses.” Do you agree or disagree? Explain.
13. “If permitted, a lessee generally prefers to account for leases using the operating lease 
method for financial reporting and the capital lease method for tax reporting.” Explain.
14. “If permitted, a lessor generally prefers to account for leases using the capital lease method 
for financial reporting and the operating lease method for tax reporting.” Explain.
EXERCISES
15. Amortization schedule for note where stated interest rate differs from historical market rate 
of interest. Hager Company acquires a computer from Volusia Computer Company. The 
cash price (fair value) of the computer is $37,938. Hager Company gives a three-year, 
interest-bearing note with a maturity value of $40,000. The note requires annual payments 
of 6% of face value, or $2,400 per year, payable at the end of each year. The interest rate 
implicit in the note is 8% per year.
a. Prepare an amortization schedule for the note similar to Exhibit 11.2.
b. Prepare journal entries for Hager Company over the life of the note. Ignore entries for 
depreciation expense on the computer.
16. Computing the issue price of bonds. Compute the issue price of each of the following bonds.
a. $10,000,000 face value, zero coupon bonds due in 20 years, priced on the market to yield 
8% compounded semiannually.
b. $10,000,000 face value, serial bonds repayable in 40 equal semiannual installments of 
$500,000, which includes coupon payments and repayment of principal, for 20 years, 
priced on the market to yield 6% compounded annually.
17. Computing the issue price of bonds. Compute the issue price of each of the following bonds.
a. $1,000,000 face value, zero coupon bonds due in 20 years, priced on the market to yield 
10% compounded semiannually.
b. $1,000,000 face value, serial bonds repayable in equal semiannual installments of 
$50,000 for 20 years, priced on the market to yield 6% compounded semiannually.
c. $1,000,000 face value, 10% semiannual coupon bonds with interest payable each six 
months and the principal due in 20 years, priced on the market to yield 8% compounded 
semiannually.
d. $1,000,000 face value semiannual coupon bonds, with an annual coupon rate of 6% 
for the first 10 years and 8% for the second 10 years and the principal due in 20 years, 
priced on the market to yield 10% compounded semiannually.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

456
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
18. Amortization schedule for bonds. On January 1 of the current year, Womack Company 
issues 10% semiannual coupon bonds maturing five years from the date of issue. The firm 
issues the bonds to yield 8% compounded semiannually. The bonds have a face value of 
$100,000.
a. Compute the initial issue proceeds of these bonds.
b. Construct an amortization schedule, similar to that in Exhibit 11.2, for this bond issue, 
assuming that Womack Company uses amortized cost measurement based on the his-
torical market interest rate to account for the bonds.
c. Assume that at the end of the bonds’ third year of life, Womack Company reacquires 
$10,000 face value of these bonds for 103% of face value and retires them. Give the 
journal entry to record the retirement.
19. Amortization schedule for bonds. On January 1, 2012, Seward Corporation issues $100,000 
face value, 8% semiannual coupon bonds maturing three years from the date of issue. 
The coupons, dated for June 30 and December 31 of each year, each promise 4% of the 
face value, 8% total for a year. The firm issues the bonds to yield 10%, compounded 
semiannually.
a. Compute the initial issue proceeds of these bonds.
b. Construct an amortization schedule, similar to that in Exhibit 11.2, for this bond issue, 
assuming that Seward Company uses amortized cost measurement based on the histori-
cal market interest rate to account for the bonds.
c. Give the journal entries related to these bonds for 2012. Seward uses the calendar year 
as its reporting period.
d. On January 1, 2014, Seward Corporation reacquires $20,000 face value of these bonds 
for 102% of face value and retires them. Give the journal entry to record the retirement.
20. Accounting for bonds using amortized cost measurement based on the historical market inter-
est rate. O’Brien Corporation issues $8,000,000 face value, 8% semiannual coupon bonds 
maturing in 20 years. The market initially prices these bonds to yield 6% compounded 
semiannually. O’Brien Corporation accounts for these bonds using amortized cost mea-
surement based on the historical market interest rate.
a. Compute the issue price of these bonds.
b. Compute the interest expense on these bonds for the first six months.
c. Compute the interest expense on these bonds for the second six months.
d. Compute the carrying value of these bonds at the end of the second six-month period.
e. Use present value computations to verify the carrying value of the bonds at the end of 
the second six-month period as computed in part d above.
21. Accounting for bonds using amortized cost measurement based on the historical market inter-
est rate. Robinson Company issues $5,000,000 face value, 8% semiannual coupon bonds 
maturing in 10 years. The market initially prices these bonds to yield 10% compounded 
semiannually. Robinson Company accounts for these bonds using amortized cost measure-
ment based on the historical market interest rate.
a. Compute the issue price of these bonds.
b. Compute the interest expense for the first six months.
c. Compute the interest expense for the second six months.
d. Compute the carrying value of these bonds at the end of the second six-month period.
e. Use present value computations to verify the carrying value of the bonds at the end of 
the second six-month period as computed in part d above.
22. Accounting for bonds using amortized cost measurement based on the historical market interest 
rate. Several years ago, Huergo Dooley Corporation (HDC) issued $2,000,000 face value, 
8% semiannual coupon bonds on the market initially priced to yield 10% compounded 
semiannually. The bonds require HDC to make semiannual payments of 4% of face value 
on June 30 and December 31 of each year. The bonds mature on December 31, 2012.
a. Compute the carrying value of these bonds on January 1, 2008, assuming that HDC 
has used amortized cost measurement based on the historical market interest rate to 
account for these bonds.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

457
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
b. Give HDC’s journal entry to recognize interest expense and cash payment on June 30, 
2008.
c. Give HDC’s journal entry to recognize interest expense and cash payment on December 
31, 2008.
d. On January 1, 2009, these bonds trade in the market at a price to yield 6%, compounded 
semiannually. On this date, HDC repurchased 20% of these bonds on the open market 
and retired them. Give the journal entry to record the repurchase.
23. Accounting for bonds using the fair value option based on the current market interest rate. 
Stroud Corporation issues $10,000,000 face value, 10-year, 6% semiannual coupon bonds 
on January 1, 2013. The bonds require coupon payments on June 30 and December 31 of 
each year. The market initially priced the bonds to yield 6% compounded semiannually. 
The current market yield on these bonds was 6.2% compounded semiannually on June 30, 
2013, and 6.6% compounded semiannually on December 31, 2008. Stroud Corporation 
computes interest expense for each six-month period using the market yield at the begin-
ning of the period.
a. Compute the carrying value of these bonds on January 1, June 30, and December 31 
of 2013, using the fair value option. You may interpolate in the interest tables or use a 
calculator or use a spreadsheet program to compute the compound interest factors not 
provided in the tables.
b. Compute the total amount of interest expense and unrealized gain or loss for the first 
six months of 2013. Do not attempt to separate this amount into interest expense and 
holding gain or loss.
c. Compute the total amount of interest expense and unrealized gain or loss for the second 
six months of 2013. Do not attempt to separate this amount into interest expense and 
holding gain or loss.
24. Accounting for bonds using the fair value option based on the current market interest rate. 
Restin Corporation issues $20,000,000 face value, 10 year, 8% semiannual coupon bonds 
on January 1, 2014. The bonds promise coupon payments on June 30 and December 31 
of each year. The market initially priced the bonds to yield 7% compounded semiannually. 
The current market yield on these bonds was 6.8% compounded semiannually on June 30, 
2014, and 6.4% on December 31, 2014. Restin Corporation computes interest expense for 
each six-month period using the market yield at the beginning of the period.
a. Compute the carrying value of these bonds on January 1, June 30, and December 31 
of 2014 using the fair value option. You may interpolate in the interest tables or use a 
calculator or use a spreadsheet program to compute the compound interest factors not 
provided in the tables.
b. Compute the total amount of interest expense and unrealized gain or loss for the first 
six months of 2014. Do not attempt to separate this amount into interest expense and 
holding gain or loss.
c. Compute the total amount of interest expense and unrealized gain or loss for the second 
six months of 2014. Do not attempt to separate this amount into interest expense and 
holding gain or loss.
25. Applying the capital lease criteria under the current/old rules. Boeing manufactures a jet air-
craft at a cost of $50 million. The usual selling price for this aircraft is $60 million, and its 
typical useful life is 25 years. United Airlines desires to lease this aircraft from Boeing. The 
parties contemplate the following alternatives for structuring the lease. Indicate whether 
each arrangement qualifies as an operating lease or a capital lease under the current/old 
rules. Assume that all cash flows occur at the end of each year.
a. United Airlines will lease the aircraft for 20 years at an annual rental of $6 million. At 
the end of 20 years, United will return the aircraft to Boeing. The interest rate appropri-
ate to a 20-year collateralized loan for United Airlines is 10%.
b. United Airlines will lease the aircraft for 15 years at an annual rental of $7.2 million. At 
the end of 15 years, United Airlines will return the aircraft to Boeing. The interest rate 
appropriate for a 15-year collateralized loan for United Airlines is 10%.
c. United Airlines will lease the aircraft for 10 years at an annual rental of $5.5 million. At 
the end of 10 years, United Airlines has the option of returning the aircraft to Boeing 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

458
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
or purchasing it for $55 million. The interest rate appropriate for a 10-year collateralized 
loan for United Airlines is 8%.
d. United Airlines will lease the aircraft for 18 years at an annual rental of $6.2 million and 
will return the aircraft at the end of the lease term. In addition, United Airlines will pay 
a fee of $1,500 per hour for each hour over 5,000 hours per year that United Airlines 
flies the aircraft. United Airlines’ average usage of its aircraft is currently 6,200 hours 
per year. The interest rate appropriate for an 18-year collateralized loan for United Air-
lines is 10%.
26. Applying the new/current rules for leases. Refer to the four scenarios in the preceding ques-
tion. Describe the accounting for these leases under the new/current rules.
27. Preparing lessor’s journal entries for an operating lease and a capital lease. Sun Microsys-
tems manufactures an engineering workstation for $7,200 and sells it for $12,000. Although 
the workstation has a physical life of approximately 10 years, rapid technological change 
limits its expected useful life to three years. Sun leases a workstation to Design Consul-
tants for the three-year period beginning January 1, 2013. The annual rental payments of 
$4,386.70 are due at the beginning of each year. The interest rate appropriate for discount-
ing cash flows is 10%, compounded annually. Sun uses a calendar year as its reporting 
period.
a. Does this lease qualify as an operating lease or a capital lease under the current/old 
rules? Explain.
b. Assume that this lease qualifies as an operating lease. Give the journal entries for Sun 
Microsystems over the three-year period.
c. Repeat part b assuming that the lease qualifies as a capital lease.
28. Preparing lessee’s journal entries for an operating lease and a capital lease. On January 1, 
2013, Baldwin Products, as lessee, leases a machine used in its operations. The annual lease 
payment of $10,000 is due on December 31 of 2013, 2014, and 2015. The machine reverts 
to the lessor at the end of the three years. The lessor can either sell the machine or lease 
it to another firm for the remainder of its expected total useful life of five years. Baldwin 
Products could borrow on a three-year collateralized loan at 8%. The market value of the 
machine at the inception of the lease is $30,000. Round all amounts to the nearest dollar.
a. Does this lease qualify as an operating lease or a capital lease?
b. Assume that this lease qualifies as an operating lease. Give the journal entries for Bald-
win Products over the three-year period.
c. Assume this lease qualifies as a capital lease. Repeat part b.
d. Compute the total expenses for the three-year period under the operating and capital 
lease methods.
PROBLEMS
29. Accounting for long-term bonds. The notes to the financial statements of Aggarwal Corpo-
ration for 2013 reveal the following information with respect to long-term debt. All interest 
rates in this problem assume semiannual compounding and the effective interest method of 
amortization using amortized cost measurement based on the historical market interest rate.
December 31
2013
2012
$800,000 zero coupon notes due December 31, 2022, 
initially priced to yield 10% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
$  301,512
$1,000,000 7% bonds due December 31, 2017.
Interest is payable on June 30 and December 31.
The bonds’ initial price implies a yield of 8%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$966,336
?
$1,000,000, 9% bonds due December 31, 2028.
Interest is payable on June 30 and December 31.
The bonds’ initial price implies a yield of 6%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
$1,305,832
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

459
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Compute the carrying value of the zero coupon notes on December 31, 2013. A zero 
coupon note requires no periodic cash payments; only the face value is payable at matu-
rity. Do not overlook the italicized sentence above.
b. Compute the amount of interest expense for 2013 on the 7% bonds.
c. On July 1, 2013, Aggarwal Corporation acquires half of the 9% bonds ($500,000 face 
value) in the market for $526,720 and retires them. Give the journal entry to record this 
retirement.
d. Compute the amount of interest expense on the 9% bonds for the second half of 2013.
30. Accounting for zero coupon debt. When Time Warner Inc. announced its intention to bor-
row about $500 million by issuing 20-year zero coupon (single payment) notes, The Wall 
Street Journal reported the following:
New York—Time Warner announced an offering of debt that could yield the com-
pany as much as $500 million. . . . The media and entertainment giant said that it 
would offer $1.55 billion principal amount of zero-coupon . . . notes due [in 20 years] 
. . . through Merrill Lynch. . . . Zero-coupon debt is priced at a steep discount to prin-
cipal, [which] is fully paid at maturity. . . . A preliminary prospectus . . . didn’t include 
the issue price and yield on the notes.15
a. Assume the initial yield on the notes is 6% per year, compounded annually. What initial 
issue proceeds will Time Warner realize from issuing these notes?
b. Assume the initial issue proceeds from these notes are $500 million. What is the initial 
yield on these notes?
c. Assume the initial issue proceeds from these notes are $400 million and their annual 
yield is 7% compounded annually. What interest expense will Time Warner record for 
2013, the first year the notes are outstanding, assuming that it uses the amortized cost 
method based on the historical market interest rate?
d. Assume the initial issue proceeds from these notes are $400 million and their annual 
yield is 7% compounded annually. What interest expense will Time Warner record for 
2032, the last year the notes are outstanding, assuming that it uses the amortized cost 
method based on the historical market interest rate?
e. Assume that Time Warner initially issued the notes to yield 6% compounded annually 
and that the bonds traded in the market on December 31, 2022, to yield 8% compounded 
annually. Give the journal entry that Time Warner would make if it repurchased and 
retired $700 million face value of these zero coupon notes on this date. Round amounts 
to the nearest one million.
31. Understanding and using bond tables. Exhibit 11.14 presents a bond table for 8%, semian-
nual bonds for various market yields and years to maturity. Don’t overlook that this table 
presents values for semiannual coupon bonds, the most usual kind. The amounts in the 
table given are percentages of face value for a stated interest rate and number of years to 
maturity. The interest rate is compounded semiannually.
a. Why are the amounts in the 8.0% market yield column equal to 100% regardless of the 
number of years to maturity?
b. Why are the amounts in the columns to the left of the 8.0% column greater than 100% 
and the amounts in the columns to the right of the 8.0% column less than 100% for all 
years to maturity?
c. Why do the amounts in the columns to the left of the 8.0% column decrease toward 
100% and the amounts in the columns to the right of the 8.0% column increase toward 
100% as the years to maturity decrease?
 
Assume for the remaining parts of this problem that a firm issues $1 million face value, 8% 
semiannual coupon bonds on January 1, 2013, at a price to yield 7% compounded semian-
nually. The firm uses the historical market interest rate to account for these bonds for parts 
d to f and the fair value option for parts g to i.
15 The Wall Street Journal, December 8, 1992, p. A6.Assume Time Warner borrows funds at the beginning of 2013 
and pays $1.55 billion in a single payment at the end of 2032.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

460
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
d. What are the initial issue proceeds for these bonds if they mature in 25 years?
e. What is the carrying value of these bonds after five years?
f. Use the bond table to compute the amount of interest expense, using historical cost 
methods, for 2018. Independently verify this amount of interest expense for 2018 by 
multiplying the historical market interest rate times the liability at the beginning of each 
six-month period during 2018.
32. Interpreting disclosures of long-term debt. Exhibit 11.15 presents excerpts from the notes to 
the financial statements of Home Supply Company.
a. The amounts shown for Debentures, Notes, and the Medium-Term Notes appear as the 
same amounts on February 1, 2012 and 2013. What is the likely interpretation for the 
identical reported amounts at the beginning and end of the year?
b. The Senior Notes comprise two debt issues on February 1, 2012, and an additional two 
debt issues on February 1, 2013. Indicate the amounts in each of the following cells.
 
Hint: Given the face value, term to maturity, and coupon rate, use Excel to solve for 
the historical market interest rate. Solving for the historical market interest rate involves 
inputting various interest rates until the present value is within $1 million of the issue 
price. Be sure to consider semiannual payments and semiannual compounding. Express 
the coupon interest rate and the historical market interest rate in the following cells as 
annual rates based on semiannual compounding.
Issue Date
Face Value
Term to Maturity 
at Issue Date
Issue Price
Coupon Interest 
Rate
Historical Market 
Interest Rate
October 2011
October 2011
October 2012
October 2012
Bond Values in Percent of Face Value
8% Semiannual Coupon Bondsa
(Problem 31)
Market Yield Percent per Year Compounded Semiannually
Years to 
Maturity
6.0
7.0
7.8
8.0
8.3
9.0
 0.5 . . . . . . 
100.9709%
100.4831%
100.0962%
100%
99.8560%
99.5215%
 1.0 . . . . . . 
101.9135
100.9498
100.1889
100
99.7177
99.0637
 1.5 . . . . . . 
102.8286
101.4008
100.2780
100
99.5849
98.6255
 2.0 . . . . . . 
103.7171
101.8365
100.3638
100
99.4574
98.2062
 2.5 . . . . . . 
104.5797
102.2575
100.4464
100
99.3350
97.8050
 5.0 . . . . . . 
108.5302
104.1583
100.8151
100
98.7924
96.0436
 9.0 . . . . . . 
113.7535
106.5948
101.2763
100
98.1240
93.9200
 9.5 . . . . . . 
114.3238
106.8549
101.3246
100
98.0548
93.7034
10.0 . . . . . . 
114.8775
107.1062
101.3711
100
97.9883
93.4960
15.0 . . . . . . 
119.6004
109.1960
101.7504
100
97.4528
91.8556
19.0 . . . . . . 
122.4925
110.4205
101.9649
100
97.1564
90.9750
19.5 . . . . . . 
122.8082
110.5512
101.9874
100
97.1257
90.8852
20.0 . . . . . . 
123.1148
110.6775
102.0091
100
97.0962
90.7992
25.0 . . . . . . 
125.7298
111.7278
102.1855
100
96.8588
90.1190
30.0 . . . . . . 
127.6756
112.4724
102.3059
100
96.7007
89.6810
40.0 . . . . . . 
130.2008
113.3744
102.4440
100
96.5253
89.2173
aThe amounts of the entries of this exhibit result from using the present value function in a spreadsheet and 
then dividing the result by 10,000 to express as a percentage.
EXHIBIT 11.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

461
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
c. The amount on the balance sheet for Senior Notes on February 1, 2013, of $1,980 
million slightly exceeds the total issue price of the four Senior Notes of $1,979 million 
(= $988 × $991). Why do the amounts differ and why is the difference so small?
d. Why are the interest rates on the convertible notes so much lower than those on Home 
Supply Company other debt?
Excerpts from Notes to the Financial Statements 
of Home Supply Company
(in millions)
(Problem 32)
NOTE 6—LONG-TERM DEBT:
Interest 
Rates %
Fiscal Year 
of Final 
Maturity
February 2, 
2013
February 3, 
2012
Secured Debt
Mortgage Notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.57 to 8.25
2028
$   30
$   38
Unsecured Debt
Debentures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.50 to 6.88
2029
693
693
Notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8.25
2010
498
498
Medium-Term Notes—Series A. . . . . . . 
7.35 to 8.20
2023
27
27
Medium-Term Notes—Series B. . . . . . . 
6.70 to 7.61
2037
267
267
Senior Notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.00 to 5.80
2036
1,980
988
Convertible Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.86 to 2.50
2021
518
596
Capital Leases and Other  . . . . . . . . . . 
2030
   400
   424
Total Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . 
 4,413
 3,531
Less Current Maturities  . . . . . . . . . . . 
    88
    32
Long-Term Debt, Excluding 
 
Current Maturities   . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,325
$3,499
SENIOR NOTES
In October 2011, the Company issued $1 billion of unsecured Senior Notes, comprised of two $500 million 
tranches maturing in October 2021 and October 2041, respectively. The first $500 million tranche of 5.0% 
Senior Notes was sold at a discount of $4 million. The second $500 million tranche of 5.5% Senior Notes was 
sold at a discount of $8 million. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semiannually in arrears in April and 
October of each year until maturity. The discount associated with the issuance is included in long-term debt 
and is being amortized over the respective terms of the Senior Notes. The net proceeds of approximately $988 
million were used for the repayment of $600 million in outstanding notes due December 2011, for general 
corporate purposes, including capital expenditures and working capital needs, and to finance repurchases of 
common stock.
In October 2012, the Company issued $1 billion of unsecured senior notes, comprised of two tranches: $550 
million of 5.4% Senior Notes maturing in October 2022 and $450 million of 5.8% Senior Notes maturing 
in October 2042. The 5.4% Senior Notes and the 5.8% Senior Notes were each issued at a discount of 
approximately $4.4 million. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable semiannually in arrears in April and 
October of each year until maturity, beginning in April 2013. The discount associated with the issuance 
is included in long-term debt and is being amortized over the respective terms of the Senior Notes. The 
net proceeds of approximately $991 million were used for general corporate purposes, including capital 
expenditures and working capital needs, and to finance repurchases of common stock.
NOTE 7—FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS:
The fair value of the Company’s long-term debt excluding capital leases and other is as follows:
February 2, 2013
February 3, 2012
(in millions)
Carrying 
Amount
Fair Value
Carrying 
Amount
Fair Value
Liabilities:
Long-Term Debt (excluding capital 
 
leases and other)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,013
$4,301
$3,107
$3,578
Interest rates that are currently available to the Company for issuance of debt with similar terms and 
remaining maturities are used to estimate fair value for debt issues that are not quoted on an exchange.
EXHIBIT 11.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

462
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
e. Refer to Note 7 on Financial Instruments. Is the weighted-average historical market 
interest rate on long-term debt higher or lower than the weighted-average current mar-
ket interest rate on February 1, 2012, and February 1, 2013? Explain.
33. Accounting for lease by lessor and lessee. IBM manufactures a particular computer for 
$6,000 and sells it for $10,000. Adair Corporation needs this computer in its operations 
and contemplates three ways of acquiring it on January 1, 2013. The computer has a three-
year estimated useful life and zero salvage value. Both firms use the straight-line deprecia-
tion method.
(1) Outright Purchase: Adair Corporation will borrow $10,000 from its bank and purchase 
the computer from IBM. The bank loan bears interest at 8% annually and requires 
payments of $3,880, which includes principal and interest, on December 31 of 2013, 
2014, and 2015.
(2) Operating Lease: Adair Corporation will lease the computer from IBM and account 
for it as an operating lease under the current/old rules. IBM sets the annual payment 
due on December 31, 2013, 2014, and 2015 at $3,810.
(3) Capital Lease: Adair Corporation will lease the computer from IBM and account for 
it as a capital lease, using an annual interest rate of 7%. The annual payment due on 
December 31 of 2013, 2014, and 2015 is $3,810.
a. Give the journal entries on the books of Adair Corporation on January 1, 2013, Decem-
ber 31, 2013, and December 31, 2014, related to the loan and acquisition of the equip-
ment assuming the outright purchase alternative.
b. Repeat part a assuming the operating lease alternative under the old rules.
c. Repeat part a assuming the capital lease alternative under the old rules.
d. Give the journal entries on the books of IBM on January 1, 2013, December 31, 2013, 
and December 31, 2014, related to the sale of the equipment assuming the outright sale 
alternative.
e. Repeat part d assuming the operating lease alternative.
f. Repeat part d assuming the capital lease alternative.
g. Prepare a schedule of the total expenses incurred by Adair Corporation for 2013, 2014, 
and 2015 under each of the three alternatives.
h. Prepare a schedule of the total revenues and total expenses recognized by IBM for 2013, 
2014, and 2015 under each of the three alternatives.
34. Comparison of borrow/buy with operating and capital leases. Carom Sports Collectibles Shop 
plans to acquire, as of January 1, 2013, a computerized cash register system that costs 
$100,000 and has a five-year life and no salvage value. The company considers two plans 
for acquiring the system:
(1) Outright purchase. To finance the purchase, the firm will issue $100,000 of face value, 
10% semiannual coupon bonds on January 1, 2013, at par. The bonds mature in five 
years.
(2) Lease. The lease requires five annual payments on December 31, 2013, 2014, 2015, 
2016, and 2017. The lease payments are such that they have a present value of $100,000 
on January 1, 2013, when discounted at 10% per year.
 
The firm will use the straight-line method for all depreciation and amortization computa-
tions for assets.
a. Applying the old rules, verify that the amount of the required lease payment is $26,380 
by constructing an amortization schedule for the five payments. Note that there will be 
a $2 rounding error in the fifth year. Nevertheless, you may treat each payment as being 
$26,380 in the rest of the problem.
b. What balance sheet accounts are affected if the firm selects plan (1)? What if the firm 
uses plan (2) and the firm uses the operating lease method? What if the firm selects plan 
(2) and it uses the capital lease method?
c. What is the total depreciation and interest expense for the five years under plan (1)?
d. What is the total expense for the five years under plan (2) if the firm could account for 
the lease as an operating lease? As a capital lease?
e. Why are the answers in part d the same? Why do the answers in part c differ from those 
in part d?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

463
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
f. What is the total expense for the first year under plan (1)? Under plan (2) accounted for 
as an operating lease? Under plan (2) accounted for as a capital lease?
g. Repeat part f for 2012.
35.  Financial statement effects of capital and operating leases. Excerpts from the notes to 
the financial statements of Northern Airlines for two recent years reveal the following 
(amounts in millions). Northern Airlines uses the current/old rules of accounting for its 
leases.
December 31
2013
2012
Capitalized Leased Asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   865
$ 1,019
Capital Lease Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    927
  1,088
Long-Term Debt (including Capital Lease) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 12,041
 13,456
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 29,145
 29,495
 
Future minimum commitments under leases with lease periods extending beyond one year 
taken from notes to the financial statements for the year ending December 31, 2012, appear 
in the following table.
Year
Capital 
Leases
Operating 
Leases
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  263
$ 1,065
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
196
1,039
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
973
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
872
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
815
After 2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   794
  7,453
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,804
$12,217
Less Interest Portion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (716)
Lease Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,088
 
Future minimum commitments under leases with lease periods extending beyond one year 
taken from notes to the financial statements for the year ending December 31, 2013, appear 
next.
Year
Capital 
Leases
Operating 
Leases
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  196
$ 1,098
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
1,032
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
175
929
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140
860
2018. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
142
855
After 2018. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   652
  6,710
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,541
$11,484
Less Interest Portion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (614)
Lease Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  927
a. Assume that Northern Airlines makes all lease payments at the end of each year. Pre-
pare an analysis that explains how the capital lease liability decreased from $1,088 mil-
lion on December 31, 2012, to $927 million on December 31, 2013.
b. Compute the weighted-average interest rate that Northern Airlines apparently used to 
compute the present value of capital lease commitments on December 31, 2012.
c. Prepare an analysis that explains how the capitalized leased asset decreased from $1,019 
million on December 31, 2012, to $865 million on December 31, 2013.
d. Give the journal entries to account for capital leases during 2013.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

464
Chapter 11 
Notes, Bonds, and Leases
e. Give the journal entries to account for operating leases during 2013.
f. Assume that 10% is an appropriate interest rate to compute the present value of operat-
ing lease commitments on December 31, 2012, and December 31, 2013. Compute the 
present value of operating lease commitments on each date. Assume that the operating 
lease payment in the fifth year continues at that amount ($815 million for the lease 
commitments on December 31, 2012, and $855 million for the lease commitments on 
December 31, 2013) until the firm has paid all commitments for years after 2017 and 
after 2018, respectively.
g. Compute the long-term debt ratio on December 31, 2012, and December 31, 2013, 
based on the reported amounts (that is, without capitalization of operating leases).
h. Repeat part g but capitalize the operating lease commitments.
i. Referring to the results above, explain why many lessees prefer to avoid treating leases 
as capital leases.
36. Measuring interest expense. GSB Corporation issued semiannual coupon bonds with a face 
value of $110,000 several years ago. The annual coupon rate is 8%, with two coupons 
due each year, six months apart. The historical market interest rate was 10% compounded 
semiannually when GSB Corporation issued the bonds, equal to an effective interest rate of 
10.25% [= (1.05 × 1.05) – 1]. GSB Corporation accounts for these bonds using amortized 
cost measurement based on the historical market interest rate. The current market interest 
rate at the beginning of the current year on these bonds was 6% compounded semian-
nually, for an effective interest rate of 6.09% [= (1.03 × 1.03) – 1]. The market interest 
rate remained at this level throughout the current year. The bonds had a book value of 
$100,000 at the beginning of the current year. When the firm made the payment at the end 
of the first six months of the current year, the accountant debited a liability for the exact 
amount of cash paid. Compute the amount of interest expense on these bonds for the last 
six months of the life of the bonds, assuming all bonds remain outstanding until the retire-
ment date.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapter 4 introduces the concept of an accounting liability. Chapter 9 discusses current liabili-
ties and Chapter 11 discusses long-term notes, bonds, and leases. This chapter explores three 
additional topics related to the recognition and measurement of liabilities:
1. Off-balance-sheet financing, other than operating leases.
2. Retirement benefits.
3. Income taxes.
OFF-BALANCE-SHEET FINANCING
Off-balance-sheet financing refers to obtaining cash, or other assets, or services without a borrow-
ing arrangement that qualifies for liability recognition under U.S. GAAP or IFRS. This section 
explores the rationale for off-balance-sheet financing and the arrangements, other than operating 
leases (which were discussed in Chapter 11), that typically create such obligations.
RATIONALE FOR OFF-BALANCE-SHEET FINANCING
Some managers cite the following reasons for using off-balance sheet financing:
1. Reduced borrowing costs. Lower borrowing costs might result if lenders ignore off-balance-
sheet financing in setting lending rates.
2. Avoid debt covenant violation. If debt covenants include only items that are recognized in the 
financial statements, off-balance sheet arrangements would not affect compliance with these 
covenants. For example, debt covenants may preclude increases in debt ratios.
The first reason is based on an assumption that some lenders do not possess the knowledge, skills, 
and information needed to identify and deal with off-balance-sheet arrangements. Although there 
is little evidence that lenders ignore these obligations, managers sometimes structure financing 
arrangements as though they believe they do. The second reason results from a firm’s desire to 
borrow more than would be permitted under existing debt covenants.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet 
Financing, Retirement 
Benefits, and Income Taxes
C h a p t e r
12
1. Understand why and how firms use 
off-balance-sheet financing and the 
authoritative guidance for it.
2. Understand the issues in measuring and 
recognizing the cost of retirement ben-
efits and in reporting overfunded and 
underfunded benefits.
3. Understand the effects of recognizing 
revenues and expenses for financial 
reporting in a period different from 
that used for tax reporting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

466
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
STRUCTURING OFF-BALANCE-SHEET FINANCING
Chapter 4 defined liabilities as present obligations of an entity to transfer assets or provide 
services to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions and events. Many off-
balance-sheet financings fall into one of two categories that accounting typically does not rec-
ognize as liabilities: executory contracts and contingent obligations.
Executory Contracts Firms may sign contracts promising to pay defined amounts in 
the future in return for future benefits. For an obligation to qualify as an accounting liability, 
the firm must have received a past or current benefit. If the firm will receive benefits only in 
the future and has not received past or current benefits, accounting treats the obligation as an 
executory  contract. Firms typically do not recognize executory contracts as liabilities.
Example 1 Operating lease commitments, discussed in Chapter 11, are a common example 
of an executory contract. If United Airlines (United) wants to acquire additional aircraft, it 
could borrow the needed funds and purchase the aircraft. This arrangement places additional 
debt on United’s balance sheet. Instead, United signs an operating lease agreement in which it 
agrees to pay the aircraft owner certain amounts each year for 12 years. The aircraft has an esti-
mated service life of 18 years. United paints its name on the aircraft, uses the aircraft in opera-
tions, and makes the required lease payments. The assumption underlying an operating lease is 
that United receives benefits when it uses the aircraft, not when it initially signs the lease. That 
is, United has future benefits, not past or current benefits. Thus, United obtains financing for 
some aircrafts without showing a liability on its balance sheet.
Example 2 Louisiana-Pacific Corporation and Weyerhaeuser Company (forest products 
companies) need additional pulp-processing capacity. Each firm could borrow the needed funds 
and build its own manufacturing plant. Instead, they form a joint venture in which each firm 
agrees to use half of the new plant’s capacity each year for 20 years and to pay half of all oper-
ating and debt service costs. The joint venture uses the purchase commitments of the two firms 
to obtain a loan to build the facility. Accounting views the purchase commitments as executory 
contracts—all benefits occur in the future—and therefore neither firm will recognize a liability 
for its portion of the loan. The loan will appear as a liability on the balance sheet of the joint 
venture.1
Contingent Obligations As an alternative to borrowing and using a particular asset as 
collateral, a firm might obtain cash by selling (transferring) an asset to a purchaser (transferee). 
In some cases, the arrangement requires the seller to pay cash to the purchaser under certain 
conditions. For example, if the asset generates less cash for the purchaser than anticipated, the 
arrangement may require the seller to make a cash payment to the purchaser. There are at least 
two accounting questions about this arrangement:
1. Should the transferor account for the transfer of the asset as a sale or as a secured 
borrowing?
2. If the transferor accounts for the transfer as a sale, how should it account for the obliga-
tion to make a future cash payment if certain conditions are met?
We present two examples to illustrate these arrangements now, and return to these questions 
later in the chapter.
Example 3 Great Deal extends credit to its customers to purchase televisions, stereos, and 
other electronic items. Great Deal could borrow from a bank, using its accounts receivable as 
collateral, and use the cash collections from the receivables to repay the bank loan with inter-
est. Alternatively, Great Deal could sell its receivables to the bank, for an amount that reflects 
both the expected defaults and the cost of the collections work required of the bank. If Great 
Deal accounts for this transaction as a sale, it will recognize no incremental debt on the balance 
sheet.
 1 These firms would likely structure the arrangement so that neither firm controls the joint venture and therefore 
neither firm would prepare consolidated financial statements with the joint venture. As Chapter 14 explains 
more fully, consolidating the financial statements of the joint venture with those of either joint owner would 
result in reporting the loan to finance the pulp-processing plant on the consolidated balance sheet of the con-
solidating firm.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

467
Off-Balance-Sheet Financing
Example 4 Seagram Company, a distiller of liquors, ages its whiskeys for approximately 10 
years. The firm must pay the costs to produce the whiskey and store it during the aging pro-
cess. Using the whiskey as collateral, Seagram could finance the costs incurred during the aging 
process and recognize the liability. Alternatively, Seagram could sell the whiskey to a bank and 
agree to oversee the aging process on the bank’s behalf. At the completion of the aging, Sea-
gram helps the bank find a buyer but is not responsible for ensuring that a sale occurs. Under 
this arrangement, the bank bears the risk of changes in whiskey selling prices. Seagram will 
probably treat this transaction as a sale, with no incremental debt on the balance sheet.
TREATMENT OF OFF-BALANCE-SHEET FINANCING 
ARRANGEMENTS UNDER U.S. GAAP AND IFRS
U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide guidance for determining whether a given financing arrange-
ment is reported as a liability on the balance sheet or is disclosed in the notes. The authoritative 
guidance tends to be tied to specific facts and circumstances of a particular arrangement. Two 
themes emerge in this authoritative guidance:
■ 
Identifying the party that enjoys the economic benefits of the resource in each transaction 
and bears the economic risk of holding it.
■ 
Identifying the party that obtains financing.
If the entity that obtains financing also controls the benefits and risks, the typical outcome is 
the recognition of a liability by that entity. If the entity that provides the financing also controls 
the benefits and risks, the typical outcome is no recognition of a liability by the entity needing 
financing. The financing remains off-balance-sheet.
Example 5 Refer to Example 1. Recall from Chapter 11 that the criteria for a capital lease 
are intended to identify the entity, either lessor or lessee, that enjoys the benefits and incurs the 
risk of the leased asset. When the lessor enjoys the benefits and incurs the risk, the lease is an 
operating lease, and no liability appears on the lessee’s balance sheet. When the lessee enjoys 
the benefits and incurs the risk, the lease is a capital lease and a lease liability appears on the 
lessee’s balance sheet.
Example 6 Refer to Example 2. If the lender relies only on the purchase commitments, nei-
ther Louisiana-Pacific nor Weyerhaeuser guarantees repayment of the loan, and neither firm 
controls the joint venture, then no liability will appear on either company’s balance sheet. If, 
however, the lender requires at least one of the firms to guarantee payment of the loan, the 
guarantor(s) would recognize the fair value of the guarantee (under both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS).2 If loan default becomes probable, then the guarantor(s) would apply loss contingency 
accounting (U.S. GAAP) or provision accounting (IFRS) and recognize a liability.
Example 7 Refer to Example 3. Assume that Great Deal must transfer additional receivables 
to the lender if any receivables become uncollectible or if interest rates rise above a specified 
level. Great Deal bears both credit risk and interest rate risk and should treat the transfer of 
receivables as a loan. Therefore, debt would appear on Great Deal’s balance sheet.
Example 8 Refer to Example 4. If Seagram guarantees a selling price that pays the lender 
both the original purchase price and a reasonable return over that amount, Seagram bears the 
economic risk and must show a liability on its balance sheet. If, however, the lender does not 
require Seagram to guarantee a minimum selling price, the lender bears both the risk of market 
prices changes and the uncertainty about the quality of the whiskey. In this case, Seagram will 
likely record the transaction as a sale and not a loan.
TRANSFER OF RECEIVABLES IN EXCHANGE FOR CASH
A transfer of receivables is a common form of financing. Example 3 and Example 7 involve 
transfers of receivables to a bank. In more complicated financing arrangements, some firms sell 
 2 The guarantee might affect whether one of the two guarantors is determined to be in control of the joint ven-
ture and would consolidate it.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

468
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
batches of receivables to a legally separate entity whose sole purpose is to hold the receivables 
and issue claims on their cash flows. Such an entity is called a special purpose entity (SPE) or 
a variable interest entity (VIE).3 The firm that sells the receivables is the transferor. The SPE or 
VIE issues securities to investors in return for cash, and then transfers the cash to the trans-
feror in payment for the receivables. The investors receive payments out of the cash flows from 
the transferred receivables. This process is called a securitization of the receivables. Exhibit 12.1 
depicts a simplified securitization structure.
Securitization transactions may include continuing involvement of the transferor with the 
transferred receivables. For example, the transferor may continue to service the receivables by 
collecting cash and pursuing customers who do not pay on time or at all. The transferor may 
also retain some credit risk or interest rate risk. U.S. GAAP and IFRS rules apply to transfers 
like the one illustrated in Exhibit 12.1. If the transferor accounts for the transaction as a sale, it 
will recognize assets it controls and liabilities it has incurred.4
SUMMARY OF THE ACCOUNTING TREATMENT OF OFF-BALANCE-SHEET 
FINANCING ARRANGEMENTS
The accounting for transfers of receivables has come under the scrutiny of standard setters, as 
has the accounting for transfers involving inventories and research and development arrange-
ments.5 A goal in formulating appropriate reporting standards is to reflect the economic 
effect of such arrangements. The trend in recent standards is to recognize more obligations as 
liabilities.
 PROBLEM  12.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Off-balance-sheet financing. Weyerhaeuser, a forest and paper products company, wishes 
to obtain $75 million of additional financing. It creates a legally separate trust to which, 
on January 1, it transfers cutting rights to a mature timber tract. The trust will pay for 
these rights by borrowing $75 million for five years from a bank, with interest at 8% per 
year. The trust promises to make equal installment payments on December 31 of each 
year for five years. The trust will harvest and sell timber each year to obtain cash to make 
the loan payments and to pay operating costs. At current prices, the value of the standing 
wood is 10% more than the amounts the trust will need to service the loan and to pay 
ongoing operating costs. The future selling price of timber will determine the trust’s 
actions, as follows:
(continued)
 3 Chapter 14 discusses the conditions under which firms must prepare consolidated financial statements with such 
entities.
 4 The guidance is FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 166, “Accounting for Transfers of 
Financial Assets,” 2009 (Codification Topic 860); Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 156, 
“Accounting for Servicing of Financial Assets,” 2006 (Codification Topic 860); IASB, International Accounting 
Standard 39, “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” revised 2003.
 5 The U.S. GAAP guidance for transfers involving inventories is FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Stan-
dards No. 49, “Accounting for Product Financing Arrangements,” 1981 (Codification Topic 470); for research 
and development arrangements, the U.S. GAAP guidance is FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Stan-
dards No. 68, “Research and Development Arrangements,” 1982 (Codification Topic 730). The IFRS guidance is 
more general; some of it is contained in the IFRS standard that describes consolidation policy, IASB, Interna-
tional Financial Reporting Standard 10, “Consolidated Financial Statements,” 2011.
Receivables
Cash
Securities
Cash
Firm Originating
Receivables
(Transferor)
Investors
Special Purpose
Entity or Variable
Interest Entity
Simplified Structure of Receivables Securitization
EXHIBIT 12.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

469
Retirement Benefits
■ If timber prices decline, the trust will harvest more timber and sell it to service the 
debt and to pay operating costs.
■ If timber prices increase, the trust will harvest timber at the level originally planned 
and invest cash receipts that exceed debt service and operating costs. At the end of 
five years, the trust will distribute any cash and uncut timber to Weyerhaeuser.
Weyerhaeuser will guarantee the debt if cash flows from selling the timber are inadequate 
to pay operating costs and service the debt. The bank has the right to inspect the tract at 
any time and to replace Weyerhaeuser’s forest-management personnel with managers of 
its own choosing if it feels that Weyerhaeuser is mismanaging the tract.
a. Identify Weyerhaeuser’s economic returns and risks in this arrangement.
b. Identify the bank’s economic returns and risks in this arrangement.
c. Should Weyerhaeuser treat this transaction as a loan (a liability on its balance sheet) 
or as a sale (with no liability on its balance sheet)? Explain your reasoning. Assume 
that Weyerhaeuser will not consolidate the trust.
RETIREMENT BENEFITS
Some employers provide retirement benefits to their employees, primarily pensions and health 
insurance. This section discusses two issues related to such benefits:
■ 
The measurement and recognition of the cost of retirement plans;
■ 
The reporting of the assets and obligations of retirement plans.
The discussion focuses on the accounting for pension plans but similar principles apply to 
health insurance benefits. Provisions in U.S. GAAP and IFRS are based on similar principles, 
although some of the specific requirements differ.6
RECOGNITION OF PENSION EXPENSE
The employer must recognize the cost of pension plans. An important conceptual question is 
whether the employer should recognize this cost as an expense:
1. During the time employees render services, or
2. When retired employees receive benefits.
The first approach records the cost of pension benefits as deferred compensation in the period 
when employees render services. This approach is similar to the accounting for current compen-
sation, such as salaries and wages.
The second approach records the cost of pension benefits as an expense after employees 
render services. Typically accounting records a cost as an expense when a firm receives services 
(when employees earn pension benefits) regardless of when a firm actually settles the obligation 
(when employees receive the benefits). Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to recognize 
the cost of pension benefits as an expense during the years when employees render services.
PENSION PLAN STRUCTURE AND DEFINITIONS
Exhibit 12.2 presents the structure of a typical pension plan.
The elements of the structure are as follows:
1. The employer sets up a pension plan that is legally separate from the employer. The plan 
specifies the eligibility of employees, the promises to employees, the method of funding, and 
 6 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 158, “Employers’ Accounting for Defined Benefit Pen-
sion and Other Postretirement Plans, 2006 (Codification Topic 715); IASB, International Accounting Standard 
19, “Employee Benefits,” revised 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

470
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
the plan administrator. Some employers promise to contribute a certain amount to the plan 
each period for each employee (usually based on an employee’s salary). Defined  contribution 
plans do not specify the benefits employees will receive during retirement. These amounts 
depend on the investment performance of the plan. In most defined contribution plans, 
employees have a say regarding how the administrator invests the amounts contributed on 
their behalf. Defined benefit plans specify the retirement benefit that employees will receive. 
Employer contributions plus earnings from investments made with those contributions pay 
the specified benefit. For reasons discussed later, the assets in a defined benefit plan will 
usually not equal the liabilities of the plan, resulting in an overfunded or underfunded 
plan.
2. Each period the employer transfers cash to the pension plan. The plan is usually organized 
as a trust, and the plan administrator serves in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of 
employees. The employer cannot access assets in the plan, except under specific conditions 
that vary by jurisdiction. The employer does not consolidate the assets and liabilities of the 
plan with the company’s own assets and liabilities. The pension expense recognized for a 
particular period equals the cash contribution for defined contribution plans. For defined 
benefit plans, the cash contribution rarely equals the pension expense.7
3. The pension plan invests the cash it receives from the employer and pays cash to retired 
employees each period. The assets in the plan change each period as follows:
Assets at Beginning of the Period
+/−Actual Earnings on Pension Plan Investments
+
Contributions Received from the Employer
−
Payments to Retirees
=
Assets at End of the Period
 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to report pension plan assets at fair value. Thus, actual 
earnings from pension plan investments include interest and dividends plus realized and 
unrealized changes in the fair value of plan investments.
4. The pension plan computes the amount of the pension liability each period. The liability 
for a defined contribution plan equals the assets in the plan. The computation of the liabil-
ity for a defined benefit plan uses the pension benefit formula underlying the plan. This 
formula requires management to estimate employee turnover, mortality, interest rates, and 
other actuarial estimates or actuarial assumptions. The liability of the pension plan equals 
the present value of the expected benefits that will be paid to employees. The discount rate 
that firms use in measuring the liability is the rate of return on high-quality, fixed-income 
investments with a maturity approximately equal to the maturity of the pension benefits.
The typical benefit formula for a defined benefit plan takes into account length of service and 
salary. For example, the employer might promise to pay an employee an annual pension equal 
to a stated percentage (say, 2% per year worked) of the employee’s average annual salary during 
his or her five highest-paid working years. In this example, an employee with 40 years of ser-
vice receives an annual pension equal to 80% of that employee’s average salary during the five 
highest-paid working years.
Cash
Contributions
Earnings from
Investments
Cash
Payments
Employer
Firm
Retired
Employees
Pension
Plan/Fund
Structure of a Typical Pension Plan
EXHIBIT 12.2
 7 We discuss the measurement of pension expense for defined benefit plans later in this section.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

471
Retirement Benefits
U.S. GAAP defines the primary measurement of the pension liability as the projected 
 benefit obligation (PBO). The PBO is the present value of the amount the pension plan expects 
to pay to employees during retirement based on accumulated service and the expected future 
salary level. IFRS uses similar measurement methods but defines the pension liability as the 
present value of a defined benefit obligation.
A related measure of the pension obligation, found in U.S. GAAP and not in IFRS, is the 
accumulated benefit obligation (ABO). The ABO is the present value of amounts the pension plan 
expects to pay to employees during retirement based on accumulated service and current salary 
at the time of measuring the liability. The difference between the PBO and the ABO relates to 
expected future salary increases. The PBO incorporates them, whereas the ABO does not.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to base both pension expense and the funded status on 
the PBO. The liability of the pension plan usually changes each period as follows:
PBO at Beginning of the Period
+
Increase in PBO for Interest
+
Increase in PBO for Current Employee Service (Service Cost)
+/−Actuarial Gains and Losses
−
Payments to Retirees
=
PBO at End of the Period 
The projected benefit obligation changes for several reasons:
■ 
Interest accrues as the payment dates approach (that is, payments are one year nearer to 
becoming cash outflows).
■ 
Employees work another period and earn rights to a larger pension.
■ 
Changes in assumptions about employee turnover, mortality, and similar factors.
SUMMARY OF PENSION PLAN STRUCTURE AND DEFINITIONS
The following points summarize the discussion of pension plan structure:
1. The employer firm and the pension plan are legally separate entities, each with its own 
financial reports.
2. The balance sheet of a defined benefit plan includes the assets in the plan measured at 
fair value and the projected benefit obligation measured using the current interest rate on 
high-quality, fixed-income investments. The difference between the assets and the liabilities 
indicates the extent to which a pension plan is overfunded or underfunded.
3. The total pension expense over time equals the amount of cash contributed to the pension 
plan. Each period, however, the cash contribution rarely equals pension expense for that 
period for a defined benefit plan.
ILLUSTRATION OF THE ACCOUNTING BY A DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN
Exhibit 12.3 presents the assets and liabilities of a simplified pension plan for its first four years.
2010 Assume this firm begins operations on January 1, 2010, and establishes a defined benefit 
pension plan. On December 31, 2010, the firm computes the present value of retirement ben-
efits earned by employees during the year based on one year of service and the expected future 
salary levels on which the plan will pay benefits to employees. These computations consider 
estimates of employee turnover, mortality, and other actuarial factors. The computation of the 
projected benefit obligation uses an 8% discount rate. In 2010, the employer contributes $100 
cash, called the service cost, which is equal to the increase in the projected benefit obligation for 
current employees’ services. The assets in the plan equal the liabilities at the end of 2010. That 
is, the plan is fully funded.
2011 During 2011 the projected benefit obligation increases by $8 (= 0.08 × $100) because 
the benefits earned during 2010 are one year closer to being paid. This amount is called the 
 interest cost. The projected benefit obligation also increases by $120 for current employee 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

472
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Illustrative Data for Defined Benefit Pension Plan
Pension Plan Assets
2010
2011
2012
2013
Pension Plan Assets at Beginning of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  0
$100
$228
$379
Contributions from Employer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
120
140
160
Income from Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
8
11
30
Payments to Retirees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   0
   0
   0
   0
$100
$228
$379
$569
Pension Plan Liabilities
2010
2011
2012
2013
Pension Plan Liability at Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  0
$100
$228
$421
Increase from Current Service Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
120
140
160
Increase from Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
8
18
34
Changes in Actuarial Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
5
0
Change Due to Prior Service  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
30
0
Payments to Retirees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   0
   0
   0
   0
Pension Plan Liability at End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
$228
$421
$615
EXHIBIT 12.3
service, suggesting that the firm added employees during 2011, or that projected salary levels 
increased above those anticipated at the end of 2010. The plan invested the cash on hand on Jan-
uary 1, 2011. The actual return on plan assets was 8%, resulting in investment income of $8. 
The employer contributes $120 to the plan. The assets in the plan at the end of 2011 equal the 
projected benefit obligation (that is, the pension plan remains fully funded). This result occurs 
because (1) the assets in the pension plan equal the projected benefit obligation at the beginning 
of the year, (2) the rate of return on assets equals the discount rate used to compute the projected 
benefit obligation, (3) the employer’s contribution equals the increase in the projected benefit 
obligation for current services, and (4) there were no changes in actuarial estimates of employee 
turnover, mortality, or other factors. A divergence in any one of the first three or a change in the 
fourth will cause the amount of plan assets to differ from the projected benefit obligation.
2012 In 2012, the illustration changes as follows:
■ 
The actual rate of return on pension investments is 4.8% (= $11/$228), not the 8% earned 
in 2011. The expected return on assets is $18 (= 0.08 × $228).
■ 
Changes in actuarial assumptions increase the projected benefit obligation by $5.
■ 
The employer changes the pension benefit formula and agrees to give employees credit for 
the time they have already worked. This retroactive benefit increases the projected benefit 
obligation by $30. The cost of this increased benefit is called prior service cost.
We continue to use an 8% discount rate to compute the projected benefit obligation. The ser-
vice cost increases during 2012 to $140 because of more employees or higher projected salary 
levels.
Exhibit 12.3 shows that the assets in the pension plan at the end of 2012 are less than the 
projected benefit obligation by $42 (= $379 − $421). The pension plan is underfunded by $42, 
as follows:
Actual Return on Investments of $11 Is Less Than the $18 Expected . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7
Change in Actuarial Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Change in Pension Benefit Formula Increasing Prior Service Cost   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 30
Total Amount of Underfunding   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$42
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

473
Retirement Benefits
In a defined benefit plan, the employer is responsible for the underfunding. Thus, the 
employer must increase its cash contribution, pension investments must generate higher returns, 
or changes in the projected benefit obligation in the future must offset the increased obligation.
2013 During 2013, pension fund investments earn 8% (= $30/$379), up from 4.8% in 2012. 
There are no changes in the interest rate used to compute the projected benefit obligation (8%), 
in actuarial assumptions, or in the pension benefit formula. Thus, at the end of 2013, the pen-
sion plan is underfunded by $46 (= $569 – $615) as follows:
Deficient Return on Assets of $7 in 2012 plus Deficient Return on Assets of $4 [= 0.08 × 
($7 + $5 + $30)] in 2013 Due to Lost Earnings on $7 Deficient Return in 2012 and 
Lost Earnings Because Employer Did Not Immediately Contribute Cash for the Change 
in Actuarial Assumptions and Prior Service Cost from 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$11
Change in Actuarial Assumptions Carried Over from 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5
Change in Pension Benefit Formula Increasing Prior Service Cost Carried Over from 2012. . . . . .  
 30
Total Amount of Underfunding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$46
The pension plan carries forward the effects of underfunding in that liabilities continue to 
increase for interest cost. Because assets are less than liabilities, investment returns are less than 
the interest cost. The claim on the employer’s assets helps explain the accounting for pension 
arrangements discussed in the next section.
ILLUSTRATION OF EMPLOYER ACCOUNTING FOR A DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN
The accounting for a defined benefit pension plan considers the balance sheet, the measure-
ment of pension expense, and the relation between pension accounting on the balance sheet 
and the income statement.
Reporting the Funded Status on the Balance Sheet Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
require employers to recognize the funded status of a defined benefit plan as either an asset 
(pension plan is overfunded) or as a liability (pension plan is underfunded).8 A firm with mul-
tiple plans nets the pension assets and pension liabilities for each plan and may further com-
bine all overfunded plans and separately combine all underfunded plans. A firm with both net 
underfunded plans and net overfunded plans would show both an asset and a liability. IFRS 
refers to this amount as the net defined benefit liability (asset), depending on whether the plan is 
underfunded or overfunded. The firm debits or credits Other Comprehensive Income, a share-
holders’ equity account that is not part of net income, for the offsetting amount. We continue 
the example summarized in Exhibit 12.3.
2010 and 2011 Pension assets equal pension liabilities at the end of 2010 and 2011. The net 
asset (or liability) is zero. Therefore, the employer’s balance sheet shows neither an asset nor a 
liability.
2012 At the end of 2012, the pension plan is underfunded by $42, and the employer records 
the following journal entry:
December 31, 2012
Other Comprehensive Income: Performance and Actuarial Losses . . . . . . . . . 
12
Other Comprehensive Income: Prior Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Liability for Pension Benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
42
(continued)
 8 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 158, “Employers’ Accounting for Defined Benefit Pen-
sion and Other Postretirement Plans,” 2006 (Codification Topics 715 and 958). IASB, International Accounting 
Standard 19, “Employee Benefits,” revised 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

474
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+42
–12
OCI → AOCI
–30
OCI → AOCI
To recognize both a liability for an underfunded pension plan of $42 and 
offsetting entries in other comprehensive income.
The $12 debit to Other Comprehensive Income includes the deficient earnings on pension 
investments of $7 and the actuarial loss of $5. U.S. GAAP requires that the firm amortize these 
charges to Other Comprehensive Income.9
Recognition of Pension Expense in the Income Statement Pension expense (or 
credit) for a defined benefit plan10 under U.S. GAAP comprises the following:
Interest Cost (the increase in the obligation because of the passage of time)
+
Service Cost (the increase in the obligation because of an additional year of employee service)
−
Expected Return on Pension Investments
+/−Amortization of Performance and Actuarial Gains and Losses
+/−Amortization of Prior Service Cost
=
Net Pension Expense (or Credit)
Including interest cost as a positive amount and the expected return on pension investments 
as a negative amount illustrates the extent to which expected earnings from pension investments 
cover the increase in the pension liability. If the expected return is large enough, the firm will 
report a pension credit to income, not an expense. When pension assets equal pension liabilities 
and the expected rate of return on pension investments equals the discount rate used, then the 
amounts on these two lines offset each other. This was the case for 2011 in the previous exam-
ple. When the interest cost exceeds the expected return on pension investments, as occurred in 
2012, either employer contributions or future earnings on pension plan investments must make 
up the difference. Computing pension expense using the expected return (not the actual return) 
rests on the view that pension plans should take a long-term perspective and generate earnings 
from investments based on a long-term expected rate of return. Annual deviations from this 
long-term expected rate should not flow through to net income. Finally, including service cost 
as an increase in expense is similar to treating salaries and wages as expenses.
IFRS requirements for the recognition of pension cost differ from the requirements of U.S. 
GAAP in three ways:
1. Under IFRS, service cost includes both the increase in the obligation because of an addi-
tional year of employee service and the effects of any change in the obligation that arises 
because of a plan amendment. The latter, which U.S. GAAP refers to as prior service cost, 
is expensed immediately and not amortized.
2. Pension cost under IFRS does not include separate amounts for interest cost and expected 
return on plan assets. Instead, it includes an amount equal to net interest on the over-
funded or underfunded amount. This net interest combines interest income on plan assets 
and interest cost on the defined benefit obligation. Interest income on plan assets is analo-
gous to the expected return amount under U.S. GAAP, although the details of the calcula-
tion differ.
3. Under IFRS, actuarial gains and losses plus the difference between interest income on plan 
assets and the actual return on plan assets are viewed as plan remeasurements. They are 
included in other comprehensive income.
 9 The rules for amortization of these amounts are complex and beyond the scope of this book.
10 Pension expense for a defined contribution plan equals the employer’s contribution to the plan.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

475
Retirement Benefits
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, the funded status of the defined benefit plan on the 
employer’s balance sheet mirrors the funded status on the books of the pension plan. Differ-
ences between pension assets and pension liabilities relate to funding policies of the employer, 
investment performance, changes in actuarial assumptions, and changes in the pension benefit 
formula. Pension plans measure and report assets at fair values and measure and report liabili-
ties using a current market interest rate for high-quality, fixed-income investments. Thus, the 
amounts reported on the balance sheets of the employer and the pension fund reflect value 
changes as they occur.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require employers to record pension expense (or credit) 
that includes service cost, measures of return on plan assets and interest cost on plan liabili-
ties, and other components that differ between the two sets of authoritative guidance. Under 
U.S. GAAP, employers include unamortized performance and actuarial gains and losses and 
unamortized prior service cost in other comprehensive income. Firms amortize these items 
and include them in pension expense. Under IFRS, amounts included in other comprehensive 
income are not amortized.
OTHER POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
The accounting and reporting of health care and other postretirement plans follow the con-
cepts and procedures discussed and illustrated for defined benefit pension plans. The liability 
for the underfunded health care obligation may exceed the liability for underfunded pensions. 
This higher liability occurs because the projected rate of increase in health care costs is higher 
than that for salaries and because some employers do not make cash contributions to cover 
their postretirement health care obligations.11
INTERPRETING RETIREMENT BENEFIT DISCLOSURES
Firms report extensive information about their retirement plans in notes to the financial state-
ments. We illustrate certain of these disclosures taken from the notes to the financial statements 
of Intertel Corporation, a U.S. computer manufacturer, for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Exhibit 12.4 shows the disclosures related to the funded status of Intertel’s pension plans 
for two recent years. The underfunded amounts appear in noncurrent liabilities on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of 2012 ($156 million) and 2013 ($170 million). The amounts that Inter-
tel includes in accumulated other comprehensive income represent unamortized net actuarial 
losses. Intertel had no unamortized prior service costs in 2012 or 2013.
Exhibit 12.5 shows the components of Intertel’s net pension cost in 2012 and 2013. The 
interest cost and the expected return on pension plan assets largely offset.
Exhibit 12.6 presents some of the estimates Intertel used in accounting for its pension plans. 
Intertel decreased the discount rate it uses to compute the pension obligation, from 6.7% at 
the end of 2012 to 6.1% at the end of 2013. A smaller discount rate increases the pension obli-
gation. Intertel maintained the expected return on plan assets at 4.5%. Intertel increased the 
assumed rate of compensation increases from 5.0% to 5.1%. The increase in compensation also 
increases the pension obligation.
From Exhibit 12.4 and Exhibit 12.5, we can break down the items affecting the unamortized 
actuarial loss included in accumulated other comprehensive income:
 
Pension Plans
Unamortized Actuarial Loss at End of 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$(268)
Actuarial Loss for 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(123)
Amortization of Actuarial Loss for 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   18
Unamortized Actuarial Loss at End of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$(373)
11 The regulatory and tax treatments of employer contributions to postretirement benefit arrangements, including 
pensions, are jurisdiction-specific. In the United States, both the regulatory treatment and the tax treatment of 
employer contributions differ substantially between postretirement health plans and defined benefit pension 
plans. Regulations and tax treatments create stronger incentives (and in the United States, requirements) to 
contribute to defined benefit pension plans than to postretirement health plans.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

476
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Intertel Corporation
Elements of Pension Expense
(amounts in millions of US$)
Intertel Corporation
Actuarial Assumptions for Pension Plans
Pension Plans
2013
2012
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 38
$ 12
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34
35
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(18)
(13)
Amortization of Prior Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
Amortization of Prior Actuarial Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  18
  22
Net Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 72
$ 56
Pension Plans
Actuarial Assumptions:
2013
2012
Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6.1%
6.7%
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4.5%
4.5%
Rate of Compensation Increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5.1%
5.0%
EXHIBIT 12.5
EXHIBIT 12.6
Intertel Corporation
Funded Status of Selected Defined Benefit Pension Plans
(amounts in millions of US$)
Pension Plans
2013
2012
Benefit Obligation, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$567
$542
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
38
12
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34
35
Actuarial Loss (Gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
123
(10)
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (23)
 (12)
Benefit Obligation, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$739
$567
Fair Value of Plan Assets, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$411
$303
Actual Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18
20
Employer Contributions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
163
100
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (23)
 (12)
Fair Value of Plan Assets, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$569
$411
Unfunded Status as of December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$170
$156
Amounts recognized in balance sheet:
 
Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$170
$156
 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
373
268
EXHIBIT 12.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

477
Retirement Benefits
The actuarial loss for 2013 appears in the analysis of the change in the pension obligation 
in Exhibit 12.4. Exhibit 12.5 includes the amount of the amortization of the actuarial loss.
JOURNAL ENTRY TO RECORD CHANGE IN BENEFIT OBLIGATIONS
Intertel’s journal entry to record the change in the underfunded pension obligation for 2013 is 
as follows:
2013
Pension Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
72
Other Comprehensive Income (Actuarial Loss: $373 – $268) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105
 
Pension Liability (Noncurrent Liability: $170 – $156) . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
163
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–163
+14
–72
IncSt → RE
–105
OCI → AOCI
To record pension expense, pension funding, and the change in balance 
sheet accounts related to the pension plan.
Exhibits 12.4 and 12.5 provide the amounts for the pension contribution and pension 
expense, respectively. The entry for the underfunded pension liability reported in noncurrent 
liabilities adjusts the amount on the balance sheet at the end of 2012 to the amount at the end 
of 2013. The entries in Other Comprehensive Income reflect the change in unamortized prior 
actuarial losses during 2013.
 PROBLEM  12.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Interpreting retirement plan disclosures. Exhibit 12.7 presents the elements of pension, 
health care, and life insurance expense for Microgen Incorporated for 2011, 2012, and 
2013. Exhibit 12.8 presents the funded status of pension, health care, and life insurance 
plans for 2012 and 2013 and the actuarial assumptions made.
a. Refer to the disclosures in Exhibit 12.8 of Microgen’s benefit obligation for its princi-
pal pension plans. What is the likely explanation for the actuarial gain of $3,205 mil-
lion in 2013?
b. Refer to the disclosures in Exhibit 12.8 for the amount of prior service cost for both 
pension plans and health care plans. What is the likely explanation for the increase in 
prior service cost for 2013?
c. Evaluate the performance of Microgen’s pension and health care plan investments in 
2012 and 2013 relative to expectations.
d. Why does Microgen include the net funded asset for its principal pension plans in 
both assets and liabilities on its balance sheet?
e. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the prior service cost included in 
shareholders’ equity from $831 at the end of 2012 to $2,060 at the end of 2013 for 
Microgen’s principal pension plans and from $2,046 at the end of 2012 to $5,700 at 
the end of 2013 for its health care plans.
f. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the net actuarial loss (gain) included 
in shareholders’ equity for Microgen’s principal pension plans (from a loss of $2,162 
at the end of 2012 to a gain of $4,974 at the end of 2013) and for its health care plans 
(from a gain of $31 at the end of 2012 to a loss of $210 at the end of 2013).
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

478
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Microgen Incorporated
Elements of Pension (Principal Plans) and Health Care Expense
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 12.2 for Self-Study)
Microgen Inc.
Funded Status of Pension (Principal Plans) and Health Care Plans
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 12.2 for Self-Study)
Principal Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,355
$ 1,402
$ 1,359
$  286
$ 229
$  243
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,416
2,304
2,248
577
455
507
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(3,950)
(3,811)
(3,885)
(125)
(127)
(138)
Prior Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
241
253
256
603
363
326
Actuarial Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       693
    729
    351
   (17)
   64
    70
Net Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   755
$   877
$   329
$1,324
$ 984
$1,008
Principal Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2013
 
2012
Benefit Obligation, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . .
$43,293
$43,331
$  8,262
$ 9,084
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,355
1,402
286
229
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,416
2,304
577
455
Plan Amendments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,470
80
4,257
—
Actuarial Loss (Gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,205)
(1,514)
320
(707)
Participant Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
162
47
43
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2,555)
(2,472)
(796)
(810)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    —
    —
      30
    (32)
Benefit Obligation, December 31. . . . . . . . .
$42,947
$43,293
$ 12,983
$ 8,262
Fair Value of Plan Assets, January 1 . . . . . . .
$54,758
$49,096
$  1,710
$ 1,619
Actual Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,188
7,851
221
222
Employer Contributions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
136
121
622
636
Participant Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
162
47
43
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (2,555)
 (2,472)
    (796)
     (810)
Fair Value of Plan Assets, December 31. . . . .
$59,700
$54,758
$  1,804
$ 1,710
Net Funded Asset (Liability) . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,753
$11,465
$(11,179)
$(6,552)
Recognized in:
 
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$20,190
$15,019
$    —
$    —
 
Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(111)
(106)
(675)
(681)
 
Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (3,326)
 (3,448)
 (10,504)
   (5,871)
 
 
Net Asset (Liability) Recognized  . . . . .
$16,753
$11,465
$(11,179)
$(6,552)
Recognized in Shareholders’ Equity:
 
Prior Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,060
$   831
$  5,700
$ 2,046
 
Net Actuarial Loss (Gain)  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (4,974)
$ 2,162
$    210
$    (31)
Actuarial Assumptions:
Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.34%
5.70%
6.31%
5.75%
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.50%
8.50%
8.50%
8.50%
Rate of Compensation Increase . . . . . . . . . .
5.00%
5.00%
—
—
Initial Health Care Cost Trend Rate  . . . . . . .
—
—
9.10%
9.20%
Ultimate Health Care Cost Trend Rate. . . . . .
—
—
6.00%
5.00%
Number of Years to Ultimate Trend Rate  . . . .
—
—
18 years
7 years
EXHIBIT 12.7
EXHIBIT 12.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

479
Income Taxes
g. Give the journal entry that Microgen made on its books to recognize pension expense, 
pension funding, and the change in the net funded asset for 2013.
h. Give the journal entry that Microgen made on its books to recognize health care 
expense and funding and the change in the net funded liability for 2013.
INCOME TAXES
Income tax expense affects assessments of profitability as much as any other expense. A com-
mon ratio for analyzing the effect of income taxes on profitability is the effective tax rate, com-
puted as income tax expense12 divided by financial reporting income before income taxes:
Effective Tax Rate =
Income Tax Expense
Pretax Book Income
Consider the data for Intertel and Great Deal in Exhibit 12.9.
Intertel’s profit margin ratio is higher than Great Deal’s: 26.3% versus 4.4%. Part of that 
higher profit margin is due to Intertel’s lower effective tax rate: 28.6% versus 36.5%. Income tax 
is one factor that causes Intertel’s profit margin to be higher than Great Deal’s. Other factors 
include other expenses associated with the operating structures and business models of the two 
enterprises.13
This section discusses the measurement of income tax expense and how information about 
income tax positions appears in the notes to the financial statements. We consider both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS, which provide similar authoritative guidance.
MEASUREMENT OF INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The amount of income taxes imposed by the government is the amount of income tax payable. 
Income tax payable does not equal income tax expense. The amounts of revenues and expenses 
recognized for financial reporting purposes will usually differ from the amounts of revenues 
and expenses reported for income tax purposes. In the discussion that follows, we use these 
terms:
■ 
Book purposes and tax purposes to distinguish the financial statements from the tax return.
■ 
Book income to refer to financial statement income and taxable income to refer to income 
on the tax return.
■ 
Book basis to refer to the unamortized cost of an item for financial reporting and tax basis 
to refer to the unamortized cost of an item for tax reporting.
12 Firms that apply U.S. GAAP sometimes use the term provision for income taxes instead of income tax expense 
in their financial reports. See the Glossary. In U.S. GAAP, provision means an expense; in IFRS, provision means 
a liability.
13 Factors influencing profit margins are discussed in Chapter 7.
Effective Income Tax Rates and Profit Margin Data
Intertel
Great Deal
Effective Tax Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28.6%
36.5%
Profit Margin (= Net Income/Revenues). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26.3%
 4.4%
EXHIBIT 12.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

480
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
The difference between book income and taxable income arises from two factors.
1. Permanent differences. Book income includes revenues or expenses that taxable income 
never includes. An example in the United States is interest revenue on certain municipal 
bonds.
2. Temporary differences. Book income includes revenues and expenses in one period, whereas 
taxable income includes them in a different period. A common example is depreciation on 
long-lived assets.
Firms use taxable income as the base for computing income tax payable. Taxable income 
excludes permanent differences and uses the accounting methods that income tax laws require 
or permit firms to use for tax reporting. The number and nature of permanent differences and 
temporary differences are jurisdiction-specific.
Income tax expense is the amount reported in calculating book income. Should income tax 
expense equal:
1. The income taxes actually payable each period based on taxable income?
2. The income taxes actually payable each period plus (minus) the income taxes a firm expects 
to pay (save) in the future when temporary differences between book income and taxable 
income of the current period reverse?
Advocates of the first approach view income taxes similar to other taxes, such as property 
taxes. Governments define the tax base (for example, assessed value of property) and apply a 
rate to this base to measure the taxes due each period.
Advocates of the second approach focus on two financial reporting objectives: recognizing 
the amount of taxes payable in the current year and recognizing deferred tax assets and deferred 
tax liabilities for the future consequences of temporary differences. Under this approach, a tem-
porary difference that implies a future tax deduction gives rise to a deferred tax asset. A tempo-
rary difference that implies a future increase in income tax payable gives rise to a deferred tax 
liability. Income tax expense is based on book income, not taxable income. Note that perma-
nent differences never reverse, never affect cash outflows for income taxes, and therefore never 
affect income tax expense for any period. The second approach is the basis used by both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS.14
ILLUSTRATION OF TEMPORARY DIFFERENCES
Exhibit 12.10, which shows data for Burns Corporation for a six-year period, illustrates some 
of the issues in accounting for income taxes for a firm with temporary differences. Burns Cor-
poration acquires equipment that cost $120,000 and that has a six-year life, with no expected 
salvage value. Columns (1) and (5) show that Burns Corporation’s income before depreciation 
expense and income tax expense is $100,000 for each of the six years of the asset’s life.
Columns (1) through (4) show data from the income tax return of Burns Corporation for 
each of the six years. The firm uses an allowable depreciation method under the tax code, which 
results in accelerated depreciation deductions relative to the straight-line depreciation method. 
Column (3) shows the amount of taxable income after subtracting accelerated depreciation. 
Column (4) shows the amount of income taxes payable for each year, assuming an income tax 
rate of 40%.
The data in Columns (5) through (7) come from the financial statements of Burns Corpora-
tion. Column (6) shows depreciation expense computed using the straight-line method. Column 
(7) shows the amounts of pretax book income.
Assume that, contrary to U.S. GAAP and IFRS, Burns Corporation reported income tax 
expense equal to income tax payable, so that income tax expense equals the amounts in Column 
(4), resulting in the hypothetical net income numbers in Column (8). The caption on Column 
(8) does not say Net Income because U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not measure income tax expense 
this way. Column (8) shows pretax book income minus income taxes payable.
14 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 109, “Accounting for Income Taxes,” 1996 (Codification 
Topic 740); IASB, International Accounting Standard 12, “Income Taxes,” 1996, 2001. The two standards have 
broadly similar requirements, but there are differences that are beyond the scope of this book.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

481
Income Taxes
Note the behavior of the hypothetical income numbers in Column (8): up 11.6% from the 
first year to the second year, down 11.3% from the second year to the third year, and down 
in each of the next three years by varying amounts. Recall that one purpose of the income 
statement is to assist a user of financial reports to understand why income behaves as it does. 
If operations remain the same and tax rates do not change, the user of financial reports will 
expect net income to remain the same. The numbers in Column (8), however, portray instabil-
ity, even though Burns Corporation does the same thing and its performance remains constant, 
over the six-year period. If income tax expense equaled income taxes payable, reported earnings 
would vary from year to year simply because temporary differences cause book income to differ 
from taxable income.
Exhibit 12.11 summarizes the computation of income tax expense for each year. Income tax 
expense in Column (7) equals income taxes currently payable in Column (2) plus (minus) the 
income tax the firm expects to pay (save) in the future on the temporary depreciation difference 
in Column (5). Total income tax expense of $192,000 for the six years equals total cash pay-
ments for income taxes of $192,000. The pattern of expense recognition differs from the pattern 
of cash outflows.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to calculate income tax expense based on pretax book 
income. Thus, when pretax book income remains the same, $80,000 (= $100,000 − $20,000) 
in this example, income tax expense also remains the same, $32,000 (= 0.40 × $80,000). Net 
income is $48,000 (= $80,000 − $32,000) each year, as Column (10) shows. This example 
assumes there are no permanent differences.
RECORDING INCOME TAX EXPENSE
Exhibits 12.10 and 12.11 illustrate that income tax expense differs from income tax payable 
each year. The difference in the first year gives rise to a deferred tax liability. The temporary 
difference associated with accelerated depreciation for tax purposes and straight-line deprecia-
tion for book purposes means that Burns Corporation will pay lower income taxes in the early 
years of the asset’s life. This temporary difference will reverse over the entire six years, resulting 
in higher taxes in later years. The journal entry to record income taxes for the first year is as 
follows:
December 31, First Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,400
 
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,600
The credit to Deferred Tax Liability represents the income taxes saved (today) because 
Burns Corporation claimed more depreciation for tax purposes than for book purposes. Burns 
Corporation will make similar entries for the second and third years, adding $7,360 to Deferred 
Tax Liability for the second year and $1,120 for the third year. The balance in Deferred Tax 
Liability at the end of the third year is $10,080 (= $1,600 + $7,360 + $1,120). This amount 
equals the 40% tax rate times the cumulative difference between tax depreciation of $85,200 
(= $24,000 + $38,400 + $22,800) and book depreciation of $60,000 (= $20,000 per year × 3 
years).
The temporary differences for depreciation begin to reverse in the fourth year. The journal 
entry to recognize income tax expense for the fourth year is as follows:
December 31, Fourth Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,240
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
34,240
Depreciation recognized for book purposes in the fourth year of $20,000 exceeds the depre-
ciation deduction for tax purposes of $14,400. The portion of Deferred Tax Liability that is 
currently payable is $2,240 [= 0.40 × ($20,000 – $14,400)]. Burns Corporation will make sim-
ilar entries in the fifth year, reducing (debiting) Deferred Tax Liability by $2,720 [= 0.40 × 
($20,000 – $13,200)], and in the sixth year, reducing Deferred Tax Liability by $5,120 [= 0.40 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

482
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Burns Corporation
Computation of Income Taxes over Six-Year Life of Equipment
(Equipment Costs $120,000 and Has Six-Year Life)
EXHIBIT 12.10
 
Information from (or Based on) Tax Returns 
 
 
 
Income Before 
Depreciation
 
 
Depreciation 
Deduction on 
Taxable 
Income Taxes
 
 
and Taxes 
Tax Return 
Income 
Payable
Year 
 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
[4]
  1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $100,000 
$ 24,000 
$ 76,000 
$ 30,400
  2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  38,400 
  61,600 
  24,640
  3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  22,800 
  77,200 
  30,880
  4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000 
  14,400 
  85,600 
  34,240
  5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  13,200 
  86,800 
  34,720
  6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
   7,200 
  92,800 
  37,120
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$120,000 
$480,000 
$192,000
Information from (or Based on) 
Accounting Not Allowed by 
Accounting Required by
 
Financial Statements 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pretax Income
 
 
Income Before 
 
Pretax Income 
Pretax Income 
Percentage 
Less Income 
Percentage
 
 
Depreciation 
Depreciation 
= $100,000 −  
Less Income 
Change in 
Taxes at 40% of 
Change in
 
 
and Taxes 
Expense 
$20,000 
Taxes Payable 
Column [8] 
Pretax Income 
Column [10]
Year 
 
[5] 
[6] 
[7] 
[8] 
[9] 
[10] 
[11]
  1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $100,000 
$ 20,000 
$ 80,000 
$ 49,600 
 
$ 48,000
  2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  20,000 
  80,000 
  55,360 
11.6% 
  48,000 
—
  3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  20,000 
  80,000 
  49,120 
−11.3% 
  48,000 
—
  4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000 
  20,000 
  80,000 
  45,760 
−6.8% 
  48,000 
—
  5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  20,000 
  80,000 
  45,280 
−1.0% 
  48,000 
—
  6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   100,000 
  20,000 
  80,000 
  42,880 
−5.3% 
  48,000 
—
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$120,000 
$480,000 
$288,000 
 
$288,000
[1] = Given 
[3] = [1] − [2] 
[5] = Given 
[7] = [5] − [6] 
 [9] = ([8] this year/[8] last year) − 1
[2] = Given 
[4] = 0.40 × [3] [6] = $120,000/6 
[8] = [7] − [4] 
[10] = (1.00 − 0.40) × [7]
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

483
Income Taxes
× ($20,000 – $7,200)]. The reductions in the Deferred Tax Liability in these three years total 
$10,080 (= $2,240 + $2,720 + $5,120), resulting in a zero balance at the end of the sixth year. 
Total lifetime depreciation amounts are the same for both financial reporting and tax report-
ing: $120,000; only the timing differs. Exhibit 12.12 illustrates the entries for the six years in the 
Deferred Tax Liability T-account.
 PROBLEM  12.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Computing income tax expense. Wade Corporation acquires a machine on January 1 
of the current year, costing $80,000 and having a four-year service life and zero salvage 
value. Wade deducts depreciation on its income tax return as follows:
(continued)
Burns Corporation
Summary Computation of Income Tax Expense
Year
(1)
Income 
Taxes 
Payable
(2)
Tax 
Depreciation
(3)
Book 
Depreciation 
(4)
Temporary 
Difference
(5)
40% of 
Temporary 
Difference
(6)
Income 
Tax 
Expense
(7)
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 30,400
$ 24,000
$ 20,000
$ 4,000
$ 1,600
$ 32,000
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  24,640
  38,400
  20,000
 18,400
  7,360
  32,000
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  30,880
  22,800
  20,000
  2,800
  1,120
  32,000
4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  34,240
  14,400
  20,000
  (5,600)
  (2,240)
  32,000
5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  34,720
  13,200
  20,000
  (6,800)
  (2,720)
  32,000
6  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  37,120
   7,200
    20,000
 (12,800)
  (5,120)
  32,000
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$192,000
$120,000
$120,000
$     0
$     0
$192,000
Column (5) = Column (3) – Column (4).
Column (6) = 0.40 × Column (5).
Column (7) = Column (2) + Column (6).
EXHIBIT 12.11
Burns Corporation
Deferred Tax Liability Account
(amounts with check mark appear on the balance sheet)
Deferred Tax Liability
0
✓
Balance at Beginning of First Year
1,600
[1]
Entry for First Year
1,600
✓
Balance at End of First Year
7,360
[2]
Entry for Second Year
8,960
✓
Balance at End of Second Year
1,120
[3]
Entry for Third Year
10,080
✓
Balance at End of Third Year
Entry for Fourth Year
[4]
2,240
7,840
✓
Balance at End of Fourth Year
Entry for Fifth Year
[5]
2,720
5,120
✓
Balance at End of Fifth Year
Entry for Sixth Year
[6]
5,120
     0
✓
Balance at End of Sixth Year
EXHIBIT 12.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

484
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
■ 33% of the cost of the machine in first year;
■ 44% in second year;
■ 15% in third year;
■ 8% in fourth year.
The firm uses the straight-line method for financial reporting. Income before 
depreciation and income taxes is $100,000 each year, and the income tax rate is 40%.
a. Compute the amount of income taxes currently payable for each year.
b. Compute the amount of income tax expense for each year.
c. Give the journal entries for income taxes for each year.
A FURTHER LOOK AT FINANCIAL REPORTING 
REQUIREMENTS FOR INCOME TAXES
The illustration for Burns Corporation in the previous section showed that income tax expense 
each period equals pretax book income multiplied by the income tax rate. In this example, 
income tax expense is $32,000 (= 0.40 × $80,000) each year. Income tax expense of Burns Cor-
poration also equals income taxes payable plus the change in Deferred Tax Liability. For exam-
ple, income tax expense for the first year equals current income taxes payable of $30,400 plus 
the $1,600 increase in Deferred Tax Liability. The change in Deferred Tax Liability each year 
is the tax effect of the temporary differences between depreciation for book reporting and tax 
reporting.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require a more complex procedure for accounting for income taxes 
than we illustrate for Burns Corporation. The complexities include:
1. Income tax rates change over time, so the deferred tax liability need not represent the 
amount of taxes the firm actually pays later.
2. Some temporary differences create deferred tax assets. A deferred tax asset arises when 
a firm recognizes an expense earlier for financial reporting than for tax reporting. For 
example, firms provide for estimated uncollectible accounts in their financial statements in 
the period when they recognize sales on account, but they deduct uncollectible accounts on 
their tax returns when they determine particular customers’ accounts are uncollectible. As 
another example, firms provide for estimated warranty costs on their financial statements 
in the year they sell warranted products; but the tax deduction occurs later when they make 
expenditures for warranty repairs.
3. Firms recognize deferred tax assets only to the extent that they expect to generate sufficient 
taxable income to realize the future tax savings. U.S. GAAP requires using a deferred tax 
asset valuation allowance to reduce the balance in the Deferred Tax Asset account to the 
amount the firm expects to realize in tax savings in the future. IFRS requires that firms rec-
ognize the expected realizable amount of deferred tax assets, with explanatory disclosures.
Thus, the Deferred Tax Asset and Deferred Tax Liability accounts on the balance sheet can 
change each period for the following reasons:
1. Temporary differences originate or reverse during the current period.
2. Income tax rates expected to apply in future periods when temporary differences reverse 
change during the current period.
3. A firm’s expectations of future taxable income change. These expectations affect whether a 
firm can realize its deferred tax assets by reducing future tax payments.
The example for Burns Corporation in Exhibit 12.10 illustrates only the first factor, tempo-
rary differences. In such cases, we can measure income tax expense using pretax book income 
amounts and add or subtract the difference between income tax expense and income tax pay-
able to deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability accounts. Because the second and third factors 
often occur, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to measure income tax expense following a 
procedure more complex than the one illustrated for Burns Corporation.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

485
Income Taxes
INTERPRETING DISCLOSURES OF INCOME TAXES
Exhibit 12.13 contains information from the disclosures in Great Deal’s fiscal 2012 financial 
report.
The difference between the statutory and effective tax rates reflects (1) tax rate differences 
and (2) permanent differences between amounts reported for book income and taxable income. 
In fiscal 2012, Great Deal’s federal statutory tax rate was 35%. Its state taxes were another 
4.6%, or a 3.0% (= 4.6%/[1 – 0.35]) increase in the effective tax rate after adjusting for fed-
eral tax benefits. Its effective tax rate was reduced because of its foreign operations. Great Deal 
reports a difference of $42 million in income, or 1.9% reduction in its tax rate, from its foreign 
operations. This $42 million reflects either differences in tax rates imposed on income gener-
ated by Great Deal’s foreign (non-U.S.) subsidiaries as compared to U.S. tax rates or perma-
nent differences between items included in taxable income and book income in those foreign 
subsidiaries.
In its disclosure of deferred taxes, Great Deal reports the following information pertaining 
to current income taxes payable and deferred taxes:
 
 
 
2012 
2011
Current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$832 
$717
Deferred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (30) 
   (43)
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$802
$674
From this information, we can conclude that Great Deal made the following summary jour-
nal entry to recognize income taxes in fiscal 2012:
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
802
Deferred Tax Assets/Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Current Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
832
Great Deal’s disclosure shows the net change in deferred taxes, not the specific deferred 
tax assets and deferred tax liabilities debited or credited. Great Deal would maintain detailed 
records about all deferred tax asset and deferred tax liability accounts, and its internal records 
would reflect this detail.
Exhibit 12.14 shows the components of Great Deal’s deferred tax assets and deferred tax 
liabilities.
From Exhibit 12.14, Great Deal’s deferred tax assets were $885 million as of February 27, 
2013. Great Deal also reports a deferred tax asset valuation allowance equal to $151 million. 
This amount indicates that Great Deal expects to be unable to realize, in the form of future tax 
deductions, $151 million of the $885 million of deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance 
increased between 2011and 2012, from $79 million to $151 million, or $72 million.
Great Deal reports total deferred tax liabilities of $608 million at the end of fiscal 2012, 
of which $381 million pertains to property and equipment. This amount likely reflects the tax 
effects of the difference in depreciation methods described in the Burns Corporation example. 
Great Deal
Income Tax Disclosures
Year Ended February 27, 2013
%
$ millions
Federal Income Tax at Statutory Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 35.0%
$768
State Income Taxes, Net of Federal Income Tax Benefit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.0%
  66
Benefit from Foreign Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1.9%)
  (42)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 0.5%
  10
Effective Income Tax Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36.5%
$802
EXHIBIT 12.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

486
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Great Deal reports a net deferred tax asset of $126 million, included on its balance sheet in 
Other Current Assets ($244 million), Other Assets ($19 million), and Other Long-Term Liabili-
ties ($137 million).
 PROBLEM  12.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Working backward to components of book and taxable income. Dominiak Company 
reports the following information for financial and tax reporting for a year:
Depreciation Expense for Financial Reporting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$270,000
Pretax Book Income for Financial Reporting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
160,000
Income Tax Expense for Financial Reporting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
36,000
Income Tax Payable for Tax Reporting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
24,000
The combined federal and state statutory income tax rate is 40%. Permanent differences 
result from municipal bond interest that appears as revenue for book purposes but is exempt 
from federal and state income taxes. Temporary differences result from the use of accelerated 
depreciation for tax purposes and the straight-line method for financial reporting.
 
Reconstruct the income statement for financial reporting and for tax reporting for the 
year, identifying temporary differences and permanent differences.
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR INCOME TAXES
The central questions in accounting for the tax effects of temporary differences between book 
and taxable income are: when do they originate, and when do they reverse? In measuring 
income tax expense, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require recognition of the tax effect when tempo-
rary differences originate. Any difference between income tax expense and income taxes payable 
for a given reporting period results in a deferred tax asset or deferred tax liability.
Great Deal 
Disclosures of Deferred Taxes
2012
2011
DEFERRED TAX ASSET 
Accrued Property Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 275
$ 297
Deferred Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
115
Compensation and Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
189
192
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
211
150
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   60
   84
 
Total Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  885
  838
Valuation Allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(151)
(79)
Total Deferred Tax Assets After Valuation Allowance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  734
  759
DEFERRED TAX LIABILITY
Property and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(381)
(383)
Goodwill and Intangible Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(196)
(192)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (31)
    (47)
 
Total Deferred Tax Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (608)
    (622)
Net Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 126
$ 137
Included in the Following Line Items on the Balance Sheet:
Other Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 244
$ 236
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
28
Other Long-Term Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (137)
   (127)
Net Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 126
$ 137
EXHIBIT 12.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

487
Solutions to Self-Study Problems 
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 12.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Weyerhaeuser; off-balance-sheet financing.)
a. Weyerhaeuser receives an immediate benefit of $75 million cash on January 1. Weyerhaeuser 
retains a residual interest in the cash and uncut timber at the end of five years. Weyerhaeuser’s 
principal risk is that cash flows from cutting and selling timber will be inadequate to service 
the debt and pay operating costs, and Weyerhaeuser will have to make debt service payments.
b. The bank has rights to a future revenue stream of 8% of the unpaid balance of the loan 
and repayment of the loan as it matures. The bank bears relatively little risk because Wey-
erhaeuser has guaranteed the loan and because at current prices the timber will generate 
excess cash flows of 10%.
c. Weyerhaeuser should initially recognize a liability equal to the fair value of its guarantee 
of the debt. The fair value of the guarantee will reflect the excess cash flows of the timber, 
10% at current prices. If timber prices decrease or the quality of the timber declines such 
that Weyerhaeuser has to make debt service payments, then Weyerhaeuser will recognize a 
liability for the debt. Note: the statement of the problem asks you to assume that Weyer-
haeuser does not consolidate the trust. As a practical matter, however, U.S. GAAP might 
require that the trust be accounted for as a variable interest entity and that Weyerhaeuser 
analyze its association with the trust to determine if it should consolidate the trust and 
include the debt to the bank as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 12.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Microgen; interpreting retirement plan disclosures.)
a. Microgen increased the discount rate it uses to compute the present value of the benefit 
obligation from 5.7% to 6.34%, which decreased the liability and resulted in an actuarial 
gain. Another possibility is that Microgen changed some of its actuarial assumptions, and 
the changes decreased the liability.
b. Microgen might have made plan amendments that increased the benefits provided to retired 
employees. The analysis of changes in the benefit obligation in Exhibit 12.8 indicates that 
plan amendments increased the obligation for both pensions and health care benefits.
c. The actual return on investments exceeded the expected return in each year and for each 
type of plan. The actual return of $7,188 million for 2013 on Microgen’s principal pension 
plan compares to an expected return of $3,950 million.
d. Microgen has multiple pension plans, some of which were overfunded and some of which 
were underfunded. Because Microgen cannot use the assets in an overfunded plan to 
finance the obligation in an underfunded plan, authoritative guidance requires Microgen to 
report both the net assets of overfunded plans and the net liabilities of underfunded plans.
e.
Principal 
Pension Plans
Health Care 
Plans
Prior Service Cost, December 31, 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  831
$2,046
Plus Additional Prior Service Cost for 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,470
4,257
Minus Amortization of Prior Service Cost for 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (241)
  (603)
Prior Service Cost, December 31, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,060
$5,700
f.
Principal 
Pension Plans
Health Care 
Plans
Net Actuarial Loss (Gain), December 31, 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$        2,162
$    (31)
Minus Deferral of Excess of Actual Return on Investments over Expected 
Return for 2013: ($7,188 − $3,950) and ($221 − $125)  . . . . . . . .
(3,238)
(96)
Actuarial (Gain) Loss for 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,205)
320
Amortization of Actuarial (Loss) Gain for 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (693)
  17
Net Actuarial Loss (Gain), December 31, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(4,974)
$210
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

488
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
g.
December 31, 2013
Pension Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
755
Pension Asset (Noncurrent Asset: $20,190 − $15,019)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,171
Pension Liability (Noncurrent Liability: $3,326 − $3,448)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
122
Other Comprehensive Income (Prior Service Cost and Amortization of 
 Prior Service Cost: $1,470 − $241)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,229
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
136
 
Pension Liability (Current Liability: $111 − $106)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5
 
Other Comprehensive Income (Excess Return on Pension Plan
 
 Investments: $7,188 − $3,950). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,238
 
Other Comprehensive Income (Actuarial Gain and Amortization
 
 of Actuarial Loss: $3,205 − $693)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,898
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+5,171
–122
  –755
IncSt → RE
      –136
 +5
–1,229
OCI → AOCI
+3,238
OCI → AOCI
+3,898
OCI → AOCI
h. 
December 31, 2013
Health Care Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,324
Health Care Liability (Current Liability: $675 − $681) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6
Other Comprehensive Income (Prior Service Cost and Amortization of 
 Prior Service Cost: $4,257 − $603)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,654
Other Comprehensive Income (Actuarial Loss and Amortization of 
 Actuarial Gain: $320 + $17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
337
Other Comprehensive Income (Other)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
  
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
622
  
Health Care Liability (Noncurrent Liability: $10,504 − $5,871). . . . . 
 
4,633
  
Other Comprehensive Income (Excess Return on Health Care Plan 
  
 Investments: $221 − $125)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
96
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–622
    –6
–1,324
IncSt → RE
+4,633
–3,654
OCI → AOCI
  –337
OCI → AOCI
   –30
OCI → AOCI
   +96
OCI → AOCI
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 12.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Wade Corporation: computing income tax expense.)
a.
Year
Income Before 
Depreciation and 
Income Taxes
[1]
Deduction 
on Tax 
Return
[2]
Taxable 
Income
[3]
Income 
Tax 
Payable
[4]
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
$26,400
$ 73,600
$ 29,440
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 35,200
  64,800
  25,920
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 12,000
  88,000
  35,200
4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
  6,400
  93,600
  37,440
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$400,000
$80,000
$320,000
$128,000
Column [1] is given.
Column [2] = $80,000 × 0.33 for first year, 0.44 for second year, 0.15 for third year, and 0.08 for fourth year.
Column [3] = [1] – [2].
Column [4] = 0.40 × [3].
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

489
  Solutions to Self-Study Problems 
b.
Year
Income Before 
Depreciation and 
Income Taxes
[1]
Depreciation 
Expense
[2]
Income 
Before 
Income 
Taxes
[3]
Income 
Tax 
Expense
[4]
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$100,000
$20,000
$ 80,000
$ 32,000
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 20,000
  80,000
  32,000
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 20,000
  80,000
  32,000
4  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 20,000
  80,000
  32,000
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$400,000
$80,000
$320,000
$128,000
Column [1] is given.
Column [2] = $80,000/4 = $20,000.
Column [3] = [1] – [2].
Column [4] = 0.40 × [3].
c.
First Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
29,440
 
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,560
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+29,440
–32,000
IncSt → RE
 +2,560
To recognize income tax expense, income tax payable, and the change in 
deferred taxes for first year.
Second Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,920
 
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,080
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+25,920
–32,000
IncSt → RE
 +6,080
To recognize income tax expense, income tax payable, and the change in 
deferred taxes for second year.
Third Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,200
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
35,200
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
  –3,200
–32,000
IncSt → RE
+35,200
To recognize income tax expense, income tax payable, and the change in 
deferred taxes for third year.
Fourth Year
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
32,000
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,440
 
Income Tax Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
37,440
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

490
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Off-balance-sheet financing
Executory contract
Loss contingency accounting or provision 
accounting
Contingent obligation (U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS) versus provision (IFRS)
Special purpose entity (SPE)
Variable interest entity (VIE)
Securitization
Deferred compensation
Defined contribution plan
Defined benefit plan
Projected benefit obligation (PBO)
Present value of a defined benefit obligation
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
 –5,440
–32,000
IncSt → RE
+37,440
To recognize income tax expense, income tax payable, and the change in 
deferred taxes for fourth year.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 12.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Dominiak Company; working backward to components of book and taxable income.)
See Exhibit 12.15.
Dominiak Company
Temporary and Permanent Differences
(Suggested Solution to Problem 12.4 for Self-Study)
Financial 
Statements
Type of 
Difference
Income Tax 
Return
Operating Income Except Depreciation . . . . . . . . 
$ 360,000
(6)
—
$ 360,000 (4)
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(270,000) (g)
Temporary
  (300,000) (3)
Municipal Bond Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   70,000
(5)
Permanent
       —
Taxable Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  60,000
(2)
Pretax Book Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 160,000 (g)
Income Tax Payable at 40%  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  24,000
(g)
Income Tax Expense at 40% of $90,000 = 
 
$160,000 − $70,000, Which Is Book Income 
 
Excluding Permanent Differences . . . . . . . . . . 
     (36,000) (g)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 124,000
(1)
Order and derivation of computations:
(g) Given.
(1) $124,000 = $160,000 − $36,000.
(2) $60,000 = $24,000/0.40.
(3) Temporary difference for depreciation is ($36,000 − $24,000)/0.40 = $30,000. Because income taxes 
payable are less than income tax expense, depreciation deducted on the tax return exceeds depreciation 
expense on the financial statements. Thus, the depreciation deduction on the tax return is $300,000 = 
$270,000 + $30,000.
(4) $360,000 = $300,000 + $60,000.
(5) Financial statement income before taxes, excluding permanent differences, is $90,000 = $36,000/0.40. 
Financial statement income before taxes, including permanent differences, is $160,000. Hence, permanent 
differences are $160,000 − $90,000 = $70,000.
(6) $160,000 + $270,000 − $70,000 = $360,000. See also (4), for check.
EXHIBIT 12.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

491
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
Accumulated benefit obligation (ABO)
Service cost
Interest cost
Prior service cost
Net defined benefit liability (asset)
Effective tax rate
Permanent difference
Temporary difference
Income tax payable
Income tax expense
Deferred tax asset
Deferred tax liability
Deferred tax asset valuation allowance
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. Compare and contrast the financial statement effects of achieving off-balance-sheet financ-
ing through an executory contract versus an asset sale in which the seller of the assets will 
reimburse the buyer for any shortfall in collections from the purchased asset.
 3. “Recognizing rights and obligations embodied in all executory contracts would eliminate 
a means of off-balance-sheet financing.” How might such an action confuse and possibly 
mislead financial statement users?
 4. What role does a special purpose entity or variable interest entity serve in achieving off-
balance-sheet financing involving the sale of receivables?
 5. “The principal accounting issue involving deferred compensation relates to when firms 
recognize compensation cost as an expense.” Explain.
 6. Suggest reasons why the total assets and total liabilities of a defined benefit pension plan 
do not appear, but their net amount does appear, on the employer’s balance sheet.
 7. Over sufficiently long periods of time, why is the total amount of an employer’s pension 
expense equal to the cash the employer pays into a pension plan, instead of the cash the 
pension plan pays retired employees?
 8. Under what circumstances would an employer firm report both a net pension asset and a 
net pension liability on its balance sheet? Why don’t U.S. GAAP and IFRS permit the firm 
to net these amounts and show only a single net pension asset or net pension liability?
 9. When an employer firm recognizes the change in either a pension asset or pension liabil-
ity for a period, the offsetting credit or debit required by U.S. GAAP is usually to Other 
Comprehensive Income. Why doesn’t this amount immediately affect pension expense as a 
credit or debit instead?
10. Describe the U.S. GAAP rationale for reducing pension expense for the return on pension 
investments.
11. Describe the U.S. GAAP rationale for reducing pension expense by the expected return on 
investments instead of the actual return.
12. “The principal issue in accounting for income taxes concerns when firms recognize the tax 
effects of temporary differences between income for book purposes and income for tax 
purposes.” Explain.
13. “One might view a deferred tax liability as an interest-free loan from the government.” Do 
you agree? Why or why not?
14. Under what circumstances will a firm report a deferred tax asset on the balance sheet? 
Under what circumstances will a firm report a deferred tax liability on the balance sheet?
15. “The required accounting for deferred taxes delays recognizing in net income the benefits 
and costs of temporary differences from the period when they originate to the period when 
they reverse.” Explain.
16. Of what value is information in the tax reconciliation about the reasons for differences 
between the statutory tax rate and the effective tax rate?
17. Of what value is information about the components of deferred tax assets and deferred tax 
liabilities, given that firms calculate income tax expense on income before taxes and not on 
individual revenues and expenses?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

492
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
EXERCISES
18. Using accounts receivable to achieve off-balance-sheet financing. Cypres Appliance Store has 
$100,000 of accounts receivable on January 2, 2013. These receivables are due on Decem-
ber 31, 2013. The firm wants to use these accounts receivables to obtain financing.
a. Prepare journal entries during 2013 for the transactions in parts (i) and (ii) below:
 
(i)  The firm borrows $92,593 from its bank, using the accounts receivable as collateral. 
The loan is repayable on December 31, 2013, with interest at 8%.
 
(ii)  The firm sells the accounts receivable to the bank for $92,593. It collects amounts 
due from customers on these accounts and remits the cash to the bank.
b. Compare and contrast the income statement and balance sheet effects of these two 
transactions.
c. How should Cypres Appliance Store structure this transaction to ensure that it qualifies 
as a sale instead of a collateralized loan?
19. Using inventory to achieve off-balance-sheet financing. Lorimar Company grows and ages 
tobacco. On January 2, 2013, the firm has aging tobacco in inventory with a cost of 
$200,000 and a current market value of $300,000. Lorimar wants to use this tobacco to 
obtain financing. The firm uses a December 31 year-end.
a. Prepare journal entries during 2013 and 2014 for the transactions in parts (i) and (ii) 
below:
 
(i)  The firm borrows $300,000 from its bank, using the tobacco inventory as collateral. 
The loan is repayable on December 31, 2014, with interest at 10% per year com-
pounded annually. Assume zero storage costs. The firm expects to (and does) sell 
the tobacco on December 31, 2014, for $363,000.
 
(ii)  The firm sells the tobacco inventory to the bank for $300,000. It promises to sell the 
inventory on behalf of the bank at the end of two years and remit the proceeds to 
the bank.
b. Compare and contrast the income statement and balance sheet effects of these two 
transactions.
c. How should Lorimar structure this transaction to ensure that it qualifies as a sale 
instead of a collateralized loan?
20. Preparing a summary journal entry for a defined benefit plan. AirFlight, an aerospace 
manufacturer, reports the following information related to its only pension plan for 2013 
(amounts in millions of U.S. dollars). AirFlight applies U.S. GAAP.
Pension Plan Assets, Beginning of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$43,484
Plus Actual Return on Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,239
Plus Employer Contribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
526
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (2,046)
Pension Plan Assets, End of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$46,203
Pension Plan Liability, Beginning of 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$45,183
Plus Service Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
908
Plus Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,497
Less Actuarial Gain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(960)
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (2,046)
Pension Plan Liability, End of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$45,582
Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   908
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,497
Expected Return on Pension Plan Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(3,456)
Amortization of Actuarial Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  1,101
Net Pension Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 1,050
 
Give a single journal entry on the books of AirFlight to recognize pension expense, the 
pension plan contribution, and the change in the net pension asset or net pension liability 
for 2013. Be sure to consider needed entries to Other Comprehensive Income, supporting 
these entries with amounts from the disclosures above. Ignore income taxes.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

493
  Questions, Exercises, and Problems 
21. Preparing a summary journal entry for a defined benefit plan. Tasty Dish Inc., a consumer 
foods company, reports the following information related to its only pension plan for 2013 
(amounts in millions of U.S. dollars). Tasty Dish applies U.S. GAAP.
Pension Plan Assets, Beginning of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,086
Plus Actual Return on Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
513
Plus Employer Contribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
19
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (233)
Pension Plan Assets, End of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,385
Pension Plan Liability, Beginning of 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,771
Plus Service Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
245
Plus Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
319
Less Actuarial Gain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(155)
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (233)
Pension Plan Liability, End of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$5,947
Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  245
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
319
Expected Return on Pension Plan Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(391)
Amortization of Actuarial Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   167
Net Pension Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  340
 
Give a single journal entry for Tasty Dish to recognize pension expense, the pension plan 
contribution, and the change in the net pension asset or net pension liability for 2013. Be 
sure to consider needed entries to Other Comprehensive Income, supporting these entries 
with amounts from the disclosures above. Ignore income taxes.
22. Preparing a summary journal entry for a health care plan. Reliance, an automobile manufac-
turer, reports the following information related to its health care plan for 2013 (amounts in 
millions of euros). Reliance applies U.S. GAAP.
Health Care Plan Assets, Beginning of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 6,497
Plus Actual Return on Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
510
Plus Employer Contribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (1,547)
Health Care Plan Assets, End of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 5,460
Health Care Plan Liability, Beginning of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€39,274
Plus Service Cost. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
617
Plus Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,004
Less Actuarial Gain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(9,485)
Less Benefits Paid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (1,547)
Health Care Plan Liability, End of 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€30,863
Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€   617
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2,004
Expected Return on Health Care Plan Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(479)
Amortization of Actuarial Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     41
Net Health Care Benefits Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 2,183
 
Give a single journal entry for Reliance to recognize health care benefits expense, the health 
care plan contribution, and the change in the net health care benefits asset or net health 
care benefits liability for 2013. Be sure to consider needed entries to Other Comprehen-
sive Income, supporting these entries with amounts from the preceding disclosures. Ignore 
income taxes.
23. Preparing journal entries for income tax expense. Fleet Sneaks, an athletic shoe company, 
reports the following information about its income taxes for three recent years (amounts in 
millions of euros):
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

494
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Components of Income Tax Expense
2013
2012
2011
Currently Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€775.6
€622.8
€495.4
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (26.0)
  25.4
   9.0
Total Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€749.6
€648.2
€504.4
a. Give the journal entries that Fleet Sneaks made to record income tax expense for 2011, 
2012, and 2013.
b. Describe the likely reasons for Fleet Sneaks’s pattern of taxes currently payable and 
deferred for each year. Assume that the deferred taxes relate primarily to retirement 
benefits, and that Fleet Sneaks’s effective tax rate was relatively stable over 2011–2013.
24. Preparing journal entries for income tax expense. Marytown Energy, an electric utility, 
reports the following information about its income taxes for three recent years (amounts in 
millions of U.S. dollars):
Components of Income Tax Expense
2013
2012
2011
Currently Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 46
$415
$ (96)
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 344
 (74)
 368
Total Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$390
$341
$272
a. Give the journal entries that Marytown Energy made to record income tax expense for 
2011, 2012, and 2013.
b. Describe the likely reasons for Marytown Energy’s pattern of taxes currently payable 
and deferred for each year. Assume that deferred taxes relate primarily to deprecia-
tion temporary differences, and that Marytown Energy’s effective tax rate was relatively 
stable over 2011–2013.
25. Deriving permanent and temporary differences from financial statement disclosures. Pownall 
Company reports the following information for a year:
Book Income Before Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$318,000
Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
156,000
Income Taxes Payable for the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
48,000
Income Tax Rate on Taxable Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
40%
 
The company has both permanent and temporary differences between book income and 
taxable income.
a. What is the amount of temporary differences for the year? Give the amount, and indi-
cate whether the effect is to make book income larger or smaller than taxable income.
b. What is the amount of permanent differences for the year? Give the amount, and indi-
cate whether the effect is to make book income larger or smaller than taxable income.
26. Reconstructing information about income taxes. Lilly Company reports the following infor-
mation about its financial statements and tax return for a year (amounts in euros):
Depreciation Expense from Financial Statements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€322,800
Financial Statement Pretax Book Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
190,800
Income Tax Expense from Financial Statements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
42,000
Income Taxes Payable from Tax Returns. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
27,600
 
The government taxes taxable income at a rate of 40%. Permanent differences result from 
municipal bond interest that appears as revenue in the financial statements but is exempt 
from income taxes. Temporary differences result from the use of accelerated depreciation 
for tax returns and straight-line depreciation for financial reporting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

495
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
 
Reconstruct the income statement for financial reporting and for tax reporting for the 
year, identifying temporary differences and permanent differences.
27. Effect of temporary differences on income taxes. Woodward Corporation purchases a new 
machine for $50,000 on January 1, 2013. The machine has a four-year estimated service life 
and an estimated salvage value of zero. After paying the cost of running and maintaining 
the machine, the firm enjoys a $25,000-per-year excess of revenues over expenses (except 
depreciation and taxes). In addition to the $25,000 from the machine, other pretax income 
each year is $35,000. Woodward uses straight-line depreciation for financial reporting and 
depreciates the machine for tax reporting using the following percentages: 33% in the first 
year, 44% in the second, 15% in the third, and 8% in the fourth. Depreciation is Wood-
ward’s only temporary difference. Woodward pays combined federal and local income taxes 
at a rate of 40% of taxable income.
a. Compute the amount of income taxes currently payable for each of the four years.
b. Compute the carrying value of the machine for financial reporting and the tax basis of 
the machine for tax reporting at the end of each of the four years. The tax basis is the 
amortized cost for income tax purposes.
c. Compute the amount of income tax expense for each of the four years.
d. Give the journal entries to record income tax expense and income tax payable for 2013 
through 2016.
PROBLEMS
28. Interpreting disclosures regarding sales of accounts receivable. Federal Stores owns sev-
eral retail store chains. On August 30, 2013, it sold all of the credit card receivables of 
its department store chains to Community Bank. Exhibit 12.16 reports the sale of these 
receivables.
a.  Using information in Exhibit 12.16, discuss why the sale of credit card accounts and 
receivables to Community Bank likely qualified as a sale and not as a collateralized 
loan.
b.  What are the benefits to Federal Stores, and what are the costs, of the sale of credit card 
accounts and receivables?
29. Interpreting notes on off-balance-sheet financing. Lewis Corporation sold certain timber 
assets and received cash and notes receivable from the purchaser. Lewis then engaged in a 
transaction to convert the notes receivable into cash without recognizing a liability on the 
balance sheet. Exhibit 12.17 presents the notes from Lewis’ financial statements describing 
this transaction. Based on the disclosures in Exhibit 12.17, discuss the likely reasons why 
this transaction qualified as a sale and not as a collateralized loan.
Federal Stores
Note on Sale of Receivables
(Problem 28)
Sale of Credit Card Accounts and Receivables
On August 13, 2012, Federal Stores (“the Company”) sold to Community Bank certain credit 
card accounts owned by the Company, together with related receivables balances, for 
approximately $3.6 billion cash, resulting in a pretax gain of $480 million. The net pro-
ceeds received were used to repay debt associated with various acquisitions. In connection 
with the sales of credit card accounts and related receivable balances, the Company and 
Community Bank entered into a long-term marketing and servicing agreement (“the Agree-
ment”) with an initial term of 10 years, and, unless terminated by either party as of the 
expiration of the initial term, an additional renewal term of three years. The Agreement 
provides for, among other things, (i) the ownership by Community Bank of the accounts 
purchased by Community Bank from the Company, (ii) the ownership by Community Bank 
of new accounts opened by the Company’s customers, (iii) the provision of credit by Com-
munity Bank to the holders of the credit cards whose accounts were sold to Community 
Bank by the Company, and (iv) the servicing of the accounts by Community Bank.
EXHIBIT 12.16
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

496
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
30. Interpreting retirement plan disclosures. Exhibits 12.18 and 12.19 present selected informa-
tion from the notes to the financial statements of Juicy-Juice, a U.S. based beverage com-
pany, regarding its pension and health care retirement plans.
a. What is the likely reason for the actuarial gains in the pension and health care obliga-
tions during 2013?
b. Did the pension plan investments perform as expected during 2012 and 2013? Explain.
c. Why is the expected return on health care assets equal to zero in each year?
d. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in prior service cost for pension plans from 
$5 million at the end of 2012 to $13 million at the end of 2013.
e. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the net actuarial loss for pension plans 
from $2,285 million at the end of 2012 to $1,836 million at the end of 2013.
f. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the prior service credit for health care 
plans from $114 million at the end of 2012 to $101 million at the end of 2013.
g. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the net actuarial loss for health care 
plans from $419 million at the end of 2012 to $364 million at the end of 2013.
Lewis Corporation
Note on Sale of Notes Receivable
(Problem 29)
12. Off-Balance-Sheet Arrangement
In connection with the sale of Lewis’s southern timber and timberlands in 2013, Lewis 
received cash of $26.4 million and notes receivable of $410.0 million. In order to borrow 
funds in a cost-effective manner, (i) Lewis contributed the $410.0 million of notes receiv-
able to a special purpose entity (SPE), (ii) the SPE issued to unrelated third parties $368.7 
million of bonds supported by a bank letter of credit, which are secured by the notes 
receivable, and (iii) the SPE distributed to Lewis, as a return of capital, $365.8 million of 
the proceeds realized by the SPE from the issuance of its bonds. The SPE has no sources of 
liquidity other than the notes receivable, the cash flow generated by the notes receivable 
will be dedicated to the payment of the bonds issued by the SPE, and the SPE’s creditors 
will have no recourse to Lewis for the SPE’s obligations. The principal amount of the SPE’s 
borrowings is approximately 90% (= $368.7/$410.0) of the principal amount of the notes 
receivable contributed by Lewis to the SPE. The SPE’s assets (the notes receivable equal 
to $410 million) have been removed from Lewis’ control and are not available to satisfy 
claims of Lewis’ creditors. The creditors of the SPE have no recourse to Lewis’s assets.
EXHIBIT 12.17
Elements of Juicy-Juice’s U.S. Pension and Health Care Expense
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 30)
U.S. Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 245
$ 213
$ 193
$ 46
$ 40
$ 38
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
319
296
271
72
78
72
Expected Return on Assets . . . .
(391)
(344)
(325)
—
—
—
Prior Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
6
(13)
(11)
(8)
Actuarial Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . .
  164
  106
   81
  21
  26
  19
Net Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 340
$ 274
$ 226
$126
$133
$121
EXHIBIT 12.18
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

497
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
h. Give the journal entry that this firm would make at the end of 2013 to recognize net 
pension expense, pension funding, and the change in balance sheet accounts for its pen-
sion plan.
i. Give the journal entry that this firm would make at the end of 2013 to recognize net 
health care expense, health care funding, and the change in balance sheet accounts for 
its health care plan.
31. Interpreting retirement plan disclosures. Exhibits 12.20 and 12.21 present selected informa-
tion from the notes to the financial statements of Treadaway, Inc., a tire manufacturing 
company, regarding its U.S. pension and health care retirement plans.
a. Refer to Exhibit 12.20. Why does the interest cost of the U.S. pension plans exceed the 
expected return on assets for 2011 and 2012, but these amounts are identical for 2013?
Funded Status of Juicy-Juice’s U.S. Pension and Health Care Plans
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 30)
U.S. Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2013
2012
Benefit Obligation, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,771
$ 4,968
$ 1,312
$ 1,319
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
213
46
40
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
319
296
72
78
Plan Amendments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
—
—
(8)
Actuarial Loss (Gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(163)
517
(34)
(45)
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(233)
(241)
(75)
(74)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (3)
     18
     49
      2
Benefit Obligation, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,947
$ 5,771
$ 1,370
$ 1,312
Fair Value of Plan Assets, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,086
$ 4,152
$   —
$   —
Actual Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
513
477
—
—
Employer Contributions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
699
75
74
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(233)
(241)
(75)
(74)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (7)
     (1)
    —
    —
Fair Value of Plan Assets, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,378
$ 5,086
$     —
$   —
Net Funded Asset (Liability) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (569)
$  (685)
$ (1,370)
$(1,312)
Recognized in:
 
Noncurrent Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  185
$ 2,068
$      —
$   —
 
Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(25)
—
(100)
—
 
Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (729)
 (2,753)
 (1,270)
 (1,312)
 
 
Net Asset (Liability) Recognized  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (569)
$  (685)
$  (1,370)
$ (1,312)
Recognized in Shareholders’ Equity:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
Prior Service Cost (Credit). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   13
$     5
$  (101)
$   (114)
 
Net Actuarial Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,836
$ 2,285
$   364
$   419
Actuarial Assumptions:
Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.8%
5.7%
5.8%
5.7%
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.8%
7.8%
—
—
Rate of Compensation Increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.5%
4.4%
—
—
Initial Health Care Cost Trend Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
9.0%
10.0%
Ultimate Health Care Cost Trend Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
5.0%
5.0%
Number of Years to Ultimate Trend Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
5 years
5 years
EXHIBIT 12.19
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

498
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
Elements of Treadaway’s U.S. Pension and Health Care Expense
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 31)
U.S. Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2011
2013
2012
2011
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 103
$  56
$  41
$ 25
$ 23
$ 25
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
295
294
300
135
149
188
Expected Return on Assets . . . .
(295)
(258)
(234)
—
—
—
Prior Service Cost  . . . . . . . . . .
59
63
71
41
43
45
Actuarial Loss. . . . . . . . . . . . .
   91
   86
   79
   9
  10
  35
Net Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 253
$ 241
$ 257
$210
$225
$293
EXHIBIT 12.20
Funded Status of Treadaway’s U.S. Pension and Health Care Plans
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 31)
U.S. Pension Plans
Health Care Plans
2013
2012
2013
2012
Benefit Obligation, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 5,407
$ 5,191
$ 2,629
$ 3,218
Service Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
56
25
23
Interest Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
295
294
135
149
Plan Amendments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
—
1
—
Actuarial Loss (Gain) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(120)
174
(110)
(532)
Participant Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
11
26
19
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(409)
(334)
(255)
(260)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     20
     15
     27
     12
Benefit Obligation, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 5,417
$ 5,407
$ 2,478
$ 2,629
Fair Value of Plan Assets, January 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 3,404
$ 3,046
$   —
$   —
Actual Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
478
261
—
—
Employer Contributions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
567
420
233
241
Benefits Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
11
26
19
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (409)
   (334)
   (255)
   (260)
Fair Value of Plan Assets, December 31. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,050
$ 3,404
$     4
$    —
Net Funded Asset (Liability) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(1,367)
$(2,003)
$(2,474)
$(2,629)
Recognized in:
 
Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   (19)
$  (736)
$   (231)
$  (254)
 
Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (1,348)
 (1,267)
 (2,243)
 (2,375)
 
 
Net Asset (Liability) Recognized  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(1,367)
$(2,003)
$(2,474)
$(2,629)
Recognized in Shareholders’ Equity:
 
Prior Service Cost (Credit). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   366
$   314
$   299
$   339
 
Net Actuarial Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,252
$ 1,646
$   221
$   340
Actuarial Assumptions:
Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.75%
5.50%
5.75%
5.50%
Expected Return on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8.50%
8.50%
—
—
Rate of Compensation Increase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.04%
4.04%
—
—
Initial Health Care Cost Trend Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
11.20%
11.50%
Ultimate Health Care Cost Trend Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
5.00%
5.00%
Number of Years to Ultimate Trend Rate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
8 years
8 years
EXHIBIT 12.21
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

499
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
b. What is the likely reason for the decline in the net expense for Treadaway’s health care 
plans between 2011 and 2012?
c. Why does Treadaway show no subtraction for the expected return on investments in 
computing net health care expense for each year?
d. What are the likely reasons that Treadaway reports an actuarial gain in its pension obli-
gation and health care obligation for 2013?
e. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in Treadaway’s prior service cost for U.S. 
pension plans from $314 at the end of 2012 to $366 at the end of 2013.
f. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in Treadaway’s net actuarial loss for U.S. 
pension plans from $1,646 at the end of 2012 to $1,252 at the end of 2013.
g. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in Treadaway’s prior service cost for health 
care plans from $339 at the end of 2012 to $299 at the end of 2013.
h. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in Treadaway’s actuarial loss for health care 
plans from $340 at the end of 2012 to $221 at the end of 2013.
i. Give the journal entry that Treadaway would make at the end of 2013 to recognize net 
pension expense, pension funding, and the change in balance sheet accounts for its pen-
sion plan.
j. Give the journal entry that Treadaway would make at the end of 2013 to recognize net 
health care expense, health care funding, and the change in balance sheet accounts for 
its health care plan.
32. Interpreting income tax disclosures. Exhibit 12.22 presents selected information from the 
notes to the financial statements of Catiman Limited, a manufacturer of farming equip-
ment, for the years ending October 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011. Catiman applies U.S. GAAP.
a. Present the journal entry to recognize Catiman’s income tax expense and income taxes 
payable for the year ended October 31, 2012. Be sure to consider the effect on deferred 
tax asset and deferred tax liability accounts.
b. Repeat part a for the year ended October 31, 2013.
c. Why do state and local taxes appear as an addition in the tax reconciliation between 
income taxes at the statutory tax rate and income tax expense?
d. Catiman combines the effect of nondeductible costs and other items in its income tax 
reconciliation. Will nondeductible costs have the effect of increasing or decreasing the 
effective tax rate? Explain.
e. Explain why a recognized health care liability and a recognized pension liability give rise 
to deferred tax assets, whereas a recognized prepaid pension asset gives rise to a deferred 
tax liability.
f. Sales allowances relate to amounts that Catiman pays after the time of sale for warranty 
repairs, rebates, and returned equipment. Why do sales allowances give rise to a deferred 
tax asset?
g. What is the likely reason that the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets increased 
continually during the three years?
h. What is the likely explanation for the direction of the change in the deferred tax liability 
relating to depreciation?
i. Catiman leases equipment to its customers, which gives rise to a deferred tax liability. 
Does Catiman likely account for these leases as operating leases or as capital leases for 
financial reporting? Which method of accounting for these same leases does the firm 
likely use for tax reporting?
33. Interpreting income tax disclosures. Exhibit 12.23 presents information from the income tax 
note to the financial statements for E-Drive, a European computer manufacturer, for the 
years ending December 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011. E-Drive applies IFRS.
a. Present the journal entry to recognize E-Drive’s income tax expense and income taxes 
payable for the year ended December 31, 2012. Use a single deferred tax account instead 
of separate accounts for deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities.
b. Repeat part a for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

500
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
c. Why do the amounts for deferred taxes in the entries in parts a and b not equal the 
change in deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities in Exhibit 12.23 for each year?
d. Why do local taxes appear as an addition in the reconciliation between the statutory tax 
rate and the effective tax rate?
e. Why does E-Drive show both deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for retire-
ment benefits?
f. What does the reporting of a deferred tax asset for bad debts and warranties suggest 
about when E-Drive recognizes expenses for these items for financial reporting and for 
tax reporting?
g. E-Drive leases equipment to its customers, which gives rise to a deferred tax liability. 
Does E-Drive likely account for these leases as operating leases or as capital leases for 
financial reporting? Which method of accounting for these same leases does E-Drive 
likely use for tax reporting?
h. What does the reporting of a deferred tax liability for development costs suggest about 
when E-Drive recognizes an expense for this item for financial reporting and for tax 
reporting?
Catiman’s Income Tax Disclosures
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 32)
2013
2012
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,174
$2,107
Income Tax Expense:
 
Current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  736
$  738
 
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     6
   (39)
 
 
Total Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  742
$  699
Income Taxes on Income Before Income Taxes at 
the Statutory Tax Rate of 35%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  761
$  737
State and Local Taxes (Net of Federal Tax Benefit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22
10
Foreign Tax Rates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8
(6)
Nondeductible Costs and Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (49)
   (42)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  742
$  699
October 31:
2013
2012
2011
COMPONENTS OF DEFERRED TAXES
Deferred Tax Assets:
Health Care Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  825
$  997
$1,017
Sales Allowances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
327
324
304
Pension Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
246
250
156
Tax Loss and Tax Credit Carryforwards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
132
93
55
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
362
225
257
Valuation Allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (50)
   (25)
    (1)
 
Total Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,842
$1,864
$1,788
Deferred Tax Liabilities:
Prepaid Pension Asset  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  845
$  860
$  778
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
214
231
263
Deferred Lease Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
144
154
159
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   122
    96
   104
 
Total Deferred Tax Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,325
$1,341
$1,304
EXHIBIT 12.22
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

501
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
34. Interpreting income tax disclosures. Exhibit 12.24 presents information from the income tax 
note of Dime Store, a discount retailer, for its fiscal years ending January 31, 2013, 2012, 
and 2011. Dime Store applies U.S. GAAP.
a. Present the journal entry to recognize Dime Store’s income tax expense and income 
taxes payable for the year ended January 31, 2011. Use a single deferred tax account 
instead of separate accounts for deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities.
b. Repeat part a for the year ended January 31, 2012.
c. Repeat part a for the year ended January 31, 2013.
d. Why do the amounts for deferred taxes in the entries in parts a, b, and c not equal the 
changes in deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities in Exhibit 12.24 for each year?
e. Why do state and local taxes appear as an addition in the reconciliation between the 
statutory tax rate and the effective tax rate?
f. What does the reporting of a deferred tax asset for health care benefits and a deferred 
tax liability for pensions suggest about the funding status of Dime Store’s health care 
and pension plans?
E-Drive’s Income Tax Disclosures
(amounts in millions of euros)
(Problem 33)
2013
2012
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€13,317
€12,226
Income Tax Expense:
 
Current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 2,177
€ 2,047
 
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,724
  2,185
 
 
Total Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 3,901
€ 4,232
Income Taxes at the Statutory Tax Rate of 35% . . . . . . . . . . . .
35%
35%
Local Taxes (Net of Federal Tax Benefit) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Foreign Tax Rates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5)
(5)
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (2)
      4
Effective Tax Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     29%
     35%
October 31:
2013
2012
2011
COMPONENTS OF DEFERRED TAXES
Deferred Tax Assets:
Stock-Based and Other Compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 3,147
€ 3,022
€ 3,122
Retirement Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,002
3,039
3,908
Capitalized Development Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,355
1,728
1,794
Bad Debts and Warranties. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
724
937
1,050
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,128
3,471
4,855
Valuation Allowance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (510)
   (562)
   (603)
 
Total Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€10,846
€11,635
€14,126
Deferred Tax Liabilities:
Retirement Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 2,906
€ 7,267
€ 7,057
Deferred Lease Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,385
964
622
Software Development Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
505
348
381
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,340
  1,502
  1,324
 
Total Deferred Tax Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ 6,136
€10,081
€ 9,384
EXHIBIT 12.23
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

502
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
g. The deferred tax liability for property, plant, and equipment remained relatively steady 
between January 31, 2011, and January 31, 2012. What does this behavior of the deferred 
tax liability suggest about Dime Store’s expenditures on property, plant, and equipment?
h. What is the interpretation of the absence of a deferred tax asset valuation allowance?
35. Behavior of deferred income tax account when a firm acquires new assets every year. Equi-
librium Company has adopted a program of purchasing a new machine each year. It uses 
a prescribed method of depreciation on its income tax return and straight-line depreciation 
on its financial statements. Each machine costs €12,000 installed and has an economic life 
of six years for financial reporting. Equilibrium depreciates this equipment for tax pur-
poses using the following percentages of acquisition cost each year: 20%, 32%, 19%, 12%, 
11%, and 6% of cost in each of the six years, respectively.
a. Calculate the total depreciation deduction on the tax return for each of the first seven 
years.
b. Calculate depreciation for each year, using the straight-line method of depreciation.
c. Calculate the annual difference in depreciation charges, using the results from parts a
and b.
d. Calculate the annual increase in the Deferred Tax Liability account for the balance sheet 
by multiplying the tax rate, 40%, by the amount found in part c.
e. Calculate year-end balances for the Deferred Tax Liability account on the balance sheet.
f. If Equilibrium continues to follow its policy of buying a new machine every year for 
€12,000, what will happen to the balance in the Deferred Tax Liability account on the 
balance sheet?
Dime Store’s Income Tax Disclosures
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 34)
Fiscal Year Ended January 31:
2013
2012
2011
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,500
$3,862
$3,032
Income Tax Expense:
 
Current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,911
$1,574
$1,052
 
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (201)
  (122)
    94
 
 
Total Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,710
$1,452
$1,146
Income Taxes at the Statutory Tax Rate of 35% . . . . 
35.0%
35.0%
35.0%
State and Local Taxes (net of federal tax benefit)  . . 
4.0
3.3
3.3
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (1.0)
  (0.7)
  (0.5)
Effective Tax Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  38.0%
  37.6%
  37.8%
January 31:
2013
2012
2011
2010
COMPONENTS OF DEFERRED TAXES
Deferred Tax Assets:
Stock-Based Compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  466
$  399
$  332
$  297
Self-Insured Benefits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
238
217
179
143
Bad Debts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
191
167
147
133
Health Care Benefits  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39
39
38
42
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   192
   152
   175
    97
 
Total Deferred Tax Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,126
$  974
$  871
$  712
Deferred Tax Liabilities:
Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,041
$1,080
$1,136
$  806
Pensions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
287
268
218
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   135
   114
    96
    84
 
Total Deferred Tax Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,276
$1,481
$1,500
$1,108
EXHIBIT 12.24
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

503
Questions, Exercises, and Problems   
36. Attempts to achieve off-balance-sheet financing. (Adapted from materials by R. Dieter, D. 
Landsittel, J. Stewart, and A. Wyatt.) Shiraz Company wants to raise $50 million cash but, 
for various reasons, does not want to do so in a way that results in a newly recorded liabil-
ity. It is sufficiently solvent and profitable that its bank will lend up to $50 million at the 
prime interest rate. Shiraz Company’s financial executives have devised six different plans, 
described in the following paragraphs.
 
 
Plan 1: Transfer of Receivables with Recourse. Shiraz Company will transfer to Credit 
Company its accounts receivable, which call for payments over the next two years. These 
receivables pay fixed interest rates. Credit Company will pay an amount equal to the present 
value of the receivables, less an allowance for uncollectibles as well as a discount, because 
it pays now but will collect cash later. Shiraz Company must repurchase from Credit Com-
pany at face value any receivables that become uncollectible in excess of the allowance for 
uncollectibles. In addition, Shiraz Company may repurchase any of the receivables not yet 
due at face value less a discount specified by formula and based on the prime rate at the 
time of the initial transfer. (This option permits Shiraz Company to benefit from an unex-
pected drop in interest rates after the transfer.) The accounting issue is whether the transfer 
is a sale (Shiraz Company debits Cash, credits Accounts Receivable, and debits an expense 
or loss on transfer) or whether the transfer is a loan collateralized by the receivables (Shiraz 
Company debits Cash and credits Loan Payable at the time of transfer).
 
 
Plan 2: Product Financing Arrangement. Shiraz Company will transfer inventory to 
Credit Company, who will store the inventory in a public warehouse. Credit Company may 
use the inventory as collateral for its own borrowings, whose proceeds will be used to pay 
Shiraz Company. Shiraz Company will pay storage costs and will repurchase the inventory 
within the next four years at contractually fixed prices plus interest accrued for the time 
elapsed between the transfer and later repurchase. The accounting issue is whether Shiraz 
has sold the inventory to Credit Company, with later repurchases treated by Shiraz as new 
acquisitions of inventory, or whether Shiraz has borrowed from Credit Company, with the 
inventory remaining on Shiraz’s balance sheet.
 
 
Plan 3: Purchase Contract. Shiraz Company wants a branch line of a railroad built 
from the main rail line to carry raw material directly to its own plant. It could borrow the 
funds and build the branch line itself. Instead, it will sign an agreement with the railroad 
to ship specified amounts of material each month for 10 years. Shiraz will pay the agreed 
shipping costs, even if it does not wish to take delivery of any raw material. The railroad 
will take the contract to its bank and, using it as collateral, borrow the funds to build the 
branch line. The accounting issue is whether Shiraz Company should debit an asset for 
future rail services and credit a liability for payments to the railroad. The alternative is to 
make no accounting entry except when Shiraz makes payments to the railroad.
 
 
Plan 4: Construction Joint Venture. Shiraz Company and Mission Company will jointly 
build a plant to manufacture chemicals that both companies need in their production pro-
cesses. Each will contribute $5 million to the project, to be named Chemical. Chemical will 
borrow another $40 million from a bank, with Shiraz (but not Mission) guaranteeing the 
debt. Shiraz and Mission are each to contribute equally to future operating expenses and 
debt-service payments of Chemical. In return for guaranteeing the debt, Shiraz will have 
an option to purchase Mission’s interest for $20 million four years later. The accounting 
issue is whether Shiraz Company, which will ultimately be responsible for all debt-service 
payments, should recognize a liability for the funds that Chemical borrowed. Alternatively, 
the debt guarantee is a commitment that Shiraz Company must disclose in notes to its 
financial statements.
 
 
Plan 5: Research and Development Partnership. Shiraz Company will contribute a labo-
ratory and preliminary research results about a potentially profitable gene-splicing discov-
ery to a partnership, to be called Venture. Venture will raise funds by selling the remaining 
interest in the partnership to outside investors for $2 million and by borrowing $48 mil-
lion from a bank, with Shiraz Company guaranteeing the debt. Although Venture will 
operate under the management of Shiraz Company, it will be free to sell the results of its 
further discoveries and development efforts to anyone, including Shiraz Company. Shiraz 
Company has no obligation to purchase any of Venture’s output. The accounting issue is 
whether Shiraz Company should recognize a liability for the $48 million bank loan. Would 
your analysis change if Shiraz Company did not guarantee the bank loan but instead had 
either the option to purchase or an obligation to purchase the results of Venture’s work?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

504
Chapter 12 
Liabilities: Off-Balance-Sheet Financing, Retirement Benefits, and Income Taxes
 
 
Plan 6: Hotel Financing. Shiraz Company owns and operates a profitable hotel. It 
could use the hotel as collateral for a conventional mortgage loan. Instead, it considers 
selling the hotel to a partnership for $50 million cash. The partnership will sell owner-
ship interests to outside investors for $5 million and borrow $45 million from a bank on a 
conventional mortgage loan, using the hotel as collateral. Shiraz Company guarantees the 
mortgage. The accounting issue is whether Shiraz Company should record a liability for the 
partnership’s bank loan.
Discuss whether Shiraz Company should recognize any of these obligations or commit-
ments as a liability on its balance sheet.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

F
irms often acquire the marketable securities (bonds, preferred stock, and common stock) of 
other entities, including firms and governments. The following are examples of acquisitions of 
such securities.
Example 1 Goldman Sachs, an investment bank, has trading operations that focus on short-
term price changes of securities. It acquired shares of common stock of Toyota Motor Corpora-
tion for $45.66 per share and sold the shares three days later for $46.25 per share.
Example 2 Southwest Airlines sells airline tickets and receives cash prior to providing trans-
portation services. Rather than let the cash remain idle in its bank account, Southwest Airlines 
acquires U.S. Treasury Notes. The firm earns interest while it holds the notes. It will sell the notes 
when it needs the cash for operations.
Example 3 Roche Holding, a pharmaceutical company, acquires shares of common stock of 
several firms engaged in biotechnology research. Roche will benefit from increases in the market 
prices of these shares if the research efforts succeed.
Firms also enter into financial contracts with other entities to hedge various risks.
Example 4 Nestlé, a consumer foods company, purchases cocoa beans for its chocolate candy. 
Based on its production plan, Nestlé intends to purchase 2,000 metric tons of cocoa beans, with 
delivery in six months. Nestlé can either acquire the cocoa beans in the spot market six months 
from now or buy the beans today for delivery in six months using a forward purchase contract. The 
former arrangement exposes Nestlé to changes in cocoa bean prices, whereas the latter fixes the 
price today. If Nestlé locks in the price today using a forward contract, it will have saved out-of-
pocket costs if cocoa bean prices increase during the next six months. It will suffer an opportunity 
loss if prices of cocoa beans decline.
Example 5 Siemens AG, a diversified German firm, places an order for 5,000 pumps to be 
manufactured in Mexico and delivered in six months. Siemens agrees to pay the supplier 64 Mexi-
can pesos per pump. The current exchange rate between the euro and the Mexican peso is about 
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Marketable Securities 
and Derivatives
C h a p t e r 
13
1. Understand why firms acquire securities 
issued by other firms and by govern-
mental bodies and how the purpose of 
the investment affects the accounting 
for that investment.
2. Understand the accounting for short-
term and long-term investments in 
marketable securities.
3. Understand why firms use derivative 
contracts to hedge the risk of changes 
in interest rates, exchange rates, 
 commodity prices, and other factors.
4. Develop skills to apply hedge account-
ing to derivative contracts.
5. Develop the ability to apply the fair 
value option to marketable securities 
and hedging contracts.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

506
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
€0.06 = 1 peso (P1), so this implies the current price of the 5,000 pumps in euros is €19,200 
(= 64 pesos × 5,000 × €0.06). If Siemens worries that the exchange rate will change before it 
takes delivery in six months, and the pumps might cost more than the current €19,200 equivalent 
of 320,000 pesos (P320,000) (= 64 pesos × 5,000), Siemens could acquire a forward currency 
contract from a bank to purchase P320,000 for €25,600 in six months, implying an exchange 
rate of €0.08 to P1. If the euro declines in value such that the exchange rate rises above €0.08 
per peso, the bank will pay Siemens the difference. If the exchange rate is €0.08 or less, the for-
ward contract expires, and Siemens exchanges the necessary euros to purchase P320,000. Thus, 
Siemens benefits from the contract if the exchange rate declines below €0.08. Siemens incurs 
the cost for exchange rates between €0.06 and €0.08; this amount equals the return to the bank 
for selling the forward contract. Siemens has paid now to neutralize its risk that exchange rates 
exceed €0.08.
Example 6 Arcelor Mittal, a steel manufacturer, issues €50 million of variable interest rate 
bonds whose interest rate varies with the prime interest rate in the Netherlands, currently 6%. 
To fix the interest rate on its borrowing at 6%, Arcelor Mittal enters into an interest rate swap 
contract with its bank. If the variable interest rate rises above 6%, say to 8%, Arcelor Mittal 
must pay its bondholders interest at 8%. However, the bank will pay Arcelor Mittal 2% of the 
amount borrowed, fixing Arcelor Mittal’s net borrowing cost at 6%. If the interest rate declines 
below 6%, say to 5%, Arcelor will pay its bondholders interest at 5%. However, Arcelor Mittal 
must pay the bank 1% of the amount borrowed, again fixing its borrowing cost at 6%.
The financial assets described in Examples 1, 2, and 3 appear either in the current assets 
section or the noncurrent assets section of the balance sheet, depending on the expected 
holding period. These financial assets are marketable securities. The financial contracts in 
Examples   4, 5, and 6 are derivatives, which can be either assets or liabilities, depending on 
movement in the financial variable (for example, interest rates or currency exchange rates) 
linked to the financial contract. This chapter discusses the accounting for investments in mar-
ketable securities and derivatives. The discussion proceeds as follows:
1. We begin with a general discussion of measurement issues and reporting the effects of 
remeasurements of marketable securities and derivatives.
2. We then describe the requirements of U.S. GAAP and IFRS to account for investments in 
marketable securities.
3. We next describe the requirements of U.S. GAAP and IFRS to account for derivatives.
4. We conclude by discussing and illustrating the fair value option, which provides firms with 
the choice to measure certain financial assets at fair value.
ISSUES IN ASSET MEASUREMENT 
AND INCOME RECOGNITION
As background to the accounting guidance in U.S. GAAP and IFRS for marketable securities 
and derivatives, we first identify the accounting issues involved in the measurement of financial 
assets on the balance sheet and the recognition of income on the income statement.
Example 7 To illustrate these accounting issues, assume the following:
1. January 1, 2013. Thames purchases 100 shares of Elseve Limited common stock for €50 
per share.
2. December 31, 2013. The market price of Elseve’s common stock is €60 per share. Thames 
continues to hold the shares.
3. December 31, 2014. The market price of Elseve’s common stock is €80 per share. Thames 
continues to hold the shares.
4. January 2, 2015. Thames sells the 100 shares of Elseve Limited for €80 per share.
Setting aside requirements of U.S. GAAP and IFRS, Thames might measure the Elseve 
shares on its balance sheet using acquisition cost or fair value. If Thames uses fair value, it 
might recognize the changes in fair value either (1) in Other Comprehensive Income as the fair 
values change and in net income when it sells the shares or (2) in net income as fair values 
change. Exhibit 13.1 illustrates the amounts on the balance sheet and in other comprehensive 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

507
Issues in Asset Measurement and Income Recognition
income and net income under these three approaches. The arrows signify the closing of net 
income to Retained Earnings or the closing of Other Comprehensive Income to Accumulated 
Other Comprehensive Income.
METHOD 1: ACQUISITION COST MEASUREMENT
The acquisition cost method measures the investment at acquisition cost for all periods unless 
that investment is impaired.1 This method results in Thames reporting marketable securi-
ties at €5,000 on the balance sheet at the end of 2013 and 2014. At the time of sale in 2015, 
Thames realizes a gain of €3,000 (= €8,000 – €5,000). The gain increases net income in 2015. 
The acquisition cost method does not recognize gains and losses before the time of sale. Thus, 
this method ignores unrealized gains and losses while a firm holds the securities. It reports only 
realized gains and losses in the income statement. The acquisition cost method does not report 
the fair value of securities on the balance sheet, although users of financial statements likely 
find fair values of marketable securities more relevant than acquisition cost.
METHOD 2: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENT WITH 
UNREALIZED GAINS AND LOSSES IN NET INCOME
The second method measures and reports the securities at fair value on the balance sheet at the 
end of each reporting period. Thus, Thames would report the marketable securities at €6,000 
on its December 31, 2013, balance sheet and at €8,000 on its December 31, 2014, balance sheet. 
Measuring securities at fair value provides financial statement users with information about the 
amount the firm would receive by selling the securities on the balance sheet date.
Changes in the fair values of the marketable securities give rise to unrealized gains (losses). 
The second method recognizes these unrealized gains (losses) in net income as the fair value 
changes and does not wait until Thames sells the shares to recognize gains (losses) in net 
income. Under the second method, readers of the financial statements have information about 
a firm’s decisions to purchase, hold, and sell marketable securities reported in the income state-
ment. Advocates of this method argue that if fair values are sufficiently reliable to measure 
assets, then they should be sufficiently reliable to recognize unrealized gains and losses on those 
assets in net income.
 1 Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms assess investments in securities measured at acquisition cost for 
impairment. This book does not consider the details of these impairment assessments.
Illustration of Asset Measurement and Income Recognition
2013
2014
2015
Method 1: Acquisition Cost
Balance Sheet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€5,000
€5,000
€     0
Other Comprehensive Income → Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     0
     0
      0
Net Income → Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     0
     0
  3,000
Method 2: Fair Value with Unrealized Gains and Losses 
in Net Income
Balance Sheet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€6,000
€8,000
€     0
Other Comprehensive Income → Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     0
     0
      0
Net Income → Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,000
 2,000
      0
Method 3: Fair Value with Unrealized Gains and Losses 
in Other Comprehensive Income
Balance Sheet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€6,000
€8,000
€     0
Other Comprehensive Income → Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,000
 2,000
 (3,000)
Net Income → Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     0
     0
  3,000
EXHIBIT 13.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

508
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
METHOD 3: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENT WITH UNREALIZED 
GAINS AND LOSSES IN OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
The third method, like the second, reports marketable securities at fair value each period. In 
contrast to the second method, the third method does not report changes in these fair values in 
the income statement until the firm realizes the gain by selling the securities. Thus, net income 
for 2015 will include the total €3,000 realized gain on the sale of the securities.
To maintain the balance sheet equality in this illustration, the third method must have an 
offsetting credit for the debit to Marketable Securities arising from the increase in fair value 
each year. The third method increases Other Comprehensive Income, which firms close to 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, another shareholders’ equity account, at the end 
of each reporting period. Thus, the €1,000 increase in fair value during 2013 increases Other 
Comprehensive Income by €1,000 and results in a balance in Accumulated Other Compre-
hensive Income of €1,000 at the end of 2013. The €2,000 increase in fair value during 2014 
increases Other Comprehensive Income by €2,000 and results in a balance in Accumulated 
Other Comprehensive Income of €3,000 (= €1,000 + €2,000) at the end of 2014. When the 
firm sells the securities in 2015 for €8,000, it makes the following entry:
January 2, 2015
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
 
Realized Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+8,000
–3,000
OCI → AOCI
–8,000
+3,000
NI → RE
To record the sale for €8,000 of marketable securities with a carrying value 
of €8,000 and reverse the previously recognized unrealized holding gains 
of €3,000 by showing a reduction in other comprehensive income, which 
is closed to accumulated other comprehensive income. The realized gain is 
€3,000. Comprehensive income (the sum of other comprehensive income and 
net income) shows €1,000 for 2013, €2,000 for 2014, and zero for 2015, as 
the realized gain and the reversal of the previously recognized holding gains 
net to zero for comprehensive income for 2015.
Each of these three methods has perceived advantages and disadvantages. U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS use a combination of these three methods in specifying the required accounting for mar-
ketable securities and for derivatives.
ACCOUNTING AND REPORTING 
OF MARKETABLE SECURITIES
Firms may acquire marketable securities for trading purposes, as Example 1 describes for Gold-
man Sachs. Or they may acquire marketable securities as a short-term investment of excess 
cash, as Example 2 describes for Southwest Airlines. The securities in both examples will be 
classified as current assets on the balance sheet. Firms that acquire marketable securities as a 
long-term investment, as Example 3 describes for Roche, classify the investments in securities as 
a noncurrent asset. The term marketable securities implies the existence of a market where the 
securities actively trade, permitting relatively easy and reliable measurement of fair values. We 
discuss and illustrate the provisions of U.S. GAAP and IFRS next.2
 2 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 115, “Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt 
and Equity Securities,” 1993 (Codification Topic 320); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” revised 2003. In November 2009, the International Accounting 
Standards Board issued International Financial Reporting Standard 9, “Financial Instruments” (IFRS 9). In 
December 2011, the IASB deferred the effective date of IFRS 9 to January 1, 2015, with early adoption permit-
ted. The Appendix to this chapter summarizes some of the changes that would be required by IFRS 9.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

509
Accounting and Reporting of Marketable Securities 
CLASSIFICATION OF MARKETABLE SECURITIES
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to classify marketable securities into three categories:
1. Debt securities held to maturity (U.S. GAAP) or held-to-maturity investments (IFRS) are 
debt securities for which a firm has both the intent and the ability to hold to maturity. 
Held-to-maturity securities are shown on the balance sheet at their acquisition cost, sub-
ject to impairment. The accounting for held-to-maturity securities follows the first method 
illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
2. Debt and equity securities held as trading securities (U.S. GAAP) or as financial assets at 
fair value through profit or loss (IFRS) are securities that the firm intends to trade for the 
purpose of obtaining a profit. We use the term trading securities to refer to these securities. 
Trading securities are shown on the balance sheet at fair value. Changes in the fair values 
of trading securities are reported each period in net income. The accounting for trading 
securities follows the second method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
3. Debt and equity securities held as available-for-sale securities (U.S GAAP) or as available-
for-sale financial assets (IFRS) are securities other than held-to-maturity and trading secu-
rities. Available-for-sale securities are shown on the balance sheet at fair value. Unrealized 
changes in the fair values of available-for-sale securities are included in other comprehen-
sive income. Realized changes in the fair values of available-for-sale securities are included 
in net income when a firm sells the securities. The accounting for available-for-sale securi-
ties follows the third method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
MEASUREMENT OF SECURITIES AT ACQUISITION
A firm initially records the purchase of marketable securities at acquisition cost. Acquisition 
cost includes the purchase price plus any commissions, taxes, and other costs incurred.3 For 
example, if a firm acquires securities classified as marketable securities for $10,000, the entry is 
as follows:
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
To record the acquisition of marketable securities costing $10,000.
The investor recognizes dividends on equity securities as revenue when the firm’s board of 
directors declares dividends. The investor recognizes interest income on debt securities when 
interest accrues over time. Assume that a firm holds equity securities earning $250 through divi-
dend declarations and debt securities earning $300 from interest earned and that it has not yet 
received these amounts in cash. The entry is as follows:
 
Dividends and Interest Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
550
 
Dividend Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
250
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
To record dividends and interest revenue from Marketable Securities.
The measurement of marketable securities at the date of acquisition and the recording of 
dividends and interest present no new issues. Measuring securities after acquisition, however, 
departs from acquisition cost accounting.
MEASUREMENT OF SECURITIES AFTER ACQUISITION
Held-to-Maturity Debt Securities Firms sometimes acquire debt securities with the 
intention of holding these securities until maturity, as in the next example.
 3 U.S. GAAP and IFRS exclude transactions costs from the acquisition cost of trading securities, treating such 
costs as expenses of the period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

510
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
Example 8 Consolidated Edison (ConEd), an electric utility, has $100 million of bonds 
payable outstanding that mature in five years. The utility acquires U.S. government securities 
whose periodic interest payments and maturity value exactly equal those on the utility’s out-
standing bonds. The firm intends to use the cash received from the government bonds to make 
required interest and principal payments on its own bonds.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to measure marketable debt securities for which firms 
have an intent and ability to hold to maturity at amortized cost. A firm initially records these 
debt securities at acquisition cost. This acquisition cost will differ from the maturity value of 
the debt if the coupon rate on the bonds differs from the effective rate on the bonds. The firm 
uses the effective interest method to amortize any difference between acquisition cost and matu-
rity value over the life of the debt as an adjustment to interest revenue.4 The amortization pro-
cedure involves the following steps:
1. The holder of the debt securities (the investor) records interest revenue each period. The 
amount of interest revenue equals to the carrying value of the debt at the start of the period 
multiplied by the effective rate of interest. It debits the Marketable Securities account for 
this amount and credits Interest Revenue. Interest Revenue is closed to Retained Earnings 
at the end of the period.
2. If the investor receives cash each period, it debits Cash and credits the Marketable Securi-
ties account. The result of this process is a new carrying value (called the amortized cost) 
for use in the computations during the next period.
Example 9 Refer to Example 8. Assume the U.S. government will pay the investor $2,500,000 
each six months, equal to 2.5% of the $100 million face amount of the bonds (5% annual cou-
pon rate, paid in two installments each year) and will repay the $100 million at the end of five 
years. Assume that at the time ConEd purchases the bonds, the effective rate of interest is 6% 
compounded semiannually (3% each six months). Because the effective rate (6%, compounded 
semiannually) is higher than the coupon rate (5%, paid semiannually), the bonds will sell for a 
discount. ConEd will pay $95,734,8985 for these bonds. Exhibit 13.2 shows the amortization 
table for these bonds for the 10 six-month periods prior to maturity in five years.
ConEd makes the following entry at the time it purchases the U.S. government securities:
Beginning of Period 1
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
95,734,898
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 95,734,898
To record the purchase of $100 million face amount of bonds classified as 
held-to-maturity securities for $95,734,898.
ConEd would classify this investment as a noncurrent asset on its balance sheet because it 
intends to hold the securities for more than one year.
At the end of the first six-month period, ConEd makes the following entry:
End of First Six-Month Period
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,872,047
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,872,047
To recognize interest revenue on bonds: $2,872,047 = 0.03 × $95,734,898.
End of First Six-Month Period
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,500,000
To record cash received from investment in U.S. government bonds.
 4 The amortization procedure involves the same compound interest computations that Chapter 11 discussed for 
the issuer of debt and illustrated in Exhibit 11.2  for a loan.
 5 The amount equals the present value of an annuity of $2.5 million for 10 periods plus the present value of $100 
million paid at the end of 10 periods, both cash flows discounted at 3% per period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

511
Accounting and Reporting of Marketable Securities 
ConEd could combine the two preceding entries into one:
End of First Six-Month Period
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500,000
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
372,047
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,872,047
ConEd makes similar entries each six months during the five years using the amounts in the 
amortization table in Exhibit 13.2. At the end of five years, the carrying value of the bonds will 
be $100 million. ConEd makes the following entry at the maturity of the bonds when it receives 
cash:
End of Last Six-Month Period
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000,000
To record cash received at the maturity of the bonds.
The accounting for held-to-maturity debt securities relies on the acquisition cost method 
illustrated in Exhibit 13.1. Both the initial amount recorded and adjustments for amortization 
each period rely on the initial purchase price of $95,734,898. The amount that results from the 
application of this measurement approach is called the amortized cost of the held-to-maturity 
security. Held-to-maturity securities are also subject to impairment. That is, firms must recog-
nize decreases in fair value (unrealized losses).6
 6 If the investor deems a held-to-maturity security to be impaired, the investor recognizes (debits) an impairment 
loss (included in net income) and reduces (credits) the balance sheet carrying value of the investment. This book 
does not address the U.S. GAAP and IFRS requirements for determining if an impairment loss has occurred 
and, if so, how to measure it.
Amortization Table for $100 Million Bonds with a Stated 
 Interest Rate of 5% and a Market Required Yield of 6%
Period 
(1)
Marketable 
Security at 
Beginning 
of Period 
(2)
Interest 
Revenue 
at 3% 
per Period 
(3)
Cash 
Received 
for Period 
(4)
Increase in 
Carrying Value 
of Marketable 
Security 
(5)
Marketable 
Security 
at End 
of Period 
(6)
 1  . . . . . . . . 
$95,734,898
$2,872,047
$2,500,000
$372,047
$ 96,106,945
 2  . . . . . . . . 
 96,106,945
 2,883,208
 2,500,000
 383,208
  96,490,153
 3  . . . . . . . . 
 96,490,153
 2,894,705
 2,500,000
 394,705
  96,884,858
 4  . . . . . . . . 
 96,884,858
 2,906,546
 2,500,000
 406,546
  97,291,404
 5  . . . . . . . . 
 97,291,404
 2,918,742
 2,500,000
 418,742
  97,710,146
 6  . . . . . . . . 
 97,710,146
 2,931,304
 2,500,000
 431,304
  98,141,450
 7  . . . . . . . . 
 98,141,450
 2,944,244
 2,500,000
 444,244
  98,585,694
 8  . . . . . . . . 
 98,585,694
 2,957,571
 2,500,000
 457,571
  99,043,265
 9  . . . . . . . . 
 99,043,265
 2,971,298
 2,500,000
 471,298
  99,514,563
10  . . . . . . . . 
 99,514,563
 2,985,437
 2,500,000
 485,437
 100,000,000
Notes: Column (2) equals Column (6) from the previous period, except for the first period, when it equals the 
purchase price of the bonds.
Column (3) = 0.03 × Column (2).
Column (4) is given.
Column (5) = Column (3) – Column (4).
Column (6) = Column (2) + Column (5).
EXHIBIT 13.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

512
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
The argument for measuring held-to-maturity debt securities at amortized cost (and ignor-
ing changes in fair value, except for impairment losses, during the contractual term of the debt) 
is that changes in fair value are not relevant if the firm has the intention and ability to hold the 
securities to maturity. The counterargument has two elements: (1) changes in economic circum-
stances (such as changes in interest rates, or the credit risk of the borrower) could change the 
investor’s willingness or ability to hold the securities until maturity, and (2) the fair value of the 
security reflects the opportunity cost of continuing to hold the securities.
 PROBLEM  13.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Accounting for an investment in bonds. General Electric Capital Services (GECS) pays 
$105,346 to acquire bonds of Sapra Company. GECS classifies these bonds as held-to-
maturity investments. GECS will receive $8,000 at the end of the first year, $8,000 at the 
end of the second year, and $108,000 at the end of the third year. The market-required 
yield at the time GECS purchased the bonds is 6%, compounded annually.
a. Prepare an amortization table, similar to that in Exhibit 13.2, for the life of the bonds.
b. Prepare journal entries that GECS would make on the date of purchase and at the 
end of the first year after the date of purchase.
Trading Securities Firms sometimes buy and sell (trade) debt and equity securities for 
short-term profit potential. An example is Goldman Sachs in Example 1. The term trading 
implies active and frequent buying and selling with the objective of generating profits from 
short-term changes in market prices. Acquisition and disposition of trading securities are 
usually operating activities. Investment banks, for example, often trade securities in different 
capital markets worldwide to take advantage of temporary differences in market prices. Other 
financial firms, such as insurance companies and brokerage firms, also trade securities. Man-
ufacturers, retailers, and other nonfinancial firms also invest funds for trading purposes, but 
less frequently and in relatively smaller amounts than do financial services firms. Firms include 
trading securities in marketable securities in the current assets section of the balance sheet.
Firms initially record trading securities at fair value, excluding transactions costs.7 U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require firms to report trading securities at fair value on the balance sheet. 
For these securities, active securities markets provide objective measures of fair values. Fair val-
ues provide financial statement users with the most relevant information for assessing the suc-
cess of a firm’s trading activities over time. The income statement reports the debit (loss) for 
decreases in the fair value and the credit (gain) for increases in the fair value of trading securi-
ties in an account with a title such as Unrealized Loss (or Gain or Gains and Losses, Net) on 
Trading Securities.
Example 10 First Insurance acquired shares of Sun Microsystems’ common stock on 
December 28, 2013, for $400,000 and classified them as trading securities. The fair value of 
these securities on December 31, 2013, was $402,000. First Insurance sold these shares on Janu-
ary 3, 2014, for $405,000. The journal entries to record these transactions appear below.
December 28, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400,000
To record acquisition of trading securities.
December 31, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Unrealized Gain on Trading Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
(continued)
 7 Transactions costs are expenses as incurred for trading securities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

513
Accounting and Reporting of Marketable Securities 
To measure trading securities at fair value and recognize unrealized gain in 
net income.
January 3, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
405,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
402,000
 
Realized Gain on Sale of Trading Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
To record the sale of trading securities at a gain.
The total income from the purchase and sale of these securities is $5,000 (= $405,000 of 
cash inflows – $400,000 of cash outflows). Measurement of trading securities at fair value 
reflects this income when it occurs in the form of a change in fair value, not when the investor 
realizes a gain or loss at the time of sale. In 2013 the income effect is $2,000, the change in fair 
value during that year, and in 2014 the income effect is $3,000, the change in fair value during 
that year. This accounting follows the second method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
Available-for-Sale Securities U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to classify marketable 
securities that are neither held-to-maturity securities nor trading securities as available-for-sale 
securities. Available-for-sale securities that the firm intends to sell within one year appear as mar-
ketable securities in the current assets section of the balance sheet. All other available-for-sale 
securities appear as noncurrent investments in securities. Acquisition and disposition of avail-
able-for-sale securities are usually classified as investing activities on the statement of cash flows. 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to report these securities at fair value on the balance sheet.
Firms initially record investments in available-for-sale securities at acquisition cost, includ-
ing transaction costs.8 On the date of each subsequent balance sheet, firms measure available-
for-sale securities at fair value. The difference between the carrying value and the fair value of 
the securities is the unrealized gain or loss. The unrealized gain or holding loss increases or 
decreases Other Comprehensive Income (a temporary shareholders’ equity account, which does 
not appear on the balance sheet). The firm closes Other Comprehensive Income to Accumu-
lated Other Comprehensive Income (a permanent shareholders’ equity account, which appears 
on the balance sheet) at the end of the period. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 
includes the sum of all increases and decreases in fair value of available-for-sale securities that 
have not yet appeared in net income. Changes in fair value of available-for-sale securities affect 
net income only when the firm sells these securities. The accounting for available-for-sale securi-
ties follows the third method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
Example 11 Nike acquires common stock of Merck for $400,000 on November 1, 2013, 
and designates this investment as available for sale. The fair value of these shares is $435,000 
on December 31, 2013. Nike sells these shares on August 15, 2014, for $480,000. The journal 
entries to record these transactions are as follows:
November 1, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+400,000
–400,000
To record acquisition of available-for-sale securities.
 8 If a firm classifies debt securities as available for sale, it must amortize any difference between the purchase 
price and the maturity value of the debt over the remaining term to maturity. This amortization makes interest 
revenue on these debt securities differ from the cash receipts for debt service payments made by the borrower.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

514
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
December 31, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
 
Unrealized Holding Gain on Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . 
 
35,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+35,000
+35,000
OCI → AOCI
To measure available-for-sale securities at fair value and recognize an 
unrealized holding gain in other comprehensive income.
August 15, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
480,000
Unrealized Holding Gain on Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
435,000
 
Realized Gain on Sale of Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+480,000
–35,000
OCI → AOCI
–435,000
+80,000
NI → RE
To record the sale of available-for-sale securities at a realized gain and 
reverse the amount previously recognized as an unrealized holding gain 
by showing a reduction in other comprehensive income, which is closed to 
accumulated other comprehensive income.
The total income from the purchase and sale of these securities is $80,000 (= $480,000 of 
cash inflows – $400,000 of cash outflows). The entire change in fair value affects net income 
in the year of sale, even though the balance sheet reports changes in fair value of the assets 
as they occur. Over the two-year period, the total effect on Comprehensive Income is $80,000. 
The statements reflect this as Other Comprehensive Income of $35,000 in the first year; Other 
Comprehensive reversal of holding gain of $35,000 in the second year, and realized Net Income 
of $80,000 in the second year. Total shareholders’ equity increases $35,000 in the first year and 
$45,000 (= $80,000 – $35,000) in the second.
Firms must test available-for-sale securities for impairment. If the investor firm deems the 
securities to be impaired, the firm treats the unrealized loss in Accumulated Other Compre-
hensive Income as if it were realized. For example, if a firm determines that an available-for-
sale security with a previously recognized (in other comprehensive income) loss of $5,000 is 
impaired as of December 31, 2013, the journal entry would be:
December 31, 2013
Impairment Loss  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
 
Unrealized Holding Loss on Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–5,000
OCI → AOCI
+5,000
AOCI → NI
To record an impairment loss in net income on available-for-sale securities. 
There is no effect on total comprehensive income, as the loss in net income 
is offset by the reversal of loss in other comprehensive income. Thus, there 
is no effect on total shareholders’ equity.
The required accounting for trading securities and available-for-sale securities differs with 
respect to the income statement but not with respect to the balance sheet. The unrealized gain 
or loss on trading securities appears in net income period by period when the fair value change 
occurs and the cumulative amount resides in Retained Earnings. The unrealized gain or loss on 
available-for-sale securities appears in Other Comprehensive Income period by period, and its 
cumulative amount resides in the Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income account on the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

515
Accounting and Reporting of Marketable Securities 
balance sheet. Management can sell available-for-sale securities with unrealized gains (or losses) 
and transfer through net income to Retained Earnings the entire unrealized gain (or loss); 
that is, the entire change in fair value since the firm acquired the securities. Management can 
affect the timing of gain or loss recognition in net income for available-for-sale securities but 
not for trading securities. This timing ability is, however, asymmetric because impairment rules 
preclude indefinite deferral of the recognition in income of unrealized losses, but not unreal-
ized gains. Users of the financial statements should be alert to this accounting in evaluating the 
profitability of firms with both types of securities.
RECLASSIFICATION OF SECURITIES
The firm’s purpose for holding securities may change, requiring it to transfer securities from 
one of the three categories to another. The firm transfers the securities at fair value at the time 
of the transfer.9 Note that a transfer of held-to-maturity securities to either trading securities or 
available-for-sale securities would call into question the original designation of that investment.
 PROBLEM  13.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Accounting for available-for-sale and trading securities. Transactions involving Conlin 
Corporation’s marketable securities appear in Exhibit 13.3.
a. Give the journal entries to account for these securities during 2013 and 2014 assum-
ing Conlin Corporation classifies them as available-for-sale securities.
b. How would the journal entries in part a differ if Conlin Corporation classified these 
securities as trading securities?
DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKETABLE SECURITIES
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require disclosures about marketable securities each period. We illustrate 
these disclosures next using information from the balance sheet and notes for Starling Cor-
poration presented in Exhibit 13.4. These disclosures reflect U.S. GAAP requirements. IFRS 
requirements are similar but can result in less detailed disclosures.10
1. The aggregate fair value, gross unrealized gains, gross unrealized losses, and amortized cost 
for held-to-maturity debt securities and for available-for-sale securities. Starling’s short-
term investments comprise securities available for sale and trading securities. Its long-term 
investments include available-for-sale securities. The available-for-sale securities comprise 
debt securities of various governmental entities. It reports no held-to-maturity securities. 
 9 FASB Statement No. 115 and IASB IAS 39 prescribe the accounting for any unrealized gain or loss at the time 
of the transfer, a topic beyond the scope of this textbook.
10 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 115, “Accounting for Certain Investments in Debt and 
Equity Securities,” 1993 (Codification Topic 320); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 7, “Finan-
cial Instruments: Disclosures,” 2005.
Conlin Corporation
(Problem 13.2 for Self-Study)
Fair Value
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Date 
Sold
Selling 
Price
December 31, 
2013
December 31, 
2014
A  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2/3/2013
$ 40,000
—
—
$ 38,000
$ 33,000
B  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 7/15/2013
  75,000
9/6/2014
$78,000
  79,000
—
C  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11/27/2013
  90,000
—
—
  93,000
  94,000
$205,000
$210,000
$127,000
EXHIBIT 13.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

516
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
The amortized cost column in Exhibit 13.4 shows the carrying value of debt securities after 
amortizing any difference between the purchase price of these securities and their matu-
rity value. The fair value column shows the fair value of these securities at each balance 
sheet date. The two middle columns show the gross unrealized gains and gross unrealized 
losses on available-for-sale securities. Requiring the separate disclosure of unrealized gains 
Starling Corporation
Disclosures Related to Marketable Securities
(amounts in thousands of US$)
Balance Sheet
September 30, 2013
September 30, 2012
Current Assets:
Available-for-Sale Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$83,845
$87,542
Securities Held as Trading Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 73,588
 53,496
Noncurrent Assets:
Long-Term Investments—Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 21,022
  5,811
Fiscal Year 2013
Fiscal Year 2012
Statement of Cash Flows: Investing Activities
Purchases of Available-for-Sale Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(237,422)
$(639,192)
Maturities of Available-for-Sale Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 178,167
 269,134
Sales of Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  47,497
 431,181
Note 3: Short-Term Investments
The Company’s short-term investments consist of the following:
Amortized 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Holding 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Holding 
Losses
Fair 
Value
September 30, 2013
Short-Term Investments—Available-for-Sale Securities:
State and Local Government Obligations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 81,366
 — 
$ (21)
$ 81,345
U.S. Government Agency Obligations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   2,500
 — 
   —  
   2,500
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 83,866
 — 
$ (21)
$ 83,845
Short-Term Investments—Trading Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  67,837
  73,588
 
Total Short-Term Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$151,703
$157,433
Long-Term Investments—Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
U.S. Government Agency Obligations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 21,000
 $22
   —  
$ 21,022
September 30, 2012
Short-Term Investments—Available-for-Sale Securities:
State and Local Government Obligations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 75,379
 $ 9
$(332)
$ 75,056
U.S. Government Agency Obligations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  10,000
 — 
  10,000
Corporate Debt Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   2,488
 — 
   (2)
   2,486
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 87,867
 $ 9
$(334)
$ 87,542
Short-Term Investments—Trading Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  55,265
  53,496
 
Total Short-Term Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$143,132
$141,038
Long-Term Investments—Available-for-Sale Securities:. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
State and Local Government Obligations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  5,893
 $—
$ (82)
$  5,811
Proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities were $47 million and $431 million, in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, respectively. Gross 
realized gains from sales were $3.8 million and $0.1 million in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, respectively. Gross realized losses from sales were 
$0.1 million and $1.7 million in fiscal years 2013 and 2012, respectively. For fiscal 2013, there were no realized losses and an immaterial 
amount of realized gains.
In fiscal years 2013 and 2012, the changes in net unrealized gains/losses in the trading portfolio included in earnings were a net gain of $7.5 
million and a net loss of $4.2 million, respectively.
EXHIBIT 13.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

517
Derivative Instruments
and unrealized losses provides information that would not appear if firms netted these 
amounts. The differences between amortized cost and fair value appear relatively small on 
both balance sheet dates.
2.  The proceeds from sales of available-for-sale securities and the gross realized gains and 
gross realized losses on those sales. The statement of cash flows shows the cash expenditures 
to purchase available-for-sale securities and the cash receipts from maturities and sales of 
 available-for-sale securities. For Starling, the cash receipts largely offset expenditures each 
year, and their amounts are larger than the balance sheet amount of available-for-sale securi-
ties at the beginning and end of the year. This implies that Starling turns over its portfolio of 
available-for-sale securities several times each year. The paragraph under the panel of data in 
Exhibit 13.4 also discloses the proceeds from selling available-for-sale securities, as well as the 
gross realized gains and gross realized losses. As with disclosures about unrealized gains and 
losses on the balance sheet, requiring the separate disclosure of realized gains and realized 
losses provides information that would not appear if firms netted these amounts.
3.  The change during the period in the net unrealized gain or loss on available-for-sale secu-
rities included in a separate shareholders’ equity account. The statement of changes in 
shareholders’ equity shows that Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income increased by 
$1,767 thousand in fiscal 2012 and decreased by $20,380 thousand in fiscal 2013 because 
of net unrealized gains and losses. Starling does not indicate how much of these changes in 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income relates to marketable securities and how much 
relates to cash flow hedges, a topic discussed in the next section.
4.  The change during the period in the net unrealized gain or loss on trading securities 
included in earnings. The second paragraph under the panel of data in Exhibit 13.4 indi-
cates the amount of the gain in fiscal year 2013 and the amount of the net loss in fiscal 
year 2012 from changes in unrealized gains and losses on trading securities.
DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
Firms incur risks in carrying out their business activities. A fire might destroy a warehouse of a 
retail chain and disrupt the flow of merchandise to stores. An automobile accident involving a 
member of the sales staff may injure the employee or others and damage the firm’s automobile. 
A firm’s products might injure customers and subject the firm to lawsuits. Most firms purchase 
property, medical, and liability insurance against such risks. The insurance shifts the risk of the 
loss beyond the deductible amount and up to the limits in the insurance policy to the insurance 
company. The firm pays insurance premiums for the right to shift the insured risk.
Firms engage in other transactions that subject them to specific financial risks. Consider the 
following scenarios.
Example 12 Great Deal orders inventory on June 30, 2013, for delivery on June 30, 2014, 
from a British supplier for £10,000 (currency is British pounds). The exchange rate between 
the U.S. dollar and the British pound is currently $1.60 per £1, indicating a purchase price of 
$16,000. If the value of the U.S. dollar declines between June 30, 2013, and June 30, 2014, when 
it must convert U.S. dollars into British pounds, Great Deal will pay more than $16,000 to pur-
chase the inventory.
Example 13 Thames issued a note dated January 1, 2013, for the purchase of manufacturing 
equipment. The note has a face value of €100,000 and bears interest at 8% each year. Interest is 
payable annually on December 31, and the note matures on December 31, 2015. If interest rates 
change, the fair value of the note will change.
Example 14 Elseve gives a note payable to a supplier on January 1, 2013, to acquire man-
ufacturing equipment. The note has a face value of €100,000 and bears interest at the prime 
lending rate, which is 8% on January 1, 2013. The supplier resets the interest rate each Decem-
ber 31 to establish the interest charge for the next calendar year. Interest is payable on Decem-
ber 31 of each year, and the note matures on December 31, 2015. If interest rates rise above 8% 
during the term of the note, Elseve will have to pay interest at that higher rate.
Example 15 Delmar Limited holds 10,000 gallons of whiskey in inventory on October 31, 
2013. Delmar expects to complete aging this whiskey by March 31, 2014, at which time it 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

518
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
intends to sell the whiskey. Uncertainties about the quality of the aged whiskey and future eco-
nomic conditions make it difficult to predict the selling price on March 31, 2014.
Most firms face risks—that is, variability of outcomes—from changes in interest rates, currency 
exchange rates, and commodity prices. Firms can purchase financial instruments to reduce 
these business risks, that is, to reduce the volatility of certain outcomes. Some of these instru-
ments have standardized terms and trade in relatively active markets, while others have special-
ized terms and do not trade at all. The general term used for the types of financial instruments 
that firms might buy to mitigate the risks described in Examples 12–15 is a  derivative. The 
accounting for derivative financial instruments follows the principles governing the accounting 
for marketable securities discussed in the previous section, with some exceptions. This section 
discusses the nature, use, accounting, and reporting of derivative instruments.11
NATURE AND USE OF DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
A derivative is a financial instrument whose value changes in response to changes in an under-
lying observable variable, such as a stock price, an interest rate, a currency exchange rate, or a 
commodity price. Unlike equity securities, which have no definite settlement date, firms settle 
a derivative at the date specified in the instrument. Finally, a derivative requires an investment 
that is small, relative to the investment in a contract that is similarly exposed to changes in mar-
ket factors, or requires no investment at all.12 An option to purchase a share of stock derives its 
value from movements in the market price of that stock. A commitment to purchase a certain 
amount of foreign currency in the future derives its value from changes in the exchange rate for 
that currency. Firms use derivative instruments to hedge the risks that arise from changes in 
interest rates, currency exchange rates, and commodity prices. The general idea behind hedging 
is that changes in the fair value of the derivative instrument offset changes in the fair value of 
an asset or liability or changes in future cash flows, thereby neutralizing, or at least reducing, 
the effects of those changes. Let’s reconsider the previous four examples.
Example 16 Refer to Example 12. Great Deal desires to incur a cost now to eliminate the 
effect of changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the British pound while it 
awaits delivery of the inventory. It purchases a forward foreign exchange contract from a bank 
on June 30, 2013, in which it promises to pay a fixed U.S. dollar amount on June 30, 2014, in 
exchange for £10,000 received on that date. The forward exchange rate between U.S. dollars 
and British pounds on June 30, 2013, for settlement on June 30, 2014, establishes the number 
of U.S. dollars it must deliver. If the forward rate on June 30, 2013, for settlement of the for-
ward contract on June 30, 2014, is $1.64 per £1, Great Deal can purchase a forward contract 
and thereby lock in the cost of the inventory at $16,400 (= £10,000 × $1.64 per pound). By 
purchasing a forward foreign exchange contract, Great Deal avoids volatility in the price of 
the inventory due to currency movements; it forgoes the possibility of benefit if the U.S. dollar 
strengthens against the pound but avoids the possibility of loss if the U.S. dollar weakens.
Example 17 Refer to Example 13. Thames wants to neutralize the effect of changes 
in the fair value of the note payable caused by changes in interest rates. It engages in an 
interest  rate swap with its bank. The swap allows Thames to exchange its fixed interest rate obli-
gation for a variable interest rate obligation. The fair value of the note and the related swap 
contract remain at €100,000 as long as the variable interest rate in the swap is the same as the 
variable rate used to revalue the note while it is outstanding.
Example 18 Refer to Example 14. Elseve wants to neutralize the effects of changes in inter-
est rates. It engages in an interest rate swap with its bank. The swap has the effect of allowing 
Elseve to exchange its variable interest rate obligation for a fixed interest rate obligation, and 
11 FASB Statements 133 and 138 and IAS 39 provide accounting and disclosure guidance for derivatives. FASB, 
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 133, “Accounting for Derivative Instruments and Hedging 
Activities,” 1998 (Codification Topic 815); FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 138, “Account-
ing for Certain Derivative Instruments and Certain Hedging Activities,” 2000 (Codification Topic 815); IASB, 
International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement,” revised 2003.
12 The definitions of a derivative in U.S. GAAP and IFRS are similar. The nature and complexity of financial 
instruments makes it difficult to discern, in certain cases, whether a given instrument is a derivative. In addition, 
both U.S. GAAP and IFRS contain exceptions—instruments that seem to meet the definition of a derivative 
are nonetheless not accounted for as derivatives.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

519
Derivative Instruments
therefore a fixed cash payment, of 8% times the €100,000 face value of the note. Elseve cannot 
benefit from decreases in interest rates below 8%, but it no longer bears risks—with attendant 
costs—if the interest rate rises above 8%.
Example 19 Refer to Example 15. Delmar would like to fix the price at which it can sell the 
whiskey in its inventory on March 31, 2014. It acquires a forward commodity contract in which 
it promises to sell 10,000 gallons of whiskey on March 31, 2014, at a fixed price. The forward 
price of whiskey on October 31, 2013, for delivery on March 31, 2014, is $320 per gallon. Thus, 
Delmar locks in a total cash inflow of $3,200,000 from selling the whiskey.
The forward contracts and swap contracts described in these examples illustrate two types of 
derivative instruments. The nature and complexity of derivatives vary widely. We use swap con-
tracts to illustrate the accounting and reporting of derivatives.
TERMINOLOGY FOR DERIVATIVES
Consider the following elements of a derivative:
1. A derivative has one or more underlyings. An underlying is an observable variable such as 
a specified interest rate, or commodity price, or currency exchange rate. The underlying in 
Example 16 is a currency exchange rate, in Examples 17 and 18 is an interest rate, and in 
Example 19 is the price of whiskey.
2. A derivative has one or more notional amounts. A notional amount is a number of cur-
rency units, bushels, shares, or other units specified in the contract. The notional amount 
in Example 16 is £10,000, in Examples 17 and 18 is the €100,000 face value of the note, and 
in Example 19 is 10,000 gallons of whiskey.
3. A derivative sometimes requires no initial investment. No initial investment means no ini-
tial cash payment to the counterparty. The firm usually acquires a derivative by exchang-
ing promises with a counterparty, such as a bank. The exchange of promises is a mutually 
unexecuted contract.
4. Derivatives typically require, or permit, net settlement, which means that when the counter-
parties settle the derivative contract, one of the contracting parties pays the other the fair 
value of the contract. For example, Great Deal in Example 16 will not deliver $16,400 and 
receive in exchange £10,000. Great Deal will actually purchase £10,000 in the market on 
June 20, 2014, at the exchange rate on that date, when it needs the British pounds to pur-
chase the inventory. Then, Great Deal will receive cash from the counterparty (that is, the 
bank) to the extent the exchange rate on June 30, 2014, exceeds $1.64 per £1 or will pay the 
counterparty on this date to the extent the exchange rate is less than $1.64 per £1. The dif-
ference between the June 30, 2014, exchange rate and the $1.64 per £1 determines the fair 
value on that date. Thames in Example 17 will pay the supplier the 8% interest established 
in the fixed rate note. If the variable interest rate used in the interest rate swap contract 
increases to 10%, Thames will pay the counterparty an amount equal to 2% (= 10% – 8%) 
of the notional amount of the note, €100,000. Paying interest of 8% to the supplier and 
2% to the counterparty results in interest payments of 10%. If the variable interest rate 
decreases to 5%, Thames still pays the supplier interest of 8% as specified in the original 
note but would receive from the counterparty 3% (= 8% – 5%) of the amount of the note, 
resulting in net payments equal to the variable rate of 5%.
Because many derivatives require no initial investment, measurement at acquisition cost 
makes little sense for these instruments. That is, a derivative may have zero initial cost but 
potentially large fair value later. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require that firms record deriva-
tives at their fair values on the balance sheet.
ACCOUNTING FOR DERIVATIVES
A firm must recognize derivatives on its balance sheet as assets or liabilities, depending on the 
rights and obligations under the contract. The forward contract in Example 16 is either an asset 
or a liability to Great Deal, depending on the exchange rate. The swap contracts in Examples 17 
and 18 may be assets or liabilities to Thames and Elseve, depending on interest rates. Whether a 
derivative is an asset or a liability depends on whether at the balance sheet date the derivative’s 
holder would be entitled to receive cash from the counterparty (asset) or have to pay cash to the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

520
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
counterparty (liability). Similarly, the forward contract in Example 19 may be an asset or liabil-
ity, depending on the price of whiskey.
Firms must remeasure derivatives to fair value each period. The change in fair value either 
increases or decreases the balance sheet carrying value of the derivative asset or liability. It also 
affects either (1) net income immediately (like trading securities), or (2) other comprehensive 
income immediately and net income later (like available-for-sale securities).
The income effect of a change in the fair value of a derivative depends on the purpose for 
which a firm acquires the derivative and whether the firm chooses to apply hedge accounting. In 
both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, hedge accounting is elective, and its application is subject to exten-
sive documentation requirements and disclosure requirements. Firms need not designate any 
derivatives as accounting hedges, regardless of the degree to which the derivatives mitigate the 
volatility of outcomes of other arrangements.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to classify derivatives as (1) fair value hedges, (2) cash 
flow hedges, or (3) not a hedging instrument.13 Derivatives designated as cash flow hedges or 
fair value hedges receive special accounting treatment. The choice between the two designations 
depends on the firm’s purpose in acquiring the particular derivative. If a firm does not des-
ignate a particular derivative as either a fair value hedge or a cash flow hedge, authoritative 
guidance requires that the firm account for the derivative as if it were a trading security (U.S. 
GAAP) or a security at fair value through profit and loss (IFRS). Firms measure derivatives 
that they do not designate as hedges at fair value each period and include the resulting gain or 
loss in net income. This accounting is the same as the second method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
Fair Value Hedges Derivative instruments acquired to hedge exposure to changes in the 
fair values of assets or liabilities are fair value hedges. Fair value hedges are either (1) hedges 
of a recognized asset or liability (or an identified portion of a recognized asset or liability), or 
(2) hedges of an unrecognized firm commitment (or an identified portion of that commitment). 
Great Deal in Examples 12 and 16 acquired the forward foreign exchange contract to neutralize 
the effect of changes in exchange rates on its commitment to purchase the inventory. Thames in 
Examples 13 and 17 entered into the interest swap agreement to neutralize the effect of changes 
in interest rates on the fair value of its notes payable. Great Deal and Thames can designate 
these derivatives as fair value hedges.
Cash Flow Hedges Derivative instruments acquired to hedge exposure to variability in 
cash flows are cash flow hedges. Cash flow hedges are either (1) hedges on some or all of the 
cash flows of a recognized asset or liability or (2) hedges on some or all of the cash flows of 
forecasted transactions. Elseve in Examples 14 and 18 entered into the interest swap agreement 
to neutralize changes in cash flows for interest payments on its variable rate notes payable, a 
recognized liability. Delmar in Examples 15 and 19 acquired the forward contract on whiskey 
to protect itself from changes in the selling price of whiskey on March 31, 2014, a recognized 
asset. Elseve and Delmar can designate these derivative instruments as cash flow hedges.
Firms might use a particular derivative either to hedge fair value or to hedge cash flows, but 
not both. Both the forward foreign exchange contract in Example 16 and the forward whiskey 
price contract in Example 19 fix, or lock in, cash flows, and the firm could therefore desig-
nate the derivatives as cash flow hedges for accounting purposes. Alternatively, Great Deal in 
Example 16 could acquire the forward contract to fix, or lock in, the fair value of the equip-
ment acquired and therefore designate that derivative as a fair value hedge. Delmar in Example 
19 could acquire the derivative to lock in the fair value of the inventory and therefore designate 
the contract as a cash flow hedge.
The four examples described thus far in this section illustrate the accounting for the follow-
ing possible scenarios:
Example
Type of Hedge
Derivative Instruments Used
12 and 16
Fair Value—Firm Commitment
Forward Currency Contract
13 and 17
Fair Value—Recognized Liability
Swap Contract—Variable for Fixed Interest Rate
14 and 18
Cash Flow—Interest Payments
Swap Contract—Fixed for Variable Interest Rate
15 and 19
Cash Flow—Forecasted Transaction
Forward Commodity Contract
13 U.S. GAAP and IFRS also allow firms to designate derivatives as hedges of a net investment in a foreign opera-
tion. We do not consider such hedges in this textbook.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

521
Derivative Instruments
TREATMENT OF HEDGING GAINS AND LOSSES
U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow firms to choose whether to designate a particular derivative as a 
hedge for accounting purposes. Firms remeasure derivatives not designated as an accounting 
hedge to fair value at every balance sheet date and include changes in fair value in net income. 
For a derivative designated as a hedge, firms must further designate it as hedging the risk of 
a change in fair value (fair value hedges) or a change in cash flows (cash flow hedges). The 
accounting for fair value hedges and cash flows hedges is similar under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. 
For fair values hedges, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to remeasure both the hedged item 
and the related derivative (the hedging instrument) to fair value each period and to recognize 
gains and losses from changes in the fair value of both the hedged item and the hedging instru-
ment in net income. If the hedge is fully effective, the gain (loss) on the derivative will precisely 
offset the loss (gain) on the asset or liability hedged. The net effect on earnings is zero. If the 
hedge is not fully effective, the net gain or loss increases or decreases earnings to the degree the 
offset is incomplete. This accounting follows the second method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1 in 
the sense that both sides of the hedging relationship are measured at fair value, with changes in 
fair value recognized in earnings.
For cash flow hedges, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to remeasure the derivative (the 
hedging instrument) to fair value each period. Firms include gains and losses from changes in 
fair values in other comprehensive income each period to the extent the hedging instrument is 
“highly effective” in neutralizing the risk of the hedged item. Firms must include the ineffective 
portion of gains and losses in net income currently. At the end of the period, the firm closes 
the Other Comprehensive Income account to the balance sheet account for Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income. The firm reverses the amount in Accumulated Other Comprehen-
sive Income related to a particular hedging instrument and reports it in Other Comprehensive 
Income, removing the effect of this transaction for Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income. 
The amounts appear in net income either periodically during the life of the hedging instrument 
or at the time of settlement, depending on the type of derivative instrument used as a hedge. 
This accounting follows the third method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
The matching convention provides both the basis for hedge accounting and the logic for 
treating gains and losses from changes in fair values of fair value hedges differently from 
changes in fair values of cash flow hedges. In a fair value hedge of a recognized asset or liabil-
ity, both the hedged item and its related derivative (hedging instrument) appear on the balance 
sheet. Remeasuring both the hedged item and its related derivative to fair value each period 
and including the gain or loss on the hedged item and the loss or gain on the derivative in net 
income results in a net gain or loss that indicates the effectiveness of the hedge in neutralizing 
the risk. If the hedge is completely effective, there is a zero net effect on income. That is, the 
gain or loss on the hedged item exactly offsets the loss or gain on the hedging instrument.
In a cash flow hedge of a forecasted transaction, the hedged cash flow commitment does 
not appear on the balance sheet, but the derivative instrument does appear. Recognizing a gain 
or loss on the derivative instrument in net income each period but not recognizing the loss or 
gain on the anticipated transaction each period results in poor matching. Application of the 
matching convention results in classifying the gain or loss on the derivative instrument in other 
comprehensive income until the forecasted transaction occurs, at which time net income will 
include the gain or loss.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF ACCOUNTING FOR DERIVATIVES
This section illustrates the accounting for the derivatives used in the two examples involving 
interest rate swaps. (Problem 13.3 for Self-Study examines the accounting for the forward for-
eign exchange contract in Example 16. Problem 28 at the end of the chapter examines the for-
ward commodity contract in Example 19.)
Fair Value Hedge: Interest Rate Swap to Convert Fixed Rate Debt to Vari-
able Rate Debt This section illustrates the accounting for an interest rate swap designated 
as a fair value hedge. Refer to Examples 13 and 17. Assume that Thames wishes to hedge the 
effects of interest rate changes on the fair value of its fixed rate note payable of €100,000. 
Thames enters into an interest rate swap contract to convert the 8% fixed rate debt to variable 
rate debt and designates the swap contract as a fair value hedge. To enhance understanding of 
the accounting for this fair value hedge, Exhibit 13.5 summarizes the balance sheet and income 
statement effects of the journal entries discussed next. You may wish to refer to Exhibit 13.5 as 
you study these journal entries.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

522
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
€100,000 Fixed Rate Note and Related Interest Rate Swap 
Accounted for as a Fair Value Hedge
Cash
Equipment: 
at Cost
Notes 
Payable: 
at Fair 
Value
Swap 
Contract: 
at Fair 
Value
Income 
Statement
2013
 (1) Issue Note for Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€      —
€100,000
€(100,000)
€    —
€    —
 (2) Enter Swap Contract. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
—
—
 (3) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(8,000)
—
—
—
8,000
 (4) Remeasure Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
(3,667)
—
3,667
 (5) Remeasure Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       —
       —
       —
  3,667
  (3,667)
December 31, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€  (8,000)
€100,000
€(103,667)
€ 3,667
€ 8,000
2014
 (6) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(8,000)
—
1,780
—
€ 6,220
 (7) Record Interest on Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
220
(220)
 (8) Record Swap Interest Received  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,000
—
—
(2,000)
—
 (9) Remeasure Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
3,705
—
(3,705)
(10) Remeasure Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       —
       —
       —
 (3,705)
  3,705
December 31, 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€ (14,000)
€100,000
€ (98,182)
€(1,818)
€ 6,000
2015
(11) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(8,000)
—
(1,818)
—
€ 9,818
(12) Record Interest on Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
(182)
182
(13) Record Swap Interest Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2,000)
—
—
2,000
—
(14) Repay Note Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (100,000)
       —
  100,000
     —
     —
December 31, 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
€(124,000)
€100,000
€      —
€    —
€10,000
Note: Amounts in parentheses are credits to the various accounts.
EXHIBIT 13.5
(1) Thames issues the note to the supplier on January 1, 2013, and makes the following entry:
January 1, 2013
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
To record the acquisition of equipment by giving a €100,000 note payable 
with a fixed interest rate of 8%.
(2) The swap contract is a mutually unexecuted contract on January 1, 2013. The variable 
interest rate on this date is 8%, the same as the fixed rate for the note payable. The swap 
contract has a fair value of zero on this date. Thus, Thames makes no entry to record the 
swap contract.
(3) On December 31, 2013, Thames makes the required interest payment on the note for 2013:
December 31, 2013
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To recognize interest expense and cash payment at the fixed interest rate of 
8%; €8,000 = 0.08 × €100,000.
(4) Interest rates decline during 2013. On December 31, the variable interest rate on the swap 
contract resets the interest rate for 2014 to 6%. Thames remeasures the note payable to fair 
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

523
Derivative Instruments
value and records the change in the fair value of the swap contract caused by the decline 
in the interest rate.
 
 
The present value of the remaining cash flows on the note payable when discounted at 
6% is:
Present Value of Interest Payments: €8,000 × 1.83339  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 14,667
Present Value of Principal: €100,000 × 0.89000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  89,000
Total Present Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€103,667
 
Thames makes the following entry to record the change in fair value:
December 31, 2013
Loss on Remeasurement of Note Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,667
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,667
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+3,667
–3,667
IncSt → RE
To measure Note Payable at fair value with cash flows discounted at 6% 
with the loss included in net income.
 
For the most part, firms do not remeasure their liabilities, such as this note payable, to 
fair value when interest rates change. They continue to account for the liabilities using the 
interest rate at the time of the initial recording of the financial instrument in the accounts. 
Fair value hedge accounting, however, requires the recognition of changes in fair values 
of a financial instrument that firms have designated as a hedged item (the note payable) 
and requires recognition of changes in the fair value of the hedging instrument (the swap 
contract).
(5) The decline in interest rates to 6% means that Thames will save €2,000 [= (0.08 − 0.06) 
× €100,000] each year in interest payments. The present value of a €2,000 annuity for two 
periods at 6% is €3,667 (= €2,000 × 1.83339). Thus, the fair value of the swap contract 
increased from zero at the beginning of 2013 to €3,667 at the end of the year. Thames 
makes the following entry:
December 31, 2013
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,667
 
Gain on Remeasurement of Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,667
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+3,667
+3,667
IncSt → RE
To measure the swap contract at fair value and recognize an asset on the 
balance sheet and a gain in net income.
 
The fair value loss on the note payable exactly offsets the fair value gain on the swap con-
tract, indicating that the swap contract was fully effective. That is, the Loss on Remeasure-
ment of Note Payable is offset by the Gain on Remeasurement of Swap Contract.
(6) Thames follows a similar process at the end of 2014. First, it records interest expense on 
the note payable:
December 31, 2014
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,220
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,780
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

524
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
To record interest expense at 6% of the carrying value of the note payable 
at the beginning of the year (€6,220 = 0.06 × €103,667), the cash 
payment at the contractual interest rate of 8% on the face amount of the 
note (€8,000 = 0.08 × €100,000), and the reduction in the carrying value 
of the note payable for the difference.
 
Thames uses the effective interest method to compute interest expense. The effective inter-
est rate for 2014 is 6%, and the carrying value of the note payable at the beginning of the 
year is €103,667. The cash payment of €8,000 is the amount specified in the original bor-
rowing arrangement with the equipment supplier.
(7) Second, Thames records interest revenue for the change in the present value of the swap 
contract for the year.
December 31, 2014
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
220
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
220
To record interest revenue for the increase in the carrying value of the swap 
contract for the passage of time; €220 = 0.06 × €3,667.
 
Interest expense (net) as a result of the two entries is €6,000 (= €6,220 − €220), which is 
the same as the variable rate for 2014 of 6% times the face value of the note.
(8) Third, Thames receives €2,000 under the swap contract from its counterparty because 
interest rates decreased from 8% to 6%.
December 31, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
To record cash received from the counterparty because the interest rate 
declined from 8% to 6%.
 
The €2,000 cash received from the counterparty is the benefit to Thames for 2014, because 
interest rates declined to 6%.
(9) Fourth, Thames must remeasure the note payable and the swap contract for changes in fair 
value at the end of 2014. Assume that interest rates increased during 2014, so the interest 
rate in the swap agreement resets to 10% for 2015. The present value of the remaining pay-
ments on the note at 10% is:
Present Value of Interest Payment: €8,000 × 0.90909. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€ 7,273
Present Value of Principal: €100,000 × 0.90909. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 90,909
Total Present Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
€98,182
 
The carrying value of the note payable before remeasurement is €101,887 (= €103,667 – 
€1,780). The entry to measure the note payable at fair value is:
December 31, 2014
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,705
 
Gain on Remeasurement of Note Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,705
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
–3,705
+3,705
NI → RE
To measure the note payable at fair value using an interest rate of 10% 
to discount the remaining cash flows to their present value; €3,705 = 
€101,887 – €98,182. The gain is included in net income.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

525
Derivative Instruments
(10) The fair value of the swap contract decreases, and Thames now pays the counterparty 
€2,000 in 2015 because of the swap contract. Thus, the swap contract is a liability to 
Thames instead of an asset. The present value of €2,000 when discounted at 10% is €1,818 
(= €2,000 × 0.90909). The carrying value of the swap contract before remeasurement is an 
asset of €1,887 (= €3,667 + €220 – €2,000). The entry to remeasure the swap contract is:
December 31, 2014
Loss on Remeasurement of Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,705
 
Swap Contract (Asset). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,887
 
Swap Contract (Liability). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,818
To measure the swap contract at fair value using a discount rate of 10% and 
recognize the decrease in fair value. The loss is included in net income.
 
The gain on remeasurement of the note exactly offsets the loss on remeasurement of the 
swap contract, so the swap contract hedges the change in interest rates.
(11) The first entry for 2015 recognizes interest expense and the cash payment for interest.
December 31, 2015
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,818
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,818
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To record interest expense at 10% of the carrying value of the note payable 
at the beginning of the year (€9,818 = 0.10 × €98,182), the cash payment 
at the contractual interest rate of 8% on the face amount of the note 
(€8,000 = 0.08 × €100,000), and the increase in the carrying value of the 
note payable for the difference.
(12) Thames must also recognize interest on the swap contract:
December 31, 2015
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
182
 
Swap Contract (Liability). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
182
To record interest expense for the increase in the carrying value of the swap 
contract for the passage of time; €182 = 0.10 × €1,818.
 
Interest expense (net) after these two entries is €10,000 (= €9,818 + €182), which equals 
the variable interest rate of 10% times the face value of the note.
(13) Thames pays the counterparty 2% of the face value of the note because the variable inter-
est rate of 10% exceeds the fixed interest rate of 8%.
December 31, 2015
Swap Contract (Liability). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
To record cash paid to the counterparty because the variable interest rate of 
10% exceeded the fixed interest rate of 8%.
(14) Thames repays the note and closes out the Swap Contract account.
December 31, 2015
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
To record repayment of note payable at maturity.
 
The Swap Contract account has a zero balance on December 31, 2015, after Thames 
makes the entries above (= €1,818 + €182 – €2,000).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

526
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
Exhibit 13.5 summarizes the effects of these entries on various accounts (credit entries in 
parentheses). Net income reflects the variable interest rate each year, 8% for 2013, 6% for 2014, 
and 10% for 2015. The sum of the balance sheet carrying amounts for the note payable and the 
swap contract (the net value) is €100,000 at the end of each year. Thames recognizes gains and 
losses from changes in the fair value of both the hedged item and its derivative in net income as 
their fair values change.
Summary of the Accounting for a Fair Value Hedge of a Recognized Asset 
or Liability The following summarizes the accounting for a fair value hedge of a recognized 
asset or liability.
1. A firm recognizes the hedged asset or liability, even in the absence of hedge accounting. 
In the absence of hedge accounting, the measurement of the hedged item depends on the 
required accounting for that item (for example, lower of cost or market for inventories, 
present value of future cash flows for long-term receivables and payables).
2. On the date a firm enters the derivative contract and designates that contract as a fair value 
hedge, it recognizes the derivative as an asset if it makes an initial payment. It recognizes 
the derivative as a liability if it receives an initial payment. Otherwise, no amount appears 
on the balance sheet for the derivative.
3. At the end of each period, the firm remeasures the hedged asset or liability to fair value 
and includes the resulting gain or loss in net income.
4. At the end of each period, the firm remeasures the derivative instrument (hedging instru-
ment) to fair value and includes the resulting loss or gain in net income.
5. The firm reports both the hedged asset or liability and its related hedging instrument sepa-
rately on the balance sheet without netting.
6. When the firm settles the derivative contract and the hedged item, the firm removes the 
hedged asset or liability and its related derivative from the accounts.
Cash Flow Hedge: Interest Rate Swap to Convert Variable Rate Debt 
to Fixed Rate Debt This section illustrates the journal entries for an interest rate swap 
accounted for as a cash flow hedge. Refer to Examples 14 and 18. Elseve desires to hedge the 
risk of changes in interest rates on its cash payments for interest. It enters into a swap contract 
with a counterparty to convert its variable rate note payable (currently at 8%) to a fixed rate 
note. Elseve designates the swap contract as a cash flow hedge. The facts for the case resemble 
those for Thames. The note has a €100,000 face value, an initial variable interest rate of 8%, 
reset to 6% for 2014 and 10% for 2015. The note matures on December 31, 2015. Exhibit 13.6 
summarizes the effects of the journal entries discussed next on the balance sheet and income 
statement. You may wish to refer to Exhibit 13.6 as you study these journal entries.
(1) The entry to record the note payable is:
January 1, 2013
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
To record the acquisition of equipment by giving a €100,000 note payable 
with a variable interest rate of 8%.
(2) The swap contract has a fair value of zero on January 1, 2013, so Elseve makes no entry 
on this date.
(3)  Elseve records interest on the note for 2013.
December 31, 2013
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To recognize interest expense and cash payment at the variable interest rate 
of 8%; €8,000 = 0.08 × €100,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

527
Derivative Instruments
€100,000 Variable Rate Note and Related Interest Rate Swap 
Accounted for as a Cash Flow Hedge
Cash
Equipment: 
at Cost
Notes 
Payable: 
at Carrying 
Value
Swap 
Contract: 
at Fair 
Value
Income 
Statement
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income
2013
 (1) Issue Note for Equipment . . . . . . 
€      —
€100,000
€(100,000)
€    —
€    —
€    —
 (2) Enter Swap Contract. . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
—
—
 (3) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . 
(8,000)
—
—
—
8,000
—
 (4) Remeasure Swap Contract . . . . . . 
       —
       —
       —
 (3,667)
     —
  3,667
December 31, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€  (8,000)
€100,000
€(100,000)
€(3,667)
€ 8,000
€ 3,667
2014
 (5) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . 
(6,000)
—
—
—
6,000
—
 (6) Record Interest on
   Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
(220)
—
220
 (7) Record Swap Interest Paid  . . . . . 
(2,000)
—
—
2,000
—
—
 (8) Reclassify Portion of Other 
   Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
2,000
(2,000)
 (9) Remeasure Swap Contract . . . . . . 
       —
       —
       —
  3,705
     —
 (3,705)
December 31, 2014
€ (16,000)
€100,000
€(100,000)
€ 1,818
€ 8,000
€   (1,818)
2015
(10) Record Interest on Note . . . . . . . 
(10,000)
—
—
—
10,000
—
(11) Record Interest on 
   Swap Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
—
182
—
(182)
(12) Record Swap Interest Received  . . 
2,000
—
—
(2,000)
—
—
(13) Reclassify Portion of Other 
   Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . 
—
—
—
—
(2,000)
2,000
(14) Repay Note Payable . . . . . . . . . . 
(100,000)
—
100,000
—
—
—
(15) Close Out Swap Contract. . . . . . . 
       —
       —
       —
      —
     —
     —
December 31, 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
€(124,000)
€100,000
€      —
€    —
€ 8,000
€    —
Note: Amounts in parentheses are credits to the various accounts.
EXHIBIT 13.6
(4) The fair value of the note in this case will not change as interest rates change because the 
note carries a variable interest rate. The fair value of the swap contract varies with changes 
in interest rates. The fair value of the swap contract on December 31, 2013, after the inter-
est rate resets to 6%, is €3,667. This amount is the present value of the €2,000 that Elseve 
will pay the counterparty on December 31 of 2014 and 2015 if the interest rate remains at 
6%. This amount is the same as in the previous illustration of a fair value hedge. The entry, 
however, differs from the one made previously.
December 31, 2013
Loss from Remeasurement of Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,667
 
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,667
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+3,667
−3,667
OCI → AOCI
To measure the swap contract at fair value and recognize a liability on the 
balance sheet and a loss in other comprehensive income.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

528
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
 
 
The swap contract is a liability because Elseve must pay the counterparty €2,000 at the 
end of 2014 and 2015. In the previous illustration, the swap contract at the end of 2013 
is an asset because Thames had the right to receive €2,000 at the end of 2014 and 2015 
from the counterparty. The €3,667 amount decreases Elseve’s other comprehensive income, 
whereas Thames recognized a gain in net income.
 
 
The carrying value of the note payable of €100,000 plus the carrying value of the swap 
contract of €3,667 is €103,667. This amount is the present value of the expected cash flows 
under the fixed rate note and swap contract combined, discounted at 6%.
(5) The entry on December 31, 2014, to recognize and pay interest on the variable rate note is:
December 31, 2014
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To recognize interest expense and cash payment at the variable interest 
rate; €6,000 = 0.06 × €100,000.
(6) Elseve must also recognize interest on the swap contract due to the passage of time. The 
interest charge does not affect net income immediately but instead decreases other compre-
hensive income. Firms close other comprehensive income to accumulated other compre-
hensive income.
(7) Elseve pays the counterparty the €2,000 [= €100,000 × (0.08 – 0.06)] required by the swap 
contract. The entry is:
December 31, 2014
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
To record cash paid to the counterparty because the interest rate declined 
from 8% to 6%.
(8) Because the swap contract hedged cash flows related to interest rate risk during 2014, 
Elseve reclassifies a portion of other comprehensive income to net income. The entry is:
December 31, 2014
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Other Comprehensive Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−2,000
NI → RE
+2,000
OCI → AOCI
To reclassify a portion of other comprehensive income to net income for the 
hedged portion of interest expense on the note payable.
 
 
Interest expense on the income statement includes (1) interest at 6% of the note payable 
paid to the holder of the note under the variable rate borrowing agreement and (2) interest 
at 2% arising from the swap contract for total interest expense for 2014 of €8,000. Elseve 
entered into the swap arrangement to fix its cash payment at 8% of the note payable, which 
it accomplishes with this hedging arrangement. At this point, the Swap Contract account 
has a credit balance of €1,887 (= €3,667 + €220 – €2,000). Accumulated other comprehen-
sive income related to this interest rate swap has a debit balance of €1,887.
(9) Resetting the interest rate on December 31, 2014, to 10% changes the swap contract from 
a liability to an asset. The present value of the €2,000 that Elseve will receive from the 
counterparty at the end of 2015 when discounted at 10% is €1,818. The entry to remeasure 
the swap contract is:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

529
Derivative Instruments
December 31, 2014
Swap Contract (Liability). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,887
Swap Contract (Asset). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,818
 
Gain from Remeasurement of Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,705
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+1,818
–1,887
+3,705
OCI → AOCI
To measure the swap contract at fair value and recognize an asset on the 
balance sheet and a gain in other comprehensive income.
 
The €3,705 gain, included in other comprehensive income, is closed to accumulated other 
comprehensive income. Accumulated other comprehensive income has a credit amount of 
€1,818, which equals the debit balance in the Swap Contract account.
(10) The entry at the end of 2015 to recognize and pay interest on the variable rate note is:
December 31, 2015
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
To recognize interest expense and cash payment at the variable interest rate 
of 10%; €10,000 = 0.10 × €100,000.
(11) Elseve also increases the carrying value of the swap contract for the passage of time.
December 31, 2015
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
182
 
Interest on Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
182
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+182
+182
OCI → AOCI
To record interest for the increase in the book value of the swap contract 
for the passage of time; €182 = 0.10 × €1,818. The interest is included in 
Other Comprehensive Income.
(12) The swap contract requires the counterparty to pay the firm €2,000 under the swap contract.
December 31, 2015
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Swap Contract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
To record cash received from the counterparty because the interest rate 
increased from 6% to 10%.
(13) Because the swap contract hedged cash flows related to interest rate risk during 2015, 
Elseve reverses a portion of accumulated other comprehensive income and reports the 
amount in net income, as an expense. The entry is:
December 31, 2015
Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

530
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−2,000
OCI → AOCI
+2,000
NI → RE
To reclassify a portion of other comprehensive income to net income for the 
hedged portion of interest expense on the note payable.
 
Thus, interest expense (net) for 2015 is €8,000 (= €10,000 – €2,000), which equals the net 
interest cash outflow that Elseve hedged with the interest rate swap.
(14) Elseve repays the note on December 31, 2015:
December 31, 2015
Note Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
To record repayment of note payable at maturity.
The Swap Contract account has a balance of zero on December 31, 2015 (= €1,818 + €182 
– €2,000). If the swap contract had been highly effective, but not perfectly effective, in neutral-
izing the interest rate risk, then Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income would have a bal-
ance related to the swap contract, which Elseve would reclassify to net income.
Exhibit 13.6 shows that interest expense is €8,000 each year, so Elseve accomplished its 
objective to pay a fixed interest rate of 8%. The amounts in other comprehensive income reflect 
changes in the fair value of the swap contract. The Swap Contract account begins and ends 
with a zero value.
Summary of Accounting for a Cash Flow Hedge of a Recognized Asset or 
Liability The following summarizes the accounting for a cash flow hedge of an recognized 
asset or liability:
1. A firm recognizes the hedged asset or liability on the balance sheet. Its measurement 
depends on the required accounting for the particular asset or liability (for example, lower 
of cost or market for inventories, present value of future cash flows for long-term receiv-
ables and payables).
2. The firm recognizes the derivative as an asset on the date of acquisition to the extent it 
makes an initial investment or as a liability to the extent it receives cash. Otherwise, no 
amount appears on the balance sheet for the derivative. The firm designates the derivative 
as a hedging instrument.
3. At the end of each period, the firm remeasures the derivative instrument (the hedging 
instrument) to fair value and includes the resulting loss or gain in other comprehensive 
income.
4. The firm reclassifies gains and losses from other comprehensive income to net income 
when the gain or loss on the hedged item affects net income. If the derivative is not highly 
effective in neutralizing the gain or loss on the hedged item, then the firm reclassifies the 
ineffective portion to net income immediately. It does not wait until the gain or loss on the 
hedged items affects net income.
5. The firm reports the hedged asset and liability and the hedging instrument separately on 
the balance sheet. It reports the cumulative amount of net changes in fair value of the 
hedging instrument in accumulated other comprehensive income.
6. The firm removes the hedged asset or liability and its related derivative from the accounts 
at the time of settlement.
SUMMARY OF ACCOUNTING FOR DERIVATIVES
Derivatives appear on the balance sheet at fair value. Their effect on net income depends on 
whether a firm designates the derivative as a hedge and, if so, whether it is a fair value hedge or 
cash flow hedge.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

531
Derivative Instruments
■ 
Gains and losses on derivatives not designated as hedges of a specific risk, gains and losses 
on fair value hedges, and the ineffective portion of cash flow hedges affect net income 
simultaneously with changes in fair value. This accounting follows the second method illus-
trated in Exhibit 13.1.
■ 
Gains and losses on effective cash flow hedges initially affect other comprehensive income, 
not net income. The holder of the hedging instrument will exclude from current earnings, 
but include in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, the gains and losses used effec-
tively to hedge cash flows. Firms reverse these gains and losses previously reported in other 
comprehensive to net income when the gain or loss on the hedged item affects net income. 
This accounting follows the third method illustrated in Exhibit 13.1.
DISCLOSURES RELATED TO DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to disclose the fair values of financial instruments in the 
notes to the financial statements. U.S. GAAP also requires firms to disclose the following infor-
mation (among others) with respect to derivatives (IFRS requires similar but not identical 
disclosures).
1. A description of the firm’s risk management strategy and how particular derivatives help 
accomplish the firm’s hedging objectives. The description should distinguish among derivative 
instruments designated as fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, and all other derivatives.
 
 
This disclosure helps the user of the financial statements understand how a firm uses 
derivatives to hedge risks.
2. For fair value and cash flow hedges, firms must disclose the net gain or loss recognized in 
earnings resulting from the hedge’s ineffectiveness and the line on the income statement that 
includes this net gain or loss.
 
 
This disclosure helps the user of the financial statements understand the effective-
ness of a firm’s hedging activities, including the amount of any gain or loss from hedge 
ineffectiveness.
3. For cash flow hedges, firms must describe the transactions or events that will result in reclas-
sifying gains and losses from accumulated other comprehensive income to net income and the 
estimated amount of such reclassifications during the next 12 months.
 
 
Accumulated other comprehensive income includes unrealized gains and losses that 
will affect net income of future periods. Most derivatives do not give management discre-
tion as to when these unrealized gains and losses will affect earnings, unlike marketable 
securities classified as available for sale where management has some discretion in timing 
earnings effects. This disclosure for derivatives requires firms to disclose their expectations 
as to the amount that the firm will transfer from accumulated other comprehensive income 
to net income within the next year to assist users of the financial statements in forecasting 
the next year’s earnings.
4. The net amount of gains and losses recognized in earnings because a hedged firm commitment 
no longer qualifies as a fair value hedge or a hedged forecasted transaction no longer qualifies 
as a cash flow hedge.
 
 
A firm might use a derivative to hedge an unrecognized commitment or forecasted 
transaction. If events unfold so that the firm does not intend to fulfill its commitment 
or engage in the forecasted transaction, any unrealized gains and losses on derivatives 
related to those commitments and forecasted transactions affect net income. This disclo-
sure informs users of the financial statements of the gains and losses that result because a 
derivative no longer qualifies as a fair value or cash flow hedge.
 PROBLEM  13.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Accounting for a forward foreign exchange contract as a fair value hedge. Refer to 
Examples 12 and 16 in the chapter. Great Deal places a firm order for the equipment 
on June 30, 2013. It simultaneously signs a forward currency contract for £10,000. The 
forward rate on June 30, 2013, for settlement on June 30, 2014, is $1.64 per £1. Great 
Deal designates the forward contract as a fair value hedge of the firm commitment.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

532
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
a. U.S. GAAP and IFRS guidance does not require Great Deal to record either the pur-
chase commitment or the forward contract on the balance sheet as a liability or an 
asset on June 30, 2013. What is the logic for this accounting?
b. On December 31, 2013, the forward exchange rate for settlement on June 30, 2014, 
is $1.73 per £1. Give the journal entries to record the change in the fair value of the 
purchase commitment and the change in the fair value of the forward contract for 
2013. Assume an 8% interest rate for discounting cash flows to their present values on 
December 31, 2013.
c. Give the journal entries on June 30, 2014, to record the change in the present value of 
the purchase commitment and the forward contract for the passage of time.
d. On June 30, 2014, the spot exchange rate is $1.75 per £1. Give the journal entries to 
record the change in the fair value of the purchase commitment and the change in the 
fair value of the forward contract due to changes in the exchange rate during the first 
six months of 2014.
e. Give the journal entry on June 30, 2014, to purchase £10,000 with U.S. dollars and 
acquire the equipment.
f. Give the journal entry on June 30, 2014, to settle the forward contract.
g. How would the entries in parts b through f differ if Great Deal had chosen to desig-
nate the forward currency contract as a cash flow hedge of a forecasted transaction 
instead of a fair value hedge of a firm commitment?
h. Suggest a scenario that would justify Great Deal treating the forward currency con-
tract as a fair value hedge, and a scenario that would justify the firm treating the con-
tract as a cash flow hedge.
THE FAIR VALUE OPTION APPLIED TO 
MARKETABLE SECURITIES AND DERIVATIVES
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide for the option of reporting selected financial assets and 
financial liabilities at fair value and recognizing gains and losses in net income as fair values 
change.14 Firms can apply the fair value option on an instrument-by-instrument basis, when the 
firm first adopts the standard that provides for the fair value option, when the firm acquires an 
eligible instrument, and at certain remeasurement events, such as business combinations. Once 
elected, the fair value option is irrevocable (for the instrument to which the firm applies it). This 
option results in the accounting illustrated under the second method in Exhibit 13.1. Both U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS require measurement at fair value with changes included in income for three 
items discussed previously in this chapter:15
1. Trading securities.
2. Fair value hedges.
3. Derivatives not designated as hedges.
14 The fair value option under IFRS is in IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial Instruments: 
Recognition and Measurement,” revised 2003. The fair value option under U.S. GAAP is in FASB, State-
ment of Financial Accounting Standards No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and Financial 
Liabilities, Including an Amendment of FASB Statement No. 115,” 2007 (Codification Topic 825). U.S. GAAP 
provides guidance for fair value measurements in Accounting Standards Update No. 2011-04, “Fair Value Mea-
surement,” 2011 (Codification Topic 820). IFRS provides guidance for fair value measurement in International 
Financial Reporting Standard 13, “Fair Value Measurement,” 2011. The U.S. GAAP guidance and IFRS guid-
ance for fair value measurement is largely converged.
15 U.S. GAAP and IFRS specify the items eligible for the fair value option. The qualifying criteria differ between 
the two sets of guidance. We do not consider all these items in this textbook.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

533
Appendix 13.1: Summary of IFRS 9, Financial Instruments 
Thus, firms can elect the fair value option for the following items discussed in this chapter:
1. Debt securities held to maturity.
2. Available-for-sale securities.
3. Cash flow hedges.
Applying the fair value option to held-to-maturity debt securities results in accounting for 
the investments as if they were trading securities, measured at fair value with changes in fair 
value recognized in income each period. Applying the fair value option to available-for-sale 
securities and to cash flow hedges results in reporting unrealized gains and losses in net income, 
instead of in other comprehensive income.
SUMMARY
Firms acquire securities issued by other entities, including firms and governments, for various 
reasons. Businesses also acquire derivatives or engage in arrangements with other entities to 
hedge risks of changes in interest rates, exchange rates, and commodity prices. U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS currently require the following accounting for marketable securities and derivatives if a 
firm does not elect the fair value option:
Accounting Method
Applicable To:
Method 1: Amortized Acquisition Cost
Held-to-Maturity Debt Securities
Method 2: Fair Value with Unrealized Gains and Losses 
Recognized in Net Income as Fair Values Change
Marketable Securities Classified as Trading Securities
Fair Value Hedges
Derivatives Not Classified as Hedges
Method 3: Fair Value with Unrealized Gains and Losses 
Recognized in Other Comprehensive Income as Fair 
Values Change, and Later in Net Income
Marketable Securities Classified as 
Available-for-Sale Securities
Cash Flow Value Hedges
The delayed inclusion of unrealized gains and losses in net income for items in the third cat-
egory results in measuring available-for-sale securities and cash flow hedges at fair value with-
out recognizing the net income effect of changes in fair value until the firm realizes the gain or 
loss. Firms that adopt the fair value option will recognize changes in fair value in net income as 
fair values change. The accounting is the same as for items in the third category.
APPENDIX 13.1: SUMMARY OF IFRS 9, 
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The International Accounting Standards Board issued International Financial Reporting Stan-
dard 9, “Financial Instruments” (IFRS 9) in November 2009. As this book goes to press, the 
effective date is January 2015, with early adoption permitted.
IFRS 9 eliminates the classification of financial assets as held-to-maturity debt securities, 
available-for-sale securities, and financial assets at fair value through profit or loss (trading 
securities) and requires that firms classify all financial assets based on two criteria. The first cri-
terion is the firm’s business model for managing the financial asset and the second is the nature 
of the contractual terms that govern the cash flows of the financial asset. If the firm’s objective 
is to hold a financial asset in order to collect its contractual cash flows (the business model cri-
terion) and the contractual terms governing those cash flows specify principal and interest pay-
ments only (the contractual terms criterion), the firm measures the financial asset at amortized 
cost. Except for impairment losses, changes in fair value are not recognized unless the asset is 
sold or reclassified. All other financial assets are measured at fair value, with changes in fair 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

534
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
value included in net income in the period they occur, with one exception. That exception per-
mits a firm to designate an investment in equity securities as “not held for trading,” measured 
at fair value with changes in fair value included in other comprehensive income. The designa-
tion is irrevocable and the unrealized gains and losses on these equity securities are not reclassi-
fied out of accumulated other comprehensive income if and when the securities are sold.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 13.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(General Electric Capital Services and Sapra Company; accounting for an investment in 
bonds.)
a. See Exhibit 13.7.
b.
Date of Purchase 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105,346
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
105,346
To record the purchase of bonds for $105,346.
End of First Year
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,321
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,321
To accrue interest revenue for the first year after purchase.
End of First Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
8,000
To record cash received at end of the first year and the reduction in Market-
able Securities.
GECS could combine the last two entries as follows:
End of First Year
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,321
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,679
Amortization Table for $100,000 Bonds with a Stated Interest 
Rate of 8% and a Market Required Yield of 6%
Period 
(1)
Marketable 
Securities at 
Beginning of 
Period
(2)
Interest 
Revenue 
at 6% per 
Period
(3)
Cash 
Received
(4)
Portion of 
Cash Received 
Reducing 
Carrying Value
(5)
Marketable 
Securities 
at End of 
Period
(6)
1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$105,346
$6,321
$  8,000
$  (1,679)
$103,667
2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 103,667
 6,220
   8,000
   (1,780)
 101,887
3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 101,887
 6,113
 108,000
 (101,887)
       0
EXHIBIT 13.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

535
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 13.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Conlin Corporation; accounting for available-for-sale and trading securities.)
a.
(1)  February 2, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
To record acquisition of Security A.
(2)  July 15, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
75,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
75,000
To record acquisition of Security B.
(3)  November 27, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
To record acquisition of Security C.
(4)  December 31, 2013
Unrealized Loss on Securities A  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 2,000
To measure Security A at fair value with the unrealized loss included in 
other comprehensive income.
(5)  December 31, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Unrealized Gain on Security B  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
To measure Security B at fair value with the unrealized gain included in 
other comprehensive income.
(6)  December 31, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
 
Unrealized Gain on Security C  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
To measure Security C at fair value with the unrealized gain included in other 
comprehensive income.
 
Entries (4), (5), and (6) above could be combined as follows:
December 31, 2013
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
 
Net Unrealized Gain on Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
To measure the portfolio of marketable available-for-sale securities to fair 
value with the net unrealized gain included in other comprehensive income.
(7) 
September 6, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
78,000
Unrealized Gain on Security B (OCI)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
79,000
 
Realized Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
To record the sale of Security B, reversing the previously recognized unreal-
ized gain in other comprehensive income, which will, when closed to accu-
mulated other comprehensive income, remove from that account the increase 
in shareholders’ equity. The realized gain will appear in net income and will, 
when closed to retained earnings, increase shareholders’ equity. The net 
effect on shareholders’ equity over the entire transaction is an increase of 
$3,000. Comprehensive income will have been $4,000 in 2013 and negative 
$1,000 in 2014, netting to $3,000 over the two-year period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

536
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
(8)  December 31, 2014
Unrealized Loss on Security A  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
To measure Security A at fair value with the unrealized loss included in 
other comprehensive income.
(9)  December 31, 2014
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Unrealized Gain on Security C  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
To measure Security C at fair value with the unrealized gain included in other 
comprehensive income.
 
Entries (8) and (9) could be combined as follows:
December 31, 2014
Net Unrealized Loss on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
b. The first three journal entries are identical. The unrealized gain or loss accounts in entries 
(4), (5), (6), (8), and (9) are income statement accounts when the firm classifies the securi-
ties as trading securities. Entry (7) is as follows:
(7)  September 6, 2014
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
78,000
Realized Loss on Sale of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
79,000
To record sale of trading security for less than its carrying value at the time 
of sale.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 13.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Accounting for a forward foreign exchange contract as a fair value hedge.)
a. The purchase commitment and the forward currency contract are mutually unexecuted 
contracts as of June 30, 2013. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not currently require firms to 
recognize mutually unexecuted contracts in the accounts.
b. The change in the value of the undiscounted cash flows related to the purchase commit-
ment and the forward contract is $900 [= (10,000 × $1.73) – (10,000 × $1.64)]. The present 
value of $900 discounted at 8% for six months is $865 [= $900/(1 + 0.08/2)].
December 31, 2013
Loss on Firm Commitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
865
 
Commitment to Purchase Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
865
To record a loss on a previously unrecognized firm commitment because 
the U.S. dollar decreased in value relative to the British pound. The loss is 
included in net income.
December 31, 2013
Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
865
 
Gain on Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
865
To measure the forward contract (an asset) at fair value and recognize a gain 
in net income.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

537
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
c. 
June 30, 2014
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35
 
Commitment to Purchase Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
35
To recognize interest on the commitment because of the passage of time; 
$35 = 0.04 × $865.
June 30, 2014
Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35
 
Interest Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
35
To record interest on the forward foreign exchange contract because of the 
passage of time; $35 = 0.04 × $865.
d. The change in the value of the purchase commitment and the forward contract due to 
exchange rate changes is $200 [= (10,000 × $1.75) – (10,000 × $1.73)].
June 30, 2014
Loss on Firm Commitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Commitment to Purchase Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
To record a loss on the purchase commitment because the value of the U.S. 
dollar declined relative to the British pound. The loss is included in net 
income.
June 30, 2014
Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Gain on Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
To record the increase in the fair value of the forward contract (an asset) 
because the U.S. dollar declined in value relative to the British pound. The 
gain is included in net income.
e.
June 30, 2014
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,400
Commitment to Purchase Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,100
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
17,500
To record the amount paid in U.S. dollars to acquire £10,000 ($17,500 = 
10,000 × 1.75), to eliminate the balance in the Commitment to Purchase 
Inventory account of $1,100 (= $865 + $35 + $200), and to record the 
acquisition cost of the inventory ($16,400).
f.
June 30, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,100
 
Forward Contract  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,100
To record cash received from the counterparty and eliminate the balance in 
the Forward Contract account of $1,100 (= $865 + $35 + $200).
g. Great Deal would not recognize changes in the fair value of the purchase commitment. 
Each of the entries related to changes in the fair value of the derivative and involv-
ing income statement accounts in parts b to d would instead affect Other Comprehen-
sive Income, which the firm would close to Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income. 
Assuming the hedge was highly effective, any balance in Accumulated Other Comprehen-
sive Income related to the forward contract on June 30, 2014, would affect the income 
statement on this date.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

538
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
h. To treat this hedge as a fair value hedge, Great Deal must intend to fix the amount it pays 
for the inventory. Perhaps Great Deal has committed to resell the inventory to a customer 
on June 30, 2014, for a fixed price in U.S. dollars and wants to protect its expected profit 
margin from the sale. To treat this hedge as a cash flow hedge, Great Deal must intend to 
fix the amount of cash it pays to the British supplier.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Marketable securities
Investments in securities
Debt securities held to maturity or held-to-
maturity investments
Trading securities or financial assets at fair 
value through profit or loss
Available-for-sale securities or available-for-
sale financial assets
Amortized cost
Derivative
Forward foreign exchange contract
Interest rate swap
Forward commodity contract
Underlyings
Notional amounts
Counterparty
Net settlement
Hedge accounting
Fair value hedge
Cash flow hedge
Fair value option
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. Distinguish between the following pairs of terms:
a. Debt securities classified as “held-to-maturity” versus “available for sale.”
b. Equity securities classified as “trading” versus “available for sale.”
c. Amortized cost versus fair value of debt securities.
d. Unrealized gain or loss on trading securities versus on available-for-sale securities.
e. Realized gain or loss on trading securities versus on available-for-sale securities.
 3. What is the reasoning for including unrealized gains and losses on trading securities in 
income but including unrealized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities in Other 
Comprehensive Income?
 4. “Reporting marketable available-for-sale securities at fair value on the balance sheet but 
not including the unrealized gains and losses in income is inconsistent and provides an 
opportunity for earnings management.” Do you agree? Why or why not?
 5. When is a derivative also an accounting hedge? When is it not also an accounting hedge?
 6. Distinguish between a fair value hedge and a cash flow hedge.
 7. “Recognizing a derivative classified as a fair value hedge of a firm commitment as an asset 
but not recognizing the commitment that the derivative is hedging as a liability is inconsis-
tent.” Do you agree? Why or why not?
 8. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the immediate recognition in net income of unrealized 
gains and losses on derivatives classified as fair value hedges. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
delay recognition in net income of unrealized gains and losses on derivatives classified as 
cash flow hedges. What is the likely rationale for these different treatments?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

539
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 9. Suggest reasons why a firm would acquire a derivative and not treat it as an accounting 
hedge.
10. “Adopting the fair value option for marketable securities collapses the accounting methods 
discussed in this chapter to a single accounting method.” Do you agree? Why or why not?
EXERCISES
11. Classifying securities. Firms that do not elect the fair value option classify marketable secu-
rities along two dimensions:
■ 
Purpose of investment: held-to-maturity debt securities, trading securities, or available-
for-sale securities.
■ 
Length of expected holding period: current asset (Marketable Securities) or noncur-
rent asset (Investment in Securities).
 
Classify each of the securities below along each of these two dimensions.
a. A forest products company plans to construct a pulp-processing plant beginning in 
April of next year. It issues common stock for $200 million on December 10 of this 
year to help finance construction. The company invests this $200 million in U.S. trea-
sury bonds to generate income until it needs the cash for construction.
b. An electric utility has bonds payable outstanding for $100 million that mature in five 
years. The electric utility acquires U.S. Treasury bonds with a maturity value of $100 
million in five years. The firm plans to use the proceeds from the Treasury bonds to 
repay its own outstanding bonds.
c. A bank acquires bonds of the state of New York to earn tax-exempt interest revenue. 
The bank plans to sell the bonds when it needs cash for ongoing operating needs.
d. A pharmaceutical company acquires common stock of a biogenetic startup company 
that conducts research in human growth hormones. The pharmaceutical company hopes 
the investment will lead to a joint venture in the future.
e. A bank maintains a department that regularly purchases and sells securities. This 
department acquires common stock of Nissan Motors because it thinks the market 
price does not fully reflect favorable news about Nissan.
f. A U.S. computer company has bonds outstanding that are payable in Swiss francs and 
mature in installments over the next five years. The computer company purchases a 
Swiss winery’s bonds, denominated in Swiss francs, that mature in seven years. The com-
puter company will sell a portion of the bonds of the Swiss winery each year to obtain 
the Swiss francs needed to repay its franc-denominated bonds.
12. Accounting principles for marketable securities and derivatives. For each of the items a to 
d below, describe the accounting treatment using one of the following four approaches, 
assuming that the firm does not elect the fair value option:
(1) Measured at fair value with changes recognized in net income.
(2) Measured at amortized cost.
(3) Measured at fair value with changes recognized initially in other comprehensive 
income.
(4) Measurement depends on whether firm uses hedge accounting.
a. A derivative judged to be effective used to hedge forecasted sales.
b. Derivatives appearing as liabilities. These derivatives do not hedge assets or liabilities or 
forecasted transactions.
c. Debt securities that the firm has purchased with the ability to hold to maturity. After 
the current year, the firm’s intent to hold the securities until maturity is uncertain. The 
firm frequently buys and sells debt of this sort.
d. Marketable equity securities held for an indefinite period as available-for-sale securities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

540
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
13. Accounting for bonds held to maturity. Murray Company acquired $100,000 face value of 
the outstanding bonds of Campbell Company on January 1, 2013. The bonds pay interest 
semiannually on June 30 and December 31 at an annual rate of 6% and mature on Decem-
ber 31, 2016. The market priced these bonds on January 1, 2013, to yield 8% compounded 
semiannually. Murray Company classifies these bonds as held-to-maturity securities.
a. Compute the amount that Murray Company paid for these bonds, excluding commis-
sions and taxes.
b. Prepare an amortization table for these bonds similar to that in Exhibit 13.2.
c. Give the journal entries that Murray Company would make to account for these bonds 
during 2013.
d. Give the journal entries that Murray Company would make to account for these bonds 
on December 31, 2016.
14. Accounting for bonds held to maturity. Kelly Company acquired $500,000 face value of the 
outstanding bonds of Steedly Company on January 1, 2013. The bonds pay interest semi-
annually on June 30 and December 31 at an annual rate of 7% and mature on December 
31, 2015. The bonds were priced on the market on January 1, 2013, to yield 6% com-
pounded semiannually. Kelly Company classifies these bonds as held-to-maturity securities.
a. Compute the amount that Kelly Company paid for these bonds, excluding commissions 
and taxes.
b. Prepare an amortization table for these bonds similar to that in Exhibit 13.2.
c. Give the journal entries that Kelly Company would make to account for these bonds 
during 2013.
d. Give the journal entries that Kelly Company would make to account for these bonds on 
December 31, 2015.
15. Accounting for available-for-sale securities. Events related to Elston Corporation’s invest-
ments of temporarily excess cash appear below. The firm classifies these investments as 
available-for-sale securities and does not adopt the fair value option.
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Fair Value on 
December 31
Date Sold
Selling 
Price
2013
2014
A  . . . . . . . . . . .
10/15/2013
$28,000
$25,000
—
2/10/2014
$24,000
B  . . . . . . . . . . .
 11/2/2013
$49,000
$55,000
$53,000
7/15/2015
$57,000
 
Elston received no dividends on Security A. It received dividends on Security B of $1,000 
on December 31, 2013, and $1,200 on December 31, 2014. Give all journal entries related 
to these securities during 2013, 2014, and 2015, including journal entries related to the 
following:
a. Acquisition of securities.
b. Receipt of dividends.
c. Remeasurement on December 31.
d. Sale of securities.
16. Accounting for available-for-sale securities. Events related to Simmons Corporation’s invest-
ments of temporarily excess cash appear below. The firm classifies these investments as 
available-for-sale securities and does not elect the fair value option.
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Fair Value on 
December 31
Date Sold
Selling 
Price
2013
2014
S  . . . . . . . . . . 
6/13/2013
$12,000
$13,500
$15,200
 2/15/2015
$14,900
T  . . . . . . . . . . 
6/13/2013
$29,000
$26,200
$31,700
 8/22/2015
$28,500
U . . . . . . . . . . 
6/13/2013
$43,000
—
—
10/11/2013
$39,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

541
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 
None of these three securities paid dividends. Give all journal entries related to these securi-
ties during 2013, 2014, and 2015, including journal entries related to the following:
a. Acquisition of securities.
b. Remeasurement on December 31.
c. Sale of securities.
17. Working backward from data on marketable securities transaction. (Adapted from a prob-
lem by S. A. Zeff.) During 2013, Fischer/Black Company purchased equity securities clas-
sified as available-for-sale securities. On May 22, 2014, the company recorded the following 
correct journal entry to record the sale of the equity securities:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,000
Realized Loss (included in net income)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
 
Unrealized Holding Loss (Other Comprehensive Income)   . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
18,000
a. What was the acquisition cost of these securities in 2013?
b. What was the market price of these securities at the end of 2013?
c. What is the total amount of securities gain or loss that Fischer/Black reports on the 
income statement for 2014?
18. Working backward from data on marketable securities transaction. (Adapted from a prob-
lem by S. A. Zeff.) On December 12, 2013, Canning purchased 2,000 shares of Werther. By 
December 31, the market price of these shares had dropped by $1,000. On March 2, 2014, 
Canning sold the 2,000 shares for $18,000 and reported a realized gain on the transaction 
of $4,000.
a. What was the acquisition cost of these securities if Canning had accounted for them as 
trading securities?
b. What was the acquisition cost of these securities if Canning had accounted for them as 
available-for-sale securities?
19. Reconstructing events from journal entries. Give the likely transaction or event that would 
result in making each of the independent journal entries that follow:
a. 
 
Unrealized Loss on Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
b. 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,100
Realized Loss on Sale of Available-for-Sale Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,300
c. 
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
750
 
Unrealized Gain on Available-for-Sale Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
750
d. 
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,800
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,700
 
Realized Gain on Sale of Available-for-Sale Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
20. Reconstructing transactions involving short-term available-for-sale securities. During 2013, 
Zeff Corporation sold marketable securities for $14,000 that had a carrying value of 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

542
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
$13,000 at the time of sale. The financial statements of Zeff Corporation reveal the follow-
ing information with respect to available-for-sale securities:
December 31
2013
2012
Balance Sheet
Marketable Securities at Fair Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$195,000
$187,000
Net Unrealized Gain on Available-for-Sale Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 10,000
$ 12,000
2013
Income Statement
Realized Gain on Sale of Available-for-Sale Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$4,000
a. What was the acquisition cost of the marketable securities sold?
b. What was the unrealized gain on the securities sold at the time of sale?
c. What was the unrealized gain during 2013 on securities still held by the end of 2013?
d. What was the cost of marketable securities purchased during 2013?
21. Accounting for forward currency contract as a fair value hedge. On September 1, 2013, 
Turner Corporation places an order with a Japanese supplier for manufacturing equipment 
for delivery on June 30, 2014. The purchase is denominated in Japanese yen in the amount 
of ¥5,200,000. Turner Corporation purchases a forward currency contract on September 
1, 2013, for the purchase of ¥5,200,000 at a forward exchange rate for settlement on June 
30, 2014, of $1 = ¥102. Turner Corporation designates the forward contract as a fair value 
hedge. The forward exchange rate on December 31, 2013, for settlement on June 30, 2014, 
is $1 = ¥100, and the actual exchange rate on June 30, 2014, is $1 = ¥95. The following 
summarizes this information:
Date
Type of Exchange Rate
Exchange 
Rate
Amount in 
Japanese 
Yen
Equivalent 
U.S. Dollar 
Amount
September 1, 2013  . . .
Forward Rate for June 30, 2014, 
Settlement
$1 = ¥102
¥5,200,000
$50,980
December 31, 2013 . . .
Forward Rate for June 30, 2014, 
Settlement
$1 = ¥100
¥5,200,000
$52,000
June 30, 2014  . . . . . .
Actual
$1 = ¥95 
¥5,200,000
$54,737
a. Using a discount rate of 8% per year, what is the fair value of the forward contract on 
December 31, 2013? Is the amount an asset or a liability?
b. What amount would Turner Corporation report on its December 31, 2013, balance 
sheet related to its commitment to purchase the equipment?
c. What is the fair value of the forward contract on June 30, 2014, just before settling the 
transaction?
d. Give the journal entry on June 30, 2014, to purchase the equipment.
e. Give the journal entry on June 30, 2014, to settle the forward contract.
22. Accounting for forward currency contract as a cash flow hedge. On October 1, 2013, Biddle 
Corporation purchases equipment from a supplier in France on account at a purchase 
price of €40,000 and denominates the transaction in euros. Biddle Corporation must pay 
the €40,000 on March 31, 2014. To protect its cash flows, Biddle Corporation purchases a 
forward currency contract on October 1, 2013, for €40,000 at a forward exchange rate for 
settlement on March 31, 2014, of €1 = $1.32. Biddle Corporation designates the forward 
contract as a cash flow hedge. The forward exchange rate on December 31, 2013, for settle-
ment on March 31, 2014, is €1 = $1.35, and the actual exchange rate on March 31, 2014, 
is €1 = $1.40. Ignore discounting of cash flows in this exercise. The following summarizes 
this information:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

543
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Date
Type of Exchange Rate
Exchange 
Rate
Amount in 
Euros
Equivalent 
U.S. Dollar 
Amount
October 1, 2013  . . . . .
Forward Rate for March 31, 2014, 
Settlement
€1 = $1.32
€40,000
$52,800
December 31, 2013 . . .
Forward Rate for March 31, 2014, 
Settlement
€1 = $1.35
€40,000
$54,000
June 30, 2014  . . . . . .
Actual
€1 = $1.40
€40,000
$56,000
a. What is the fair value of the forward contract on December 31, 2013? Is the amount an 
asset or a liability?
b. What amount would Biddle Corporation report on its December 31, 2013, balance sheet 
for its Note Payable to the supplier?
c. What is the fair value of the forward contract on March 31, 2014, just before settling 
the transaction?
d. Give the journal entry on March 31, 2014, to pay cash to the supplier.
e. Give the journal entry on March 31, 2014, to settle the forward contract.
PROBLEMS
23. Journal entries and financial statement presentation of short-term available-for-sale securi-
ties. The following information summarizes data about Dostal Corporation’s marketable 
securities held as current assets and classified as available-for-sale securities:
Fair Value
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Date 
Sold
Selling 
Price
Dec. 31, 
2013
Dec. 31, 
2014
A  . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2/5/2013
$60,000
6/5/2014
$72,000
$66,000
—
B  . . . . . . . . . . . .
8/12/2013
$25,000
—
—
$20,000
$20,000
C  . . . . . . . . . . . .
1/22/2014
$82,000
—
—
—
$79,000
D  . . . . . . . . . . . .
2/25/2014
$42,000
6/5/2014
$39,000
—
—
E  . . . . . . . . . . . .
3/25/2014
$75,000
—
—
—
$80,000
a. Give all journal entries relating to these marketable equity securities during 2013 and 
2014, assuming the accounting period is the calendar year.
b. Provide a suitable presentation of marketable securities in the balance sheet and related 
notes on December 31, 2013.
c. Provide a suitable presentation of marketable securities in the balance sheet and related 
notes on December 31, 2014.
24. Journal entries and financial statement presentation of long-term available-for-sale securi-
ties. The following information summarizes data about Rice Corporation’s investments in 
equity securities held as noncurrent assets and classified as available-for-sale securities:
Fair Value
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Date 
Sold
Selling 
Price
Dec. 31, 
2013
Dec. 31, 
2014
A  . . . . . . . . . . . .
 3/5/2013
$40,000
10/5/2014
$52,000
$45,000
—
B  . . . . . . . . . . . .
5/12/2013
$80,000
—
—
$70,000
$83,000
C  . . . . . . . . . . . .
3/22/2014
$32,000
—
—
—
$27,000
D  . . . . . . . . . . . .
5/25/2014
$17,000
10/5/2014
$16,000
—
—
E  . . . . . . . . . . . .
5/25/2014
$63,000
—
—
—
$67,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

544
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
26. Effect of various methods of accounting for marketable equity securities. Information related 
to marketable equity securities of Callahan Corporation appears on the next page.
Security
Acquisition 
Cost in 
2013
Dividends 
Received 
During 
2013
Fair Value 
on Dec. 31, 
2013
Selling 
Price in 
2014
Dividends 
Received 
During 2014
Fair Value 
on Dec. 31, 
2014
G  . . . . . . . 
$18,000
$  800
$16,000
$14,500
$  200
—
H . . . . . . . 
 25,000
 1,500
 24,000
 26,000
   500
—
I  . . . . . . . 
 12,000
 1,000
 14,000
     —
 1,500
$17,000
$55,000
$3,300
$54,000
$40,500
$2,200
$17,000
a. Assume these securities are trading securities. Indicate the nature and amount of income 
recognized during 2013 and 2014 and the presentation of information about these secu-
rities on the balance sheet on December 31, 2013 and 2014.
b. Repeat part a assuming these securities are available-for-sale securities held as tempo-
rary investments of excess cash by Callahan Corporation.
c. Repeat part a assuming these securities represent long-term investments by Callahan 
Corporation held as available-for-sale securities.
a. Give all journal entries relating to these equity securities during 2013 and 2014, assum-
ing the accounting period is the calendar year.
b. Provide a suitable presentation of investments in securities in the balance sheet and 
related notes on December 31, 2013.
c. Provide a suitable presentation of investments in securities in the balance sheet and 
related notes on December 31, 2014.
25. Analysis of financial statement disclosures for available-for-sale securities. Exhibit 13.8
reproduces data about marketable equity securities classified as available-for-sale securi-
ties by Moonlight Mining Company. Assume that Moonlight held no current marketable 
securities at the end of 2013, sold no current marketable securities during 2014, purchased 
no noncurrent marketable securities during 2014, and transferred no noncurrent market-
able securities to the current portfolio during 2014. The income statement for 2014 shows 
a realized loss on sale of noncurrent marketable securities of $3,068,000.
a. What amount of net unrealized gain or loss on noncurrent marketable securities appears 
on the balance sheet for the end of 2013?
b. What amount of net unrealized gain or loss on noncurrent securities appears on the 
balance sheet for the end of 2014?
c. What were the proceeds from the sale of noncurrent marketable securities during 2014?
d. What amount of unrealized gain or loss on marketable securities appears on the income 
statement for 2014?
Moonlight Mining Company
Data on Marketable Equity Securities
(amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 25)
Marketable Equity Securities
Acquisition 
Cost
Fair 
Value
At December 31, 2014:
Current Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 7,067
$ 4,601
Noncurrent Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,158
$ 8,807
At December 31, 2013:
Noncurrent Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$21,685
$11,418
EXHIBIT 13.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

545
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
d. Compute the combined income for 2013 and 2014 under each of the three treatments of 
these securities in parts a, b, and c. Why do the combined income amounts differ? Will 
total shareholders’ equity differ? Why or why not?
27. Analysis of financial statement disclosures related to marketable securities and quality of 
earnings. A bank reports the following information relating to its marketable securities 
classified as available-for-sale securities for a recent year (amounts in millions of US$):
December 31
2014
2013
Marketable Securities at Acquisition Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$13,968
$14,075
Gross Unrealized Gains. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,445
957
Gross Unrealized Losses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (218)
   (510)
Marketable Securities at Fair Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$15,195
$14,522
 
Cash proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities totaled $37,600 million 
in 2014. Gross realized gains totaled $443 million, and gross realized losses totaled $113 
million during 2014. The carrying value of marketable securities sold or matured totaled 
$37,008 million. Interest and dividend revenue during 2014 totaled $1,081 million. Pur-
chases of marketable securities totaled $37,163 million during 2014.
a. Give the journal entries to record the sale of marketable securities during 2014.
b. Analyze the change in the net unrealized gain from $447 million on December 31, 2013, 
to $1,227 million on December 31, 2014.
c. Compute the total income (both realized and unrealized) occurring during 2014 on the 
bank’s investments in securities.
d. How might the judicious selection of marketable securities sold during 2014 permit the 
bank to report an even larger net realized gain?
28. Accounting for forward commodity contract as a cash flow hedge. Refer to Examples 15 and 
19 in the chapter. Delmar holds 10,000 gallons of whiskey in inventory on October 31, 
2013, that costs $225 per gallon. Delmar contemplates selling the whiskey on March 31, 
2014. Uncertainty about the selling price of whiskey on March 31, 2014, leads Delmar to 
acquire a forward contract on whiskey. The forward contract does not require an initial 
investment. Delmar designates the forward commodity contract as a cash flow hedge of a 
forecasted transaction. The forward price on October 31, 2013, for delivery on March 31, 
2014, is $320 per gallon.
a. Give the journal entry, if any, that Delmar would make on October 31, 2013, when it 
acquires the forward commodity contract.
b. On December 31, 2013, the end of the accounting period for Delmar, the forward price 
of whiskey for March 31, 2014, delivery is $310 per gallon. Give the journal entry to 
record the change in the value of the forward commodity price contract. Ignore the 
discounting of cash flows in this part and for the remainder of the problem.
c. Give the journal entry, if any, that Delmar must make on December 31, 2013, for the 
decline in value of the whiskey inventory.
d. On March 31, 2014, the price of whiskey declines to $270 per gallon. Give the journal 
entry that Delmar must make to remeasure the forward contract.
e. Give the entry, if any, that Delmar must make on March 31, 2014, to reflect the decline 
in value of the inventory.
f. Give the journal entry that Delmar would make on March 31, 2014, to settle the for-
ward contract.
g. Assume that Delmar sells the whiskey on March 31, 2014, for $270 a gallon. Give the 
journal entries to record the sale and recognize cost of goods sold.
h. How would the entries in parts b through g differ if Delmar had chosen to designate the 
forward commodity contract as a fair value hedge instead of a cash flow hedge?
i. Suggest a scenario that would justify the firm treating the forward commodity contract 
as a fair value hedge, and a scenario that would justify treating it as a cash flow hedge.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

546
Chapter 13 
Marketable Securities and Derivatives
29. Accounting for forward currency contract as a fair value hedge and a cash flow hedge. On 
July 1, 2013, Owens Corporation places an order with a European supplier for manufactur-
ing equipment for delivery on June 30, 2014. The purchase is denominated in euros in the 
amount of €60,000. Owens Corporation purchases a forward currency contract on July 1, 
2013, for the purchase of €60,000 at a forward exchange rate for settlement on June 30, 
2014, of €1 = $1.32. Owens Corporation designates the forward contract as a fair value 
hedge. The forward exchange rate on December 31, 2013, for settlement on June 30, 2014, 
is €1 = $1.35, and the actual exchange rate on June 30, 2014, is €1 = $1.40. The following 
summarizes this information:
Date
Type of Exchange Rate
Exchange 
Rate
Amount in 
Euros
Equivalent 
U.S. Dollar 
Amount
July 1, 2013. . . . . . . . . . .
Forward for June 30, 2014, 
Settlement
€1 = $1.32
€60,000
$79,200
December 31, 2013 . . . . . .
Forward for June 30, 2014, 
Settlement
$1 = €1.35
€60,000
$81,000
June 30, 2014  . . . . . . . . .
Actual
€1 = $1.40
€60,000
$84,000
a. Using a discount rate of 8% per year, give the journal entries that Owens Corporation 
would make on July 1, 2013, December 31, 2013, and June 30, 2014, to account for 
the purchase commitment and the forward contract. Owens Corporation’s accounting 
period is the calendar year.
b. How would the journal entries in part a differ if Owens Corporation designates the 
forward contract as a cash flow hedge instead of a fair value hedge?
c. Suggest a scenario that would justify the firm treating the forward contract as a fair 
value hedge and a scenario that would justify treating it as a cash flow hedge.
30. Accounting for an interest rate swap as a fair value hedge. Sandretto Corporation issues 
a note payable on January 1, 2013, to a supplier in return for equipment. The note has a 
face value of $50,000 and bears interest at 6% each year. Interest is payable annually on 
December 31, and the note matures on December 31, 2015. Sandretto Corporation has 
the option of repaying the note at any time prior to maturity at its fair value. Sandretto 
Corporation will repay the note early only if interest rates drop. In that event, the fair value 
of the note would exceed $50,000, and Sandretto Corporation will not capture the benefits 
of the lower interest rate. To neutralize the effects of changes in the fair value of the note 
payable, Sandretto enters into an interest rate swap with its bank. The swap has the effect 
of allowing Sandretto to exchange its fixed interest rate liability for a variable rate obliga-
tion. Assume that the variable interest rate is 6% on January 1, 2013, and the rate is reset 
to 8% on December 31, 2013, and to 4% on December 31, 2014.
a. Give the journal entries that Sandretto Corporation will make on January 1, 2013, 
December 31, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
b. Sandretto Corporation decides to repay this note on January 1, 2015. Give the journal 
entries for the repayment of the note and to close out the swap agreement, assuming 
that Sandretto Corporation does not incur any additional costs for the early repayment 
or closing out the swap contract.
c. How would the entries in part a differ if Sandretto Corporation elected the fair value 
option for the note payable and interest rate swap?
31. Accounting for an interest rate swap as a cash flow hedge. Avery Corporation issues a note 
payable on January 1, 2013, to a supplier in return for equipment. The note has a face 
value of $50,000 and bears interest at a variable interest rate; the variable interest rate is 
6% on January 1, 2013. Interest is payable annually on December 31, and the note matures 
on December 31, 2015. To protect its cash flows from changes in the variable interest rate, 
Avery Corporation enters into an interest rate swap with its bank. The swap has the effect 
of allowing Avery Corporation to exchange its variable interest rate liability for a 6% fixed 
rate obligation. Assume the variable interest rate increases to 8% on December 31, 2013, 
and decreases to 4% on December 31, 2014. Avery Corporation designates the interest rate 
swap as a cash flow hedge. Give the journal entries that Avery Corporation will make on 
January 1, 2013, December 31, 2013, December 31, 2014, and December 31, 2015.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

F
or various reasons, corporations often acquire common stock issued by other entities.
Example 1 Citigroup has trading operations that focus on short-term changes in the prices of 
securities. Citigroup purchases shares of common stock of Roche Holding, Ltd., a pharmaceutical 
company, on December 28, 2013, with the expectation of selling them early in 2014.
Example 2 Microsoft Corporation acquires 5% of the common shares of a technology startup 
company, with the intent of benefitting from increases in the value of these shares if the technol-
ogy company succeeds.
Example 3 The Coca-Cola Company (Coke) owns 40% of the common stock of Coca-Cola 
Enterprises, a bottler of its soft drinks. This ownership percentage permits Coke to exert signifi-
cant influence, perhaps even control, over the operations of Coca-Cola Enterprises. As discussed 
later in this chapter, the amount of Coke’s holdings is not large enough to warrant consolidating 
Coca-Cola Enterprises by including all of the assets and liabilities of Coca-Cola Enterprises on 
Coke’s balance sheet, under the provisions of U.S. GAAP; it is possible, however, that if Coke 
were to apply IFRS it might consolidate Coca-Cola Enterprises.
Example 4 The Walt Disney Company owns all the common stock of ESPN, Inc., and can 
therefore control both ESPN’s overall policies and its day-to-day business decisions. Walt Disney 
will prepare consolidated financial statements that include ESPN’s assets and liabilities.
OVERVIEW OF THE ACCOUNTING FOR AND 
REPORTING OF INVESTMENTS IN COMMON STOCK
The accounting for investments in common stock depends on two factors:
1. The expected holding period.
2. The purpose and relative size of the investment.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Intercorporate Investments 
in Common Stock
C h a p t e r
14
1. Understand why firms invest in com-
mon stock issued by other entities and 
how the purpose and relative size of an 
investment determine the method of 
accounting for that investment.
2. Develop skills to apply the equity 
method to minority, active investments.
3. Understand the concepts underlying 
consolidated financial statements for 
majority, active investments, including 
the concept of control.
4. Understand consolidation policy for an 
entity for which the analysis of voting 
interests does not reveal control.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

548
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
EXPECTED HOLDING PERIOD
The expected holding period determines whether an investment in common stock is clas-
sified as a current asset or as a noncurrent asset on the balance sheet. Equity securities 
with readily determinable fair values that firms expect to sell within the next year appear 
as marketable    securities and are included among current assets on the balance sheet. In 
Example 1, Citigroup would classify its investment in Roche Holding, Ltd., as a current asset. 
Securities that firms expect to hold for more than one year from the date of the balance sheet 
appear in  investments in securities, classified as a noncurrent asset on the balance sheet. Micro-
soft’s investment in the technology startup company in Example 2 and Coke’s investment in 
Coca-Cola Enterprises in Example 3 appear in investments in securities. A later section explains 
that Walt Disney in Example 4 would prepare consolidated financial statements with ESPN. 
The consolidation procedure requires Walt Disney to replace its Investment in ESPN account 
with accounts showing ESPN’s individual assets and liabilities, and report the two legally sepa-
rate entities as a single economic entity. The Investment in ESPN account does not appear on 
the consolidated balance sheet.
PURPOSE OF AN INVESTMENT IN COMMON STOCK
This section describes how the purpose of an investment in common stock and the percent-
age of common stock held combine to determine the accounting for that investment. Refer to 
 Figure 14.1, which identifies three types of investments.
1. Minority, passive investments For these investments, an investor acquires the common 
stock of another entity (the investee) for the dividends and price appreciation anticipated 
from share ownership. The acquiring (investor) company’s ownership percentage is suffi-
ciently small that it cannot control the other company or exert significant influence over it. 
Citigroup’s investment in Roche Holding, Ltd., in Example 1 and Microsoft Corporation’s 
5% ownership investment in the technology startup company in Example 2 are minority, 
passive investments. U.S. GAAP and IFRS view investments of less than 20% of the voting 
shares of another company as minority, passive investments.1 An investor who intends to 
hold the shares for less than a year classifies them as current assets. If the expected holding 
period is longer, the investor classifies them as noncurrent assets. Chapter 13 discusses the 
accounting for minority, passive investments in both debt securities and equity securities.
2. Minority, active investments For these investments, an investor acquires common shares of 
an investee with the intent of exerting significant influence over the investee. Investors who 
own less than a majority (less than 50%) of an investee’s common shares are often able to 
exert significant influence over the investee because the ownership of publicly traded enter-
prises is diffuse.2 An example of a minority, active investment is Coke’s investment in the 
 1 Accounting Principles Board, Opinion No. 18, “The Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Common 
Stock,” 1971 (Codification Topic 323); IASB, International Accounting Standard 28, “Investments in Associates 
and Joint Ventures,” 2011.
 2 Diffuse ownership means there are many different owners of common shares who do not work together to align 
their votes.
Investor
Corporation
Minority, Passive
Investments
(less than 20%
ownership)
Majority, Active
Investments
(control)
Minority, Active
Investments
(between 20% and
50% ownership)
Types of Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
FIGURE 14.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

549
Minority, Active Investments
shares of Coca-Cola Enterprises in Example 3. U.S. GAAP and IFRS view investments of 
between 20% and 50% of the voting stock of another company as minority, active invest-
ments.3 Minority, active investments are classified as noncurrent assets on the balance sheet, 
often called equity method investments or investments in affiliates or investments in associates. 
Firms use different terms to refer to these types of investments, so the user of financial 
reports should read the footnote disclosures to determine how the firm describes its minor-
ity active investments.
3. Majority, active investments For these investments, an investor holds a controlling financial 
interest in the investee and is able to make decisions for the investee both at the broad 
policy- making level and at the day-to-day operational level. Refer to Example 4. Walt Dis-
ney acquired ESPN to add sports television broadcasting to its entertainment capabili-
ties. U.S. GAAP and IFRS view ownership of more than 50% of an investee as implying 
control of the investee.4 As discussed later, IFRS also provides conditions in which a less-
than-50% ownership interest implies control.
This chapter describes and illustrates the accounting for minority, active investments in com-
mon shares and majority, active investments in common shares. Throughout our discussion, 
we designate the acquiring corporation (the investor) as P, for purchaser or parent, and the 
acquired corporation (the investee) as S, for seller or subsidiary.
MINORITY, ACTIVE INVESTMENTS
When an investor owns less than a controlling financial interest in another corporation, the 
investor must determine if it can exert significant influence. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
presume that significant influence exists at 20% ownership. That is, significant influence is 
presumed to exist when the investor owns 20% or more of the voting stock of the investee. Sig-
nificant influence can exist at lower ownership levels, if there is a contractual or other basis to 
demonstrate that influence. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to account for minority, active 
investments using the equity method. We describe this method and its rationale next.5
EQUITY METHOD: RATIONALE
To introduce the rationale for the equity method, we first review the accounting for available-
for-sale marketable securities, discussed in Chapter 13. The investor, P, measures its investments 
in available-for-sale marketable securities at fair value on the balance sheet and recognizes 
revenue when it receives a dividend or sells some of the securities at a gain or loss. (P recog-
nizes unrealized changes in the fair value of available-for-sale securities in other comprehensive 
income, not in earnings.) Suppose that the investee, S, follows a policy of financing its opera-
tions using assets generated through the retention of earnings, consistently declaring dividends 
less than its net income or perhaps declaring no dividends at all. The fair value of S’s shares 
will probably increase to reflect this retention of assets. But P reports income only from the 
dividends it receives. Thus, the increase in the fair value of S’s common stock will not appear in 
P’s earnings until P sells the common shares and realizes the fair value increase.
Consider what would happen if this accounting treatment were permitted for ownership 
percentages at which P could exert significant influence over S. If P can exert significant influ-
ence over S, P can affect S’s dividend policy, thus affecting P’s own income. For example, if P 
would like to increase its own income for a particular period, P can pressure S to increase S’s 
 3 FASB, Interpretation No. 35, “Criteria for Applying the Equity Method of Accounting for Investments in Com-
mon Stock,” 1981 (Codification Topic 323); IASB, International Accounting Standard 28, “Investments in Associ-
ates and Joint Ventures,” 2011.
 4 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 94, “Consolidation of All Majority-owned Subsidiar-
ies,” 1987 (Codification Topic 810); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 10, “Consolidated Finan-
cial Statements,” 2011.
 5 Firms may apply the fair value option to certain equity method investments. The fair value option requires 
remeasuring the investment to fair value each period, with unrealized gains and losses included in net income. 
FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 159, “The Fair Value Option for Financial Assets and 
Financial Liabilities,” 2007 (Codification Topic 825); IASB, International Accounting Standard 39, “Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurements,” revised 2003 and International Financial Reporting Standard 9, 
“Financial Instruments,” 2010.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

550
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
periodic dividend or to pay a special dividend. To avoid this outcome, accounting requires a dif-
ferent treatment for minority, active investments (the equity method) than for minority, passive 
investments.
EQUITY METHOD: PROCEDURES
The equity method records the initial purchase of an investment at acquisition cost. Each 
period, P treats as income (or loss) its share of the net income (or loss) of S. This income also 
increases P’s Investment in Stock of S, an asset on P’s balance sheet. Finally, P treats its share 
of dividends declared and paid by S as a reduction of P’s Investment in Stock of S account.
Example 5 Suppose that P acquires 30% of the outstanding shares of S for $600,000. The 
entry to record the acquisition on P’s balance sheet is as follows:
(1) 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600,000
To record Company P’s investment in 30% of the common shares of Company S.
Between the time of the acquisition and the end of P’s next accounting period, S reports 
earnings of $80,000. P, using the equity method, records the following journal entry:
(2) 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
24,000
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
24,000
To record 30% of the earnings of S accounted for using the equity method; 
$24,000 = 0.30 × $80,000.
The Equity in Earnings of Affiliate account is an income statement account.6 Firms that 
apply IFRS more commonly use the title, Equity in Earnings of Associate (or Associated 
Companies).
If S declares and pays a dividend of $30,000 to holders of its common stock, P receives 
$9,000 (= 0.30 × $30,000) and records the following journal entry:
(3) 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,000
 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,000
To record 30% of the dividend declared and paid by S, accounted for using 
the equity method.
P records its share of income earned by S as an increase in investment, while the dividend 
is a partial return of the investment and decreases P’s Investment in Stock of S account. To 
understand journal entry (3), which shows a credit to an asset account by the investor when 
the investee company pays a dividend, consider a savings account at a bank. Assume you put 
$600,000 in a savings account. Later the bank adds interest of 4% (or $24,000) to the account, 
and still later you withdraw $9,000 from the account. You can record journal entries (1) through 
(3) for these three events, with slight changes in the account titles: Investment in Stock of S 
changes to Savings Account, and Equity in Earnings of Affiliate changes to Interest Revenue. 
The cash withdrawal of $9,000 reduces the amount invested in the savings account. Similarly, 
the payment of a cash dividend by an investee accounted for with the equity method reduces the 
investor’s investment because it reduces the investee’s retained earnings. The investor, P, owns a 
sufficiently large percentage of the voting shares that it can often influence S to pay a dividend, 
just as you can require the savings bank to remit cash to you whenever you choose.
 6 If instead of earnings of $80,000, S had a loss of $20,000, P would make an entry debiting Equity in Loss of 
Affiliate and crediting Investment in Stock of S for $6,000 (= 0.30 × $20,000). That is, just as S’s earnings 
increase P’s income, so too do S’s losses decrease P’s income.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

551
Minority, Active Investments
Suppose S reports earnings of $100,000 and pays dividends of $40,000 during the next 
accounting period. P’s entries are as follows:
(4) 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
 
Equity in Earnings of S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,000
To record 30% of the earnings of S, accounted for using the equity method; 
$30,000 = 0.30 × $100,000.
(5) 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
To record 30% of the dividend declared and paid by S, accounted for using 
the equity method; $12,000 = 0.30 × $40,000.
P’s Investment in Stock of S account now has a balance of $633,000 as follows:
Investment in Stock of S
(1)
600,000
9,000
(3)
(2)
24,000
12,000
(5)
(4)
30,000
Bal. 633,000
Assume now that P sells one-fourth of its investment in S for $165,000. The entry is as 
follows:
(6) 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
165,000
 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
158,250
 
Gain on Sale of Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,750
To record the sale of one-fourth of the investment in S. The balance sheet 
carrying value of the investment sold is $158,250 = 1/4 × $633,000. The 
Gain on Sale of Investment increases P’s net income by $6,750.
After the sale, the balance in the Investment in Stock of S account is $474,750, as follows:
Investment in Stock of S
(1)
600,000
9,000
(3)
(2)
24,000
12,000
(5)
(4)
30,000
Bal. 633,000
158,250
(6)
Bal. 474,750
Recognizing the Investor’s Share of the Investee’s Other Comprehensive 
Income In addition to recognizing the investor’s share of the investee’s net income, the inves-
tor also recognizes its share of the investee’s other comprehensive income.7 The investor can 
combine its share of the elements of other comprehensive income of the investee with similar 
items arising from its own operations. For instance, in the preceding example assume that S’s 
other comprehensive income during the first period is as follows:
Unrealized Gains from Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 3,000
Unrealized Losses from Cash Flow Hedges  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (2,000)
Other Comprehensive Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 1,000
 7 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 130, “Reporting Comprehensive Income,” 1997, par. 
121 (Codification Topic 220).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

552
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
P would make the following entry to recognize its share of the other comprehensive income 
of S, based on its 30% ownership of S.
 
Investment in Stock of S. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
Unrealized Losses from Cash Flow Hedges 
 
(Other Comprehensive Income) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600
 
Unrealized Gains from Marketable Securities 
 
 
(Other Comprehensive Income)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
900
To recognize P’s share of S’s Other Comprehensive Income. The amounts 
of Other Comprehensive Income are closed to P’s Accumulated Other 
Comprehensive Income.
Excess Purchase Price on Acquisition of Equity Method Investment P’s 
investment in S represents a proportionate share (in the previous example, 30%) of the share-
holders’ equity of S. P may pay more than the carrying value for this investment. That is, P’s 
payment for S may exceed its 30% interest in the balance sheet carrying value of S’s net assets 
(= assets – liabilities = shareholders’ equity) at the date of acquisition. For example, assume 
that when P acquired 30% of S’s common shares for $600,000, S’s total shareholders’ equity 
was $1.5 million. P’s acquisition cost exceeds the carrying value of its proportionate share of 
the net assets acquired by $150,000 [= $600,000 – (0.30 × $1,500,000)]. P may pay this pre-
mium (the excess purchase price) because the fair values of S’s net assets differ from their carry-
ing values, or because of S’s unrecorded assets (for example, trade secrets).
The investor’s accounting for the excess purchase price embedded in the Investment in 
Stock of S account is similar to the treatment of an excess purchase price in a business combi-
nation. As Chapter 10 discusses, the investor identifies any recorded assets and liabilities with 
fair values that differ from their carrying values, as well as any unrecorded assets and liabili-
ties. The investor attributes the excess purchase price to these assets and liabilities, based on 
the investor’s proportionate ownership interest, and attributes any remaining excess purchase 
price to goodwill. For example, assume that P attributes the $150,000 excess purchase price in 
the preceding example as follows: $100,000 to remeasure buildings and equipment to fair value 
and $50,000 to goodwill. P does not reclassify this excess out of its Investment in Stock of S 
account to Buildings and Equipment and to Goodwill. P must, however, amortize (or depreci-
ate) any amount attributed to assets with definite lives. Thus, P must depreciate the $100,000 
attributed to buildings and equipment over their remaining useful lives. U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
do not permit the investor to amortize the excess purchase price attributed to goodwill and 
other assets with indefinite lives. Instead, the investor must test the investment account annu-
ally for possible impairment.
EQUITY METHOD DISCLOSURES
Thames’s balance sheet, shown in in Exhibit 1.6, indicates that Thames has investments in 
equity affiliates. Thames refers to these investments on its balance sheet as Share of Net Assets 
of Equity Affiliates. The amount reported for these investments increased from €692.4 million 
at the end of fiscal 2012 to €711.0 million at the end of fiscal 2013. Exhibit 14.1 presents infor-
mation from Thames’s footnote disclosures pertaining to these investments. Thames accounts 
for these investments using the equity method.
The first panel of Exhibit 14.1 shows the investee names, ownership percentages, and bal-
ance sheet carrying values of Thames’s investments in six affiliated companies. The last row of 
this table, labeled “Other,” captures Thames’s aggregate holdings of smaller enterprises that it 
also accounts for using the equity method. The ownership percentages indicate that at the end 
of fiscal 2012 Thames owned between 20% and 33% of the six named equity affiliates. The data 
also indicate that Thames did not increase or decrease its ownership stakes in these compa-
nies during 2013. The carrying values of these investments on Thames’s balance sheet changed 
because of the earnings generated and dividends paid by the affiliates.
For all equity affiliates combined, the second panel shows the reasons for the change in 
the carrying values. The carrying value of Thames’s investment in equity affiliates increased 
because of Thames’s share of earnings generated by the affiliates. In 2013, Thames’s share 
amounted to €48.0 million. Thames’s income statement, Exhibit 1.6, shows this amount. The 
carrying value of Thames’s investment in equity affiliates declined by €26.5 million to reflect 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

553
Minority, Active Investments
Thames’s portion of dividends paid by equity affiliates during 2013. Finally, Thames’s carrying 
value in the account Investment in Equity Affiliates declined by €2.9 million due to exchange 
rate effects.8
The information reported in Exhibit 14.1 connects to the information in Thames’s state-
ment of cash flows, shown in Exhibit 1.7. Thames’s statement of cash flows shows a subtrac-
tion from net income of €21.5 million. This amount equals Thames’s portion of equity affiliate 
earnings included in net income of €48.0 million, net of Thames’s portion of dividends paid by 
the equity affiliates of €26.5 million, that is, €21.5 = €48.0 – €26.5 million.
Summary of Accounting for Investments Under the Equity Method On the 
investor’s balance sheet, an investment accounted for using the equity method appears among 
noncurrent assets. The amount shown equals the acquisition cost of the shares, plus P’s share 
of S’s earnings (or losses) since the date P acquired the shares, less P’s share of any dividends 
paid by S, less any amortization or depreciation associated with an allocation of an excess pur-
chase price to assets with definite service lives. P includes in its income each period its share of 
S’s income (or loss) as income (or loss). P also recognizes its share of the investee’s other com-
prehensive income (or loss). The accounting method that the investor, P, uses does not affect 
the separate financial statements of the investee, S.
 PROBLEM  14.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries to apply the equity method. Exhibit 14.2 summarizes data about the 
minority, active investments of Equigroup. Assume that any excess of acquisition cost 
over the carrying value of the net assets acquired (excess purchase price) relates to 
equipment with a 10-year remaining life on January 1, 2013. Prepare the journal entries 
to do the following:
a. Record the acquisition of these securities on January 1, 2013.
(continued)
Thames’s Note on Investments in Equity Affiliates
Ownership %
Share in Net Assets 
(€ million)
Share in 
Income 
(€ millions)
Affiliate
2013
2012
2013
2012
2013
Plane Ltd.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
30
 54.9
 57.3
 4.6
Dante Plc. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
20
 50.0
 48.9
 6.4
LJGD. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
25
520.2
505.5
23.5
GePix  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
20
 16.4
 15.7
 1.3
Electronica. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
33
 30.4
 28.1
 6.1
IndoTechnica  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
33
 16.3
 16.3
 1.2
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
   22.8
    20.6
    4.9
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
711.0
692.4
48.0
Share in Net Assets of Equity Affiliates, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . .
€692.4
Share in Income (Loss) of Equity Affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  48.0
Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(26.5)
Effect of Exchange Rates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2.9)
Share in Net Assets of Equity Affiliates, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . .
€711.0
EXHIBIT 14.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
 8 We do not consider the accounting for the effects of changes in exchange rates in this textbook.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

554
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
b. Apply the equity method for 2013.
c. Apply the equity method for 2014.
d. Record the sale of Security E on January 2, 2015, for $190,000.
MAJORITY, ACTIVE INVESTMENTS
When an investor controls an investee company, that investor can prescribe the activities of the 
investee in terms of both broad policy making and day-to-day operations. U.S. GAAP states 
that an investor controls an investee when the investor has a controlling financial interest in the 
investee; the usual condition for control is holding more than 50% of the voting stock of the 
investee, that is, majority ownership. IFRS defines control in terms of three conditions: (1) the 
investor has power over the investee; (2) the investor has exposure to variable returns (for exam-
ple, share price changes) because of its involvement with the investee; and (3) the investor can 
use its power over the investee to affect the returns it will receive (for example, the investor can 
direct the operating, financing and investing activities of the investee). The IFRS approach to 
determining control is broader than the U.S. GAAP approach, and applying it can require sig-
nificant judgment. The IFRS approach to control can encompass, for example, the following, in 
addition to majority ownership of shares:
■ 
An investor has a large, but not majority, ownership interest; no other investor has more 
than a very small ownership interest; and those other investors do not work together to 
align their votes. Coke’s 40% ownership of Coca-Cola Enterprises might place Coke in 
control of Coca-Cola Enterprises, under IFRS, depending on the number and nature of 
the other owners.
■ 
An investor has both an ownership interest and a contractual arrangement that gives it the 
power to elect a majority of the investee’s governing board (board of directors).
Common usage refers to the investor that controls the investee as the parent (P) and to the con-
trolled (for example, majority-owned company) as the subsidiary (S). U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
require the parent to combine the financial statements of controlled companies with those of 
the parent in consolidated financial statements.9 A consolidation of the financial statements of 
the parent and each of its subsidiaries presents the results of operations, financial position, and 
cash flows of an affiliated group of companies under the control of a parent as if the group of 
companies was arranged as a single entity. The parent and each subsidiary are legally separate 
entities that operate as one centrally controlled economic entity.
Equigroup
(Problem 14.1 for Self-Study)
Earnings (Loss)
Dividends
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Ownership 
Percentage
Carrying Value 
of Net Assets on 
January 1, 2013
2013
2014
2013
2014
D  . . . . . . . . . . .
1/1/2013
$ 80,000
  40%
$200,000
$ 40,000
$ 50,000
$10,000
$12,000
E  . . . . . . . . . . .
1/1/2013
 190,000
30
 500,000
 120,000
  (40,000)
 30,000
—
F  . . . . . . . . . . .
1/1/2013
 200,000
20
 800,000
 200,000
  50,000
 60,000
 60,000
EXHIBIT 14.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
 9 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 94, “Consolidation of All Majority-Owned Subsidiar-
ies,” 1987 (Codification Topic 810); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 10, “Consolidated Finan-
cial Statements,” 2011.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

555
Majority, Active Investments
REASONS FOR LEGALLY SEPARATE CORPORATIONS
Firms have several reasons for preferring to operate as a group of legally separate corporations 
(an affiliated group), rather than as a single entity. From the standpoint of the parent company, 
reasons for maintaining legally separate subsidiary companies include the following:
1. To reduce legal or operational risk. Separate corporations may obtain raw materials, trans-
port them to a manufacturing plant, produce the product, and sell the finished product to 
the public. If any one part (subsidiary) of the total process proves to be unprofitable or 
inefficient, losses from insolvency will fall only on the owners and creditors of that subsid-
iary entity, and not fall upon the others.
2. To reduce the costs of dealing with jurisdiction-specific differences in corporate laws and 
tax rules. An organization that does business in a number of localities faces overlapping 
and inconsistent taxation and regulations. Organizing legally separate corporations to con-
duct operations in the various locales can reduce the administrative costs of dealing with 
location-specific rules.
3. To expand or diversify. A firm may enter a new line of business, or expand an existing line, 
by acquiring a controlling interest in another company’s voting stock. This approach may 
be faster, less expensive, and less risky than constructing a new plant or starting a new line 
of business.
4. To reduce the costs of divesting assets. Firms generally save costs if they sell the common 
stock of a subsidiary rather than trying to sell each of its assets separately.
PURPOSE OF CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS
Consolidated financial statements provide more helpful information than does the equity 
method. This is because consolidated statements include all the assets, liabilities, revenues, and 
expenses of the controlled (legally separate) subsidiaries. In contrast, the equity method shows 
only: (1) the investment account that represents the parent’s investment in the subsidiary’s com-
mon shareholders’ equity; and (2) the parent’s share of the subsidiary’s net income (or loss).
A parent that controls a subsidiary can control the use of all of the subsidiary’s assets. The 
parent does not need to own 100% of the voting shares to achieve control over all assets. For 
example, a parent that owns a 70% share of the investee’s voting shares is able to exercise con-
trol over all of the investee’s assets, not 70% of those assets. Consolidation of the individual 
assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses of both the parent and the subsidiary provides a more 
realistic picture of the operations and financial position of the single economic entity.
The separate financial statements of the parent and its subsidiaries form the base for con-
solidated financial statements. In a legal sense consolidated statements supplement, and do not 
replace, the separate statements of the individual corporations. Published annual reports typi-
cally contain only the consolidated statements.
Example 6 Great Deal and Thames, among others, have wholly owned finance subsidiaries 
that make loans to customers who want to purchase products produced by the consolidated 
entity. The parent company consolidates the financial statements of these finance subsidiar-
ies. Nothing prevents the separate display of the finance subsidiary’s financial statements (and 
in some circumstances the financial report must display the subsidiary’s separate financial 
statements).
Example 7 A mining company owns all the shares of a mining subsidiary in South America, 
where the government enforces stringent control over cash distributions outside that country. 
The parent cannot control all the assets of the subsidiary, despite owning a majority of the vot-
ing shares, so it does not prepare consolidated statements with the subsidiary.
THE PURCHASE TRANSACTION
In a business combination, one corporation either
1. Acquires the assets and assumes the liabilities of another corporation, or
2. Acquires control of another corporation by, for example, acquiring all, or a majority, of 
another corporation’s common shares. By acquiring shares, the acquirer obtains a control-
ling interest in the net assets of the other corporation.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

556
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to account for a business combination using the 
acquisition method, also called the purchase method.10 The acquisition method views a business 
combination as conceptually identical to the purchase of any single asset (for example, inven-
tory or a machine). Application of the acquisition method involves two steps:
1. Measure the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities of the acquired 
company at their fair values. In some cases, the acquired firm may not have recognized 
some identifiable assets or liabilities in its accounting records. For example, the acquired 
company may own patents and trademarks that it developed internally. Those internally 
developed intangible assets are not recorded as assets on the firm’s balance sheet.11 The 
consolidated balance sheet would recognize those assets at their fair values.
2. Compare the fair value of the cash, common stock, or other consideration paid in the 
purchase transaction with the fair value of the identifiable net assets (identifiable assets 
less identifiable liabilities) acquired. The excess of the fair value of the consideration over 
the fair value of the acquired firm’s identifiable net assets is goodwill. If the fair value of 
the acquired firm’s identifiable net assets exceeds the fair value of the consideration, the 
excess is a gain from a bargain purchase, which the purchaser immediately includes in net 
income.12
 PROBLEM  14.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Financial statement effects of the acquisition method. Exhibit 14.3 presents balance sheet 
data for Powell Corporation and Steele Corporation as of January 1, 2013. On this date, 
Powell exchanges 2,700 shares of its common stock with $1 par value, selling for $20 per 
share, for all of the individual assets and liabilities of Steele.
a. Give the journal entry on the books of Powell Corporation to record the acquisition 
of the assets and liabilities of Steele Corporation.
b. Prepare a balance sheet for Powell Corporation after the acquisition of Steele Corpo-
ration on January 1, 2013, using the acquisition method.
UNDERSTANDING CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Recording the Acquisition In Problem 14.2 for Self-Study, Powell acquired the assets 
and liabilities of Steele and recognized them at their fair values. After the acquisition, the assets 
of Steele would consist of only the consideration received from Powell (that is, shares of Powell 
common stock). Steele might distribute this consideration to its shareholders and dissolve as a 
legal corporation. If it did so, Steele would no longer be a legally separate corporation.
An investor firm (parent) prepares consolidated financial statements when the investor 
acquires control of an investee firm, for example by purchasing all or a majority of the com-
mon stock of the investee. In this case, the acquiring firm records the acquisition in the Invest-
ment in Stock account on its separate (parent company) balance sheet in the same net amount 
as if it had purchased the identifiable assets net of liabilities. If Powell were to issue 2,700 
shares with par value $1 and market value $20 for all of the shares of Steele, Powell would 
record its investment in Steele as follows:
January 1, 2013
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
54,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,700
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
51,300
10 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 141R (revised 2007), “Business Combinations,” 2007 
(Codification Topic 805); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 3, “Business Combinations,” revised 
2008.
11 Chapter 10 discusses the accounting for internally developed intangible assets.
12 Paragraph 36 of FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 141R (revised 2007), “Business Com-
binations,” 2007 (Codification Topic 805); paragraph 34 of IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 3, 
“Business Combinations,” revised 2008.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

557
Majority, Active Investments
Preparing a Consolidated Balance Sheet at Date of Acquisition The first two 
columns of Exhibit 14.4 present the separate balance sheets of Powell and Steele on January 1, 
2013, immediately after Powell’s acquisition of Steele’s common stock. Powell’s separate com-
pany balance sheet includes the Investment in Steele account measured on January 1, 2013, at 
the consideration given ($54,000). This consideration equals the fair value of the identifiable 
net assets of Steele plus $40,000 of goodwill.
To prepare a consolidated balance sheet on January 1, 2013, Powell would construct a 
consolidation work sheet like that in Exhibit 14.4. The first two columns show the amounts from 
the separate balance sheets of Powell and Steele. Adding these amounts together would double- 
count both the net assets and the shareholders’ equity of the two entities. Powell’s balance sheet 
contains an asset for its investment in the net assets of Steele. Steele’s books contain the indi-
vidual net assets. Likewise, Powell’s shareholders’ equity provides the equity financing for its 
assets, one of which is its investment in Steele. Steele’s balance sheet includes the sharehold-
ers’ equity owned by Powell. Thus, to prepare a consolidated balance sheet that reflects assets, 
liabilities, and shareholders’ equity as if the two companies were one economic entity, we must 
eliminate the double-counting. We make this elimination entry on the consolidation work sheet, 
not on the books of either company. This entry involves eliminating the Investment in Steele in 
the amount of $54,000, eliminating the shareholders’ equity accounts of Steele in the amount 
of $9,000 (= $1,000 + $5,000 + $3,000), and allocating the difference of $45,000 (= $54,000 
– $9,000) to remeasure Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net) to its fair value (the amount is 
$5,000) and to Goodwill (the amount is $40,000). The entry on the consolidation work sheet is 
as follows:
January 1, 2013
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
54,000
Work sheet entry to eliminate the investment account and Steele’s 
shareholders’ equity accounts, and to allocate the excess purchase price to 
property, plant, and equipment (net) and goodwill.
Powell Corporation and Steele Corporation
Financial Statement Data for January 1, 2013
(Problem 14.2 for Self-Study)
Carrying Value
Fair Value
Powell 
Corp.
Steele 
Corp.
Steele 
Corp.
ASSETS
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,000
$ 7,000
$ 7,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 30,000
 18,000
 23,000
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     —
     —
 40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$40,000
$25,000
$70,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$25,000
$16,000
$16,000
Common Stock ($1 Par Value) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,000
  1,000
  1,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  9,000
  5,000
  5,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,000
  3,000
  3,000
Unrecorded Excess of Fair Value over Carrying Value . . . . . . . . 
     —
     —
 45,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$40,000
$25,000
$70,000
EXHIBIT 14.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

558
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
The amounts in the Consolidated column of the work sheet are identical to those in Exhibit 
14.9 in the solution to Problem 14.2 for Self-Study, in which Powell acquires Steele’s assets and 
liabilities directly.
Accounting for the Investment Subsequent to the Date of Acquisition After 
the acquisition, Powell will account for its investment in Steele on its separate-company books 
using the equity method. To illustrate the subsequent accounting, assume that during 2013, 
Steele’s net income is $2,500 and Steele declares and pays a dividend of $400. Also assume that 
the average remaining life of Steele’s depreciable assets at the acquisition date is 10 years. Pow-
ell makes the following entries on its separate-company books to apply the equity method dur-
ing 2013:
December 31, 2013
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500
 
Equity in Earnings of Steele Corporation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,500
To recognize Powell’s share of Steele’s earnings.
December 31, 2013
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
 
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
To recognize Powell’s share of Steele’s dividends.
December 31, 2013
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
500
 
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500
To record additional depreciation expense from the excess of fair value over 
carrying value of Steel’s property, plant, and equipment on January 1, 2013; 
$500 = $5,000/10.
The Investment in Steele Corporation account has a balance of $55,600 (= $54,000 +
$2,500 – $400 – $500) on December 31, 2013.
Consolidated Work Sheet for Powell Corporation 
and Steele Corporation
January 1, 2013
Powell 
Corp.
Steele 
Corp.
Debit
Credit
Consolidated
ASSETS
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,000
$ 7,000
$ 17,000
Property, Plant, and 
 
Equipment (Net) . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
18,000
 5,000
53,000
Investment in Powell Corp.. . . . . 
54,000
54,000
      —
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     —
     —
40,000
  40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$94,000
$25,000
$110,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$25,000
$16,000
$ 41,000
Common Stock ($1 Par Value) . . . 
3,700
1,000
 1,000
3,700
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . 
60,300
5,000
 5,000
60,300
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,000
  3,000
 3,000
   5,000
 
Total Liabilities and
 
 
Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . 
$94,000
$25,000
$110,000
EXHIBIT 14.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

559
Majority, Active Investments
Preparing Consolidated Financial Statements Subsequent to the Date of 
Acquisition Exhibit 14.5 presents information from the accounting records of Powell in col-
umn (1) and Steele in column (2) on December 31, 2013. Column (3) combines the amounts 
from the accounting records of each company. These amounts do not represent the correct 
amounts for consolidated statements for the reasons discussed next. Column (4) shows the cor-
rect consolidated amounts. We use Exhibit 14.5 to gain additional understanding of consoli-
dated financial statements. We consider three topics:
1. The need for intercompany eliminations.
2. The meaning of consolidated net income.
3. The nature of noncontrolling interest.
Need for Intercompany Eliminations Corporation laws typically require each legally 
separate entity to maintain its own separate accounting records. During an accounting period, 
each corporation will record its transactions with all other entities (both affiliated and non-
affiliated). At the end of the period, each corporation will prepare its own financial statements. 
Illustrative Data for Preparation of Consolidated 
Financial Statements
Powell
(1)
Steele
(2)
Combined
(3)
Consolidated
(4)
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEET ON DECEMBER 31, 2013
Assets
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 12,000
$ 8,200
$ 20,200
$ 14,200
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . 
35,400
20,000
55,400
59,900
Investment in Steele Corporation  . . . . 
55,600
—
55,600
—
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
      —
     —
      —
  40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$103,000
$28,200
$131,200
$114,100
Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 26,500
$17,100
$ 43,600
$ 37,600
Common Stock ($1 Par Value) . . . . . . . 
3,700
1,000
4,700
3,700
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . 
60,300
5,000
65,300
60,300
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  12,500
  5,100
  17,600
  12,500
 
Total Liabilities and 
 
 
Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . 
$103,000
$28,200
$131,200
$114,100
CONDENSED INCOME STATEMENT FOR 2013
Revenues
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$200,000
$50,000
$250,000
$230,000
Equity in Earnings of 
 
Steele Corporation. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   2,500
     —
   2,500
      —
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$202,500
$50,000
$252,500
$230,000
Expenses
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$125,000
$30,000
$155,000
$135,000
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
11,800
61,800
61,800
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
1,500
3,500
3,500
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  10,200
  4,200
  14,400
  14,400
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$187,200
$47,500
$234,700
$214,700
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 15,300
$ 2,500
$ 17,800
$ 15,300
Dividend Declared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (7,800)
    (400)
   (8,200)
   (7,800)
Increase in Retained Earnings 
 
for the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  7,500
$ 2,100
$  9,600
$  7,500
EXHIBIT 14.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

560
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
The consolidation of these financial statements involves summing the amounts across the sepa-
rate company statements and then adjusting these sums to eliminate double-counting result-
ing from intercompany transactions. Intercompany transactions are transactions between and 
among affiliated companies.
The guiding principle of consolidation procedures is that consolidated financial statements 
reflect the results that the affiliated group would report if it were a single company. Consoli-
dated financial statements reflect transactions between the consolidated group of entities and 
others outside the consolidated group. Thus, if one subsidiary in a consolidated group sells 
goods to another, the consolidation procedure must remove the effects of this intercompany 
transaction.
Eliminating Double-Counting of Intercompany Payables Separate company 
records indicate that $6,000 of Powell’s receivables represent amounts receivable from Steele. 
Column (3) of Exhibit 14.5 counts the current assets underlying this transaction twice: once 
as a receivable on Powell’s books and a second time as cash that Steele will use to pay Pow-
ell. Also, the liability shown on Steele’s books appears in the combined amount for liabilities 
in column (3). The consolidated group does not owe this $6,000 to an outsider. To eliminate 
double-counting on the asset side and to report liabilities at the amounts payable to outsiders, 
the consolidation process eliminates $6,000 from the amounts for receivables and liabilities in 
column (3). The work sheet entry is as follows:
December 31, 2013
Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
 
Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,000
To eliminate intercompany receivable and payable.
In column (4), consolidated Current Assets, which include receivables, and consolidated Liabili-
ties, which include the payable to Powell, both total $6,000 less than their sum in column (3).
If a parent or subsidiary invests in bonds or long-term notes issued by the other, the con-
solidation process eliminates the investment and related liability from the consolidated balance 
sheet. It also eliminates the borrower’s interest expense and the lender’s interest revenue from 
the consolidated income statement.
Eliminating Double-Counting of Investment Powell’s balance sheet shows an asset, 
Investment in Steele Corporation, which represents Powell’s investment in Steele’s net assets. 
The subsidiary’s balance sheet shows its individual assets and liabilities. When column (3) adds 
the two balance sheets, the sum shows both Powell’s investment in Steele’s assets and Steele’s 
actual assets. The consolidation process eliminates the amount of Powell’s investment, $55,600, 
and the account Investment in Steele Corporation from the sum of the balance sheet amounts. 
The work sheet entry is as follows:
December 31, 2013
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000
Equity in Earnings of Steele Corporation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,500
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,500
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Dividend Declared  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
 
Investment in Steele Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
55,600
To eliminate the Investment in Steele Corporation account and the 
shareholders’ equity accounts of Steele, and recognize the unamortized 
difference between the fair values of Steele’s net assets at acquisition and 
their carrying values.
This elimination entry is similar to the work sheet entry made on the acquisition date (Janu-
ary 1, 2013), except for the following:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

561
Majority, Active Investments
1. The balance in the Investment in Steele Corporation account changed during 2013 as 
a result of applying the equity method. We eliminate the Investment in Steele Corpora-
tion account on Powell’s books and the related shareholders’ equity accounts on Steele’s 
books. The latter include Common Stock, Additional Paid-In Capital, Retained Earnings, 
and Dividends Declared. We also eliminate the Equity in Earnings of Steele Corpora-
tion account of $2,500. Steele’s records show individual revenues and expenses that net to 
$2,500. When column (3) sums the revenues and expenses of the two companies, it counts 
that income twice. The consolidation process eliminates the account Equity in Earnings 
of Steele Corporation. Likewise, Steele paid the dividend it declared to Powell, not to an 
outsider, so we eliminate the intercompany dividend.
2. The amount added to Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net) equals the difference between 
the fair value and the carrying value of these assets on January 1, 2013, of $5,000 less one 
year of amortization of $500.
3. Because goodwill is not amortized, its carrying value on December 31, 2013, is the same 
as on January 1, 2013, $40,000. Each period, Powell will test the amount of goodwill for 
impairment. We assume no goodwill impairment in this example.
Eliminating Intercompany Sales The consolidation process eliminates intercompany 
transactions from the sum of the income statements so that the consolidated income statement 
presents only the consolidated entity’s transactions with outsiders. Consider intercompany 
sales. Separate company records indicate that Powell sold merchandise at its cost of $20,000 
to Steele for $20,000 during the year. None of this inventory remains in Steele’s inventory on 
December 31, 2013. Therefore, the merchandise inventory sold appears in Sales Revenue both 
on Powell’s books (sale to Steele) and on Steele’s books (sale to outsiders), and column (3) over-
states sales of the consolidated entity to outsiders. Likewise, Cost of Goods Sold in column (3) 
counts twice the cost of the goods sold, first by Powell to Steele and then by Steele to outsiders. 
The consolidation process eliminates the effects of the intercompany sale with the following 
work sheet entry:
December 31, 2013
Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
To eliminate intercompany sale of merchandise.
A Realistic Complication We simplified the example by having Powell sell the goods 
to Steele at cost, $20,000, so that you can easily see that the consolidation process reduces 
both sales and cost of goods sold by $20,000. Sales revenue, however, usually exceeds cost of 
goods sold. Assume now that Powell sold goods costing $15,000 to Steele for $20,000, and 
Steele later sold the goods to outsiders for $23,000. The consolidation process eliminates the 
intercompany sale of $20,000 from both the combined sales and the combined cost of goods 
sold. The transactions remaining in the consolidated income statement will be Steele’s sales to 
outsiders for $23,000 and Powell’s cost of goods sold of $15,000. This is exactly what would 
appear if Powell and Steele were a single company selling goods that cost $15,000 at a price of 
$23,000.
It is possible that Steele has not, by the end of the accounting period, sold all the goods it 
bought from Powell. In that case, Powell’s single-company income statement contains a profit 
on the goods remaining in inventory, which the consolidation must eliminate. We do not illus-
trate this complication.
Consolidated Income The amount of consolidated net income (or loss) for a period 
equals the amount the parent would show on its separate company books if it used the equity 
method for all its subsidiaries. That is, consolidated net income is as follows:
Parent Company’s 
Net Income from 
Its Own Activities
+
Parent Company’s 
Share of Subsidiaries’ 
Net Income
−
Profit (or + Loss) 
on Intercompany 
Transactions
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

562
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
Powell used the equity method to account for its investment in Steele Corporation and 
reported net income for 2013 of $15,300, including $2,500 for Equity in Earnings of Steele 
Corporation. The work sheet entry to eliminate the Investment in Steele Corporation account 
eliminated the Equity in Earnings of Steele Corporation account in the amount of $2,500 and 
replaced it in consolidation with the revenues and expenses of Steele Corporation for 2013 net-
ting to $2,500.
A consolidated income statement differs from a parent’s income statement using the equity 
method only in the components presented. Some accountants describe the equity method as 
a one-line consolidation because of this feature. When a parent applies the equity method, the 
parent’s share of the subsidiary’s revenues less expenses appears in the single account Equity 
in Earnings of Subsidiary, and the parent’s share of the (net) amount of the subsidiary’s 
assets less its liabilities appears in the single account Investment in Subsidiary. Application of 
the equity method treats the investee’s revenues, expenses, assets, and liabilities in such a way 
that the parent’s income equals the amount it would report if it had consolidated the investee 
instead of using the equity method.
Noncontrolling Interest in Consolidated Subsidiary If the parent does not own 
100% of the voting stock of a consolidated subsidiary, the owners of the remaining shares of 
voting stock are the noncontrolling interest or minority interest.13 By virtue of their ownership of 
shares, these shareholders have provided a portion of the subsidiary’s equity financing. These 
noncontrolling shareholders also have a claim to this portion of the subsidiary’s net assets and 
to this portion of the subsidiary’s earnings.
The Noncontrolling Interest in Net Assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheet 
Assume that Powell acquired 80% of the outstanding stock of Steele instead of the 100% illus-
trated to this point. Therefore, the noncontrolling shareholders of Steele own 20% of Steele.
Powell, with its controlling interest, can direct the use of all Steele’s assets and liabilities, not 
merely 80% (reflecting its ownership interest of Steele’s shares). The consolidated balance sheet 
reports the ownership interest of the noncontrolling shareholders in the consolidated subsid-
iary as part of shareholders’ equity.
The amount of the noncontrolling interest appearing in the balance sheet at the date of 
acquisition can differ between U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Under U.S. GAAP, the consolidated 
balance sheet shows all assets and liabilities at fair value and the noncontrolling interest at its 
ownership percentage times this fair value.14 Refer to the information for Steele Corporation 
on January 1, 2013, in Exhibit 14.3. The fair value of Steele’s net assets is $54,000 (= $70,000 
– $16,000). Under U.S. GAAP, a 20% noncontrolling interest would appear on the consolidated 
balance sheet at $10,800 (= 0.20 × $54,000) on January 1, 2013. In contrast, IFRS permits 
firms a choice between the approach required by U. S. GAAP and an alternative approach. 
Under the permitted alternative, the fair value of the subsidiary’s net identifiable assets is the 
basis for measuring the noncontrolling interest; goodwill is not a separately identifiable asset.15 
Thus, under IFRS, the noncontrolling interest would appear on the balance sheet at either 
$2,800 [= 0.20 × ($7,000 + $23,000 – $16,000)] or $10,800 as measured under U.S. GAAP.
The consolidated income statement shows all of the parent’s and the subsidiary’s revenues 
less all of the parent’s and the subsidiary’s expenses, plus or minus intercompany revenues, 
expenses, gains, and losses. This calculation yields consolidated income. The consolidated 
income statement shows the portion of this consolidated income to which the noncontrolling 
shareholders have a claim. The noncontrolling shareholders’ claim on net income equals the 
subsidiary’s net income multiplied by the noncontrolling shareholders’ ownership percentage. 
Exhibit 14.6 illustrates this presentation.
13 Common practice in the United States has been to use the term minority interest. IFRS does not use this term, 
and U.S. GAAP has eliminated it; however, you may continue to encounter it in financial reports.
14 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 160, “Noncontrolling Interests in Consolidated Finan-
cial Statements,” 2007 (Codification Topic 810).
15 IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 3, “Business Combinations,” revised 2008.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

563
Majority, Active Investments
 PROBLEM  14.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Understanding consolidation concepts. Exhibit 14.6 presents income statement data, 
and Exhibit 14.7 presents balance sheet data for Pomel Corporation and its 80% owned 
subsidiary, Static Company, for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2013. The first two 
columns in each exhibit show amounts taken from the separate-company accounting 
records of each firm. The third column sums the amounts in the first two columns. 
The fourth column shows consolidated amounts for Pomel and Static after making 
intercompany eliminations.
a. Does the account Investment in Static (equity method) on Pomel’s books include any 
excess acquisition cost relative to the fair value of the shareholders’ equity of Static?
b. Suggest four ways in which the data in Exhibits 14.6 and 14.7 confirm that Pomel 
owns 80% of Static.
c. Why does the amount for accounts receivable in column (3) of Exhibit 14.7 differ 
from the amount in column (4)?
d. Explain why the account Investment in Static does not appear on the consolidated 
balance sheet.
e. Why does the total shareholders’ equity of $740 on the consolidated balance sheet 
exceed the shareholders’ equity on Pomel’s separate-company accounting records of 
$692?
f. Compute the amount of intercompany sales during the year.
g. Explain why the $80 for Equity in Earnings of Static does not appear on the consoli-
dated income statement.
h. Why does the Noncontrolling Interest in Earnings of Static account appear on the 
consolidated income statement but not on the income statements of either Pomel or 
Static?
Pomel and Static
Income Statement Data for 2013
(Problem 14.3 for Self-Study)
Pomel
(1)
Static
(2)
Combined 
(3) =
(1) + (2)
Consolidated
(4)
REVENUE
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,000
$2,000
$6,000
$5,500
Equity in Earnings of Static  . . . . . . . . 
    80
    —
    80
    —
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4,080
$2,000
$6,080
$5,500
EXPENSES
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,690
$1,350
$4,040
$3,540
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . .
1,080
480
1,560
1,560
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
20
50
50
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    70
    50
   120
   120
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,870
$1,900
$5,770
$5,270
Income Before Noncontrolling 
 
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  210
$  100
$  310
$  230
Noncontrolling Interest in 
 
Earnings of Static  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    —
    —
    —
   (20)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  210
$  100
$  310
$  210
EXHIBIT 14.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

564
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
Pomel and Static
Balance Sheet Data, December 31, 2013
(Problem 14.3 for Self-Study)
Pomel
(1)
Static
(2)
Combined 
(3) =
(1) + (2)
Consolidated
(4)
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  125
$ 60
$  185
$  185
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
550
270
820
795
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
460
210
670
670
Investment in Static (Equity Method). . 
192
—
192
—
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . 
   680
 380
 1,060
 1,060
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,007
$920
$2,927
$2,710
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  370
$170
$  540
$  515
Notes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
250
650
650
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . 
245
60
305
305
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   300
 200
   500
   500
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,315
$680
$1,995
$1,970
Noncontrolling Interest in 
 
Net Assets of Static . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   —
$ —
$   —
$   48
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
50
250
200
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   492
 190
   682
   492
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . 
$  692
$240
$  932
$  740
 
Total Liabilities and 
 
 
Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . 
$2,007
$920
$2,927
$2,710
EXHIBIT 14.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
DISCLOSURE OF CONSOLIDATION POLICY
The summary of significant accounting policies, a required part of the financial statement foot-
notes, must include a statement about the parent’s consolidation policy. If an investor does not 
consolidate a significant majority-owned subsidiary, the notes will disclose that fact. The notes 
to the financial statements of Great Deal describe its accounting for the acquisition of subsid-
iaries and the preparation of consolidated financial statements.
To discern whether Great Deal owns 100% of its consolidated subsidiaries, we can refer to 
its balance sheet, shown in Exhibit 1.1, and determine whether there is a noncontrolling inter-
est. For the fiscal year ended February 27, 2013, Great Deal reports noncontrolling interest of 
$644 million. Great Deal’s income statement, shown in Exhibit 1.2, indicates that $77 million of 
fiscal 2012 earnings were attributable to noncontrolling interests. Subtracting this amount from 
total earnings yields Great Deal’s net income of $1,317 (= $1,394 – $77) million in fiscal 2012.
C O N S O L I D A T E D  F I N A N C I A L  S TA T E M E N T S
The consolidated financial statements include the 
accounts of Great Deal, Inc., and its consolidated 
subsidiaries. Investments in unconsolidated entities 
over which we exercise significant influence but do not 
have control are accounted for using the equity method. 
Our share of the net earnings or loss of equity method 
investees was not significant for any period presented. 
We have eliminated all intercompany accounts and 
transactions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

565
Variable Interest Entities
LIMITATIONS OF CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS
Consolidated statements, provided for the parent’s shareholders, do not replace the statements 
of individual corporations.
■ 
Creditors typically rely on the resources of the entity to which they lend funds and are there-
fore interested in the unconsolidated (single-company) financial statements of that entity.
■ 
A corporation can declare dividends against only its own retained earnings.
■ 
When the parent company does not own all the shares of the subsidiary, the noncontrol-
ling shareholders can judge the dividend constraints only by inspecting the subsidiary’s 
statements.
VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES
In U.S. GAAP the usual criterion for preparing consolidated financial statements is a control-
ling financial interest, typically evidenced by voting control in the form of majority owner-
ship of common stock. For some entities common stock ownership does not indicate control 
because the common stock of the entity lacks one or more of the economic characteristics 
associated with equity. To see this, consider the following business arrangement of Company P, 
which wants to borrow to finance the acquisition of an airplane.
1. Company P pays $100,000 to an unrelated party to induce that party to own 100% of the 
shares of Entity S. The unrelated party buys these shares for $60,000 cash, contributing the 
cash to Entity S in return for the shares, and keeps the remaining $40,000.
2. Entity S borrows $50 million from a group of Lenders to buy the airplane that Company 
P wants to use. It agrees to repay the loan in 120 monthly installments of $717,500 per 
month. The implicit interest rate is 1% per month, and the loan is fully paid after 120 
payments.
3. Company P provides a written guarantee to the Lenders that it will make any debt service 
payment that Entity S fails to make on time. Without the guarantee, the Lenders would not 
lend to Entity S, as the airplane itself does not provide sufficient collateral for the loan.
4. Company P agrees to pay $717,500 per month to Entity S to rent the airplane, plus a small 
additional fee to cover Entity S’s transactions costs. Entity S signs a contractual agreement 
with Company P to use the rental payments from Company P to repay the $50 million 
loan. Company P takes possession of the airplane, including responsibility for using and 
maintaining it. The governing documents that establish Entity S preclude it from engaging 
in any transactions other than the borrowing and repayment of the loan and the rental 
arrangement involving Company P.
Figure 14.2 depicts this structure.
In this arrangement, an unrelated party owns 100% of Entity S, but Company P controls 
the use of Entity S’s only asset (the airplane) and has responsibility for repayment of the loan. 
The unrelated party that owns Entity S has no management responsibility and no opportunity 
for gain or loss. As described in Chapter 12, firms have used entities such as Entity S to convert 
receivables into cash, to finance large projects, and to finance research and development efforts. 
The accounting issue is: under what conditions should such an entity be consolidated, and by 
whom.
U.S. GAAP refers to entities such as Entity S in our illustration as a variable interest entity 
(VIE).16 A variable interest entity is an entity that meets one or both of the following criteria:
1. The amount of invested equity is so small that the entity requires other financial support 
to sustain its activities.
2. The equity owners lack meaningful decision rights or meaningful exposure to losses or 
returns.
16 FASB, Interpretation No. 46R, “Consolidation of Variable Interest Entities,” 2003, amended by Statement of 
Financial Accounting Standards No. 167, “Amendments to FASB Interpretation No. 46(R),” 2009 (Codification 
Topic 810). In some cases, common terminology refers to a VIE as a special purpose entity (SPE); this term is 
not used in authoritative guidance.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

566
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
If the entity qualifies as a VIE, U.S. GAAP requires the primary beneficiary (if one exists) 
of the VIE to consolidate the VIE. Entity S in our example qualifies as a VIE because its own-
ers have no meaningful decision rights and no exposure to losses or returns. Company P in the 
illustration will be the primary beneficiary of Entity S if Company P has two characteristics:
1. It has the power to direct the activities of the entity that most affect how the entity 
performs.
2. It is exposed to potentially significant losses or returns.
Entity S’s activities are determined by the governing documents Company P put in place when 
it created Entity S. In addition, Company P guarantees all the debt of the VIE. Therefore, 
Company P is the primary beneficiary of Entity S and will consolidate Entity S. The consoli-
dated financial statements will reflect both Entity S’s asset (the airplane) and its obligation (the 
loan); the outcome is that the financing arrangement is on-balance-sheet for P.
IFRS does not contain the concept of a VIE. Rather, IFRS contains a general consolida-
tion policy standard that is applicable to all entities; there is no distinction, for purposes of 
consolidation policy, in IFRS between entities for which control is evidenced by share owner-
ship and entities for which control is evidenced by other arrangements.17 Firms that apply IFRS 
would analyze any entity using the consolidation criteria described earlier in this chapter under 
the heading “Majority Active Investments.”
SUMMARY
This chapter discusses the accounting for investments in common stock when the owner-
ship percentage is 20% or more. The investor records the acquisition of the common stock 
of another entity at the cash amount paid or the fair value of other consideration given. The 
Company P
Lenders to Entity S
supply all financing
100% Owners 
of Entity S
Entity S, designed to
achieve a
special purpose
(3)
(1)
(2)
(4)
(1)
To Illustrate an Entity Whose Voting Control Provides 
an Inadequate Test for Consolidation
FIGURE 14.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
(1) Company P gives $100,000 to Owners to own all the shares of Entity S.
(2) Entity S borrows $50 million from Lenders and uses cash to buy an airplane.
(3)  Company P guarantees the Lenders that it will make debt service payments on Entity S’s borrowings if 
Entity S fails to do so.
(4) Company P rents the airplane from Entity S on a month-to-month basis.
17 IFRS guidance for consolidation policy is in IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 10, “Consoli-
dated Financial Statements,” 2011. The application guidance that is part of this standard illustrates the applica-
tion of the control criterion to entities with characteristics that make them similar to a VIE in U.S. GAAP.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

567
Summary
account debited for an investment in equity securities, either Marketable Securities or Invest-
ment in Securities, depends on the expected holding period.
The accounting for investments in equity securities subsequent to acquisition depends in 
part on the ownership percentage:
■ 
The fair value method generally applies when the investor owns less than 20% and the 
equity securities are marketable.
■ 
The equity method generally applies when the investor owns at least 20% but not more 
than 50% of the common stock of another company (the investee).
■ 
Under U.S. GAAP, the investor generally prepares consolidated statements when it 
owns more than 50% of the voting shares of another company. Under IFRS, the inves-
tor prepares consolidated statements when it is in control of another company; control 
can be evidenced by majority share ownership and by other means.
■ 
Under U.S. GAAP, an investor applies specialized guidance to determine whether an 
entity with which it is involved is a variable interest entity (VIE) and, if so, whether the 
investor is the primary beneficiary of the VIE and will consolidate.
Exhibit 14.8 summarizes the accounting for investments subsequent to acquisition studied in 
Chapters 13 and 14.
Consolidated statements and the equity method have the same effect on net income. The 
investor includes in its income its share of the investee’s periodic income (or loss) since acquisi-
tion, after eliminating intercompany transactions. In the equity method, this share appears on 
a single line of the investor’s income statement. The consolidated income statement combines 
the revenues and expenses of the acquired (subsidiary) company with those of the parent. Bal-
ance sheet components under consolidation will exceed those under the equity method because 
the consolidated balance sheet replaces the parent company’s Investment in Subsidiary account 
with the individual assets and liabilities of the subsidiary.
Effects of Various Methods of Accounting for Short- and 
Long-Term Investments in Corporate Securities
Method of Accounting
Balance Sheet
Income Statement
Fair value method for marketable securities 
available for sale (generally used when equity 
ownership percentage is less than 20%) and 
for cash flow hedges.a
Investment account or derivative appears at 
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses appear 
in Other Comprehensive Income.
Dividends declared by investee included 
in revenue of investor. Gains and losses 
included in income when realized in arm’s-
length transactions with outsiders.
Fair value method for trading securities 
(generally used when ownership percentage 
is less than 20%) and for fair value hedges.
Investment account or derivative appears at 
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses appear 
in income statement, and the effects increase 
or decrease the Retained Earnings account.
Dividends declared by investee included in 
revenue of investor. Gains and losses (from 
then-current carrying values) included in 
income when fair values change.
Amortized cost method (used only for debt 
where holder has both intent and ability to 
hold to maturity).a
Acquisition cost plus accrued interest not yet 
received in cash.
Carrying value at start of period multiplied 
by historical market interest rate on the 
date of acquisition of debt security.
Equity method (generally used when 
ownership percentage is at least 20% but 
not more than 50%).a
Investment account appears at acquisition 
cost plus share of investee’s net income less 
share of investee’s dividends since acquisition 
minus amortization of excess of purchase 
price over fair value of identifiable assets 
with limited lives.
Equity in investee’s net income is part of 
the investor’s income in the period that 
investee earns income. Reduce (increase) by 
the amount, if any, of intercompany gains 
(losses).
Consolidation (generally used when ownership 
percentage exceeds 50% [U.S. GAAP] or when 
the investor controls the investee [IFRS]).
Eliminate investment account, and replace 
it with individual assets and liabilities of 
subsidiary. Show noncontrolling interest in 
shareholders’ equity. Eliminate inter-company 
assets and liabilities.
Combine individual revenues and expenses 
of subsidiary with those of parent, and 
eliminate intercompany items. Subtract 
noncontrolling interest in subsidiary’s net 
income.
aFirms can elect the fair value option to account for these securities. The effects on the balance sheet and income statement are the same as 
those described for trading securities and fair value hedges.
EXHIBIT 14.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

568
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 14.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Equigroup; journal entries to apply the equity method.)
a.
January 1, 2013
Investment in Securities [D]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
Investment in Securities [E]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
190,000
Investment in Securities [F]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
470,000
b.
December 31, 2013
Investment in Securities [D] (0.40 × $40,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,000
Investment in Securities [E] (0.30 × $120,000) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36,000
Investment in Securities [F] (0.20 × $200,000) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
92,000
December 31, 2013
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
25,000
 
Investment in Securities [D] (0.40 × $10,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
 
Investment in Securities [E] (0.30 × $30,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,000
 
Investment in Securities [F] (0.20 × $60,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
December 31, 2013
Amortization Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Investment in Securities [E]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
 
Investment in Securities [F]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
Security
Carrying Value 
of Investee’s 
Net Assets on 
January 1, 2013
Ownership 
Percentage
Share of 
Carrying 
Value 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost of 
Investment
Excess 
Acquisition 
Cost
Annual 
Amortization 
for 10 Years
D  . . . . .
$200,000
 40%
$ 80,000
$ 80,000
—
—
E  . . . . .
 500,000
30
 150,000
 190,000
$40,000
$4,000
F  . . . . .
 800,000
20
 160,000
 200,000
 40,000
 4,000
c.
December 31, 2014
Investment in Securities [D] (0.40 × $50,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
Investment in Securities [F] (0.20 × $50,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Investment in Securities [E] (0.30 × $40,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
 
Equity in Net Earnings of Affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
18,000
December 31, 2014
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,800
 
Investment in Securities [D] (0.40 × $12,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,800
 
Investment in Securities [F] (0.20 × $60,000). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

569
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
December 31, 2014
Amortization Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Investment in Securities [E]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
 
Investment in Securities [F]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
d.
January 2, 2015
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
190,000
Loss on Sale of Investment in Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,000
 
Investment in Securities [E]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
197,000
$197,000 = $190,000 + $36,000 – $9,000 – $4,000 – $12,000 – $4,000.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 14.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Powell and Steele; financial statement effects of the acquisition method.)
a.
January 1, 2013
Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23,000
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40,000
 
Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
16,000
 
Common Stock (2,700 × $1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,700
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (2,700 × $19)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
51,300
b. Exhibit 14.9 presents the consolidated balance sheet as of January 1, 2013, using the acqui-
sition method.
Powell Corporation and Steele Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheet, January 1, 2013
(Problem 14.2 for Self-Study)
ASSETS
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 17,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53,000
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  40,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$110,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 41,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,700a
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60,300b
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   5,000
 
Total Equities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$110,000
a$3,700 = $1,000 + (2,700 × $1).
b$60,300 = $9,000 + (2,700 × $19).
EXHIBIT 14.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

570
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 14.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Pomel and Static; understanding consolidation concepts.)
a. No. The investment account shows a balance of $192, which equals 80% of Static’s share-
holders’ equity ($192 = 0.80 × $240). If there was an excess of the fair value over the 
carrying value of Static’s net assets on the date of acquisition, Pomel has either fully amor-
tized the excess or recognized impairment losses, which eliminated the excess.
b. (1)  The Investment in Static account has a balance of $192, which equals 80% of Static’s 
shareholders’ equity. This clue supports the 80% ownership only because no unamor-
tized excess acquisition cost exists (see the response to part a).
(2) The noncontrolling interest in the net assets of Static is $48, which equals 20% of 
Static’s shareholders’ equity ($48 = 0.20 × $240).
(3) The Equity in Earnings of Static account on Pomel’s books has a balance of $80 for 
2013, which equals 80% of Static’s net income for 2013 ($80 = 0.80 × $100).
(4) The Noncontrolling Interest in Earnings account of Static has a balance of $20 for 
2013 ($20 = 0.20 × $100).
c. Pomel and Static have intercompany accounts receivable and accounts payable. Combined 
accounts receivable exceed consolidated accounts receivable by $25 (= $820 – $795), the 
same as the excess of combined accounts payable over consolidated accounts payable ($25 
= $540 – $515).
d. Double-counting results if both the investment account and the individual assets and lia-
bilities of Static appear on the consolidated balance sheet.
e. Consolidated shareholders’ equity includes the shareholders’ equity of Pomel plus the 20% 
noncontrolling interest in Static.
f. $500 (= $6,000 – $5,500 or $4,040 – $3,540).
g. Consolidated amounts include individual revenues, expenses, and noncontrolling interest 
in earnings, which net to $80. Double-counting this earnings results if the accountant does 
not eliminate the equity in earnings account.
h. The separate-company income statements report the total revenues and expenses of each 
entity without regard to who owns the common stock of each company. The consolidated 
income statement shows the earnings allocable to the noncontrolling shareholders and to 
the shareholders of Pomel. The shareholders of Pomel have a claim on all of the earnings 
of Pomel and 80% of the earnings of Static. Consolidated revenues and expenses include 
the combined amounts for both companies, adjusted for intercompany transactions. The 
noncontrolling interest in net income of Static shows the portion of Static’s net income not 
subject to a claim by Pomel’s shareholders.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Marketable securities
Investments in securities
Minority, passive investments
Significant influence
Minority, active investments
Equity method investments, investments in 
affiliates, investments in associates
Majority, active investments
Equity method
Parent
Subsidiary
Consolidated financial statements
Acquisition, or purchase, method
Goodwill
Bargain purchase
Consolidation work sheet
Intercompany transactions
Noncontrolling interest, minority interest
Consolidation policy
Variable interest entity (VIE)
Primary beneficiary
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

571
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. Distinguish between significant influence and control, and describe how these concepts 
relate to the method of accounting for intercorporate investments.
 3. “Dividends received or receivable from another company are revenue in calculating net 
income, a return of investment, or eliminated, depending on the method of accounting the 
investor uses.” Explain.
 4. Describe the rationale for why an investor using the equity method must amortize any 
excess purchase price attributable to assets with a definite service life.
 5. Describe the rationale for why an investor using the equity method must eliminate any 
intercompany profit or loss on transactions between the investor and the investee.
 6. Describe the rationale for why an investor using the equity method must recognize its share 
of Other Comprehensive Income of the investee.
 7. Why is the outcome of applying the equity method sometimes described as a one-line con-
solidation? Consider both the balance sheet and the income statement in your response.
 8. “Accounting for an investment in a subsidiary using the equity method and not consolidat-
ing it yields the same net income as consolidating the subsidiary. Total assets will differ 
depending on whether the investor consolidates the subsidiary.” Explain.
 9. Distinguish between minority investments in other companies and the noncontrolling, or 
minority, interest in a consolidated subsidiary.
10. Define the concept of an economic entity and explain its importance in preparing consoli-
dated financial statements of a parent company with its controlled subsidiaries.
11. The Investment in Subsidiary account is an asset. Why must an investor eliminate this 
account when preparing consolidated financial statements with the subsidiary?
12. Distinguish between the noncontrolling, or minority, interest in net income of a consoli-
dated subsidiary and the noncontrolling, or minority, interest in net assets of a consoli-
dated subsidiary.
13. Why must we eliminate intercompany transactions when preparing consolidated financial 
statements?
14. Under what circumstances might majority share ownership of another entity not serve as 
an indicator of control?
EXERCISES
15. Equity method entries. Cayman Company purchased 100% of the common stock of Den-
ver Company on January 2 for $550,000. The common stock of Denver at this date was 
$200,000, and the retained earnings balance was $350,000. During the year, net income 
of Denver was $120,000 and dividends declared were $30,000. Cayman uses the equity 
method to account for the investment. Give the journal entries Cayman made during the 
year to account for its investment in Denver.
16. Equity method entries. Weber Corporation acquired significant influence over Albee Com-
puter Company on January 2 by purchasing 20% of its outstanding stock for $100 million. 
Weber Corporation attributes the entire excess of acquisition cost over the carrying value 
of Albee Computer Company’s net assets to a patent, which it amortizes over 10 years. 
The shareholders’ equity accounts of Albee Computer Company appeared as follows on 
January 2 and December 31 of the current year (amounts in millions):
Jan. 2
Dec. 31
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$300
$300
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 120
 190
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

572
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
 
Albee Computer Company had earnings of $100 million and declared dividends of $30 
million during the year. The accounts receivable of Weber Corporation at December 31 
included $600,000 due from Albee Computer Company. Weber Corporation accounts for 
its investment in Albee Computer Company using the equity method. Give the journal 
entries to record the acquisition of the shares of Albee Computer Company and to apply 
the equity method during the year on the books of Weber Corporation.
17. Journal entries to apply the equity method of accounting for investments in securities. Wood 
Corporation made three long-term intercorporate investments on January 2. Data relating 
to these investments for the year appear next.
Company
Percentage 
Acquired
Carrying 
Value and 
Fair Value of 
Identifiable 
Net Assets 
on January 2
Acquisition 
Cost
Net 
Income 
(Loss) for 
the Year
Dividends 
Declared 
During 
the Year
Knox Corporation  . . . . . .
 50%
$700,000
$350,000
$ 70,000
$30,000
Vachi Corporation . . . . . .
30
 520,000
 196,000
40,000
 15,000
Snow Corporation  . . . . . .
20
 400,000
 100,000
(24,000)
—
 
Give the journal entries to record the acquisition of these investments and to apply the 
equity method during the year. There are no goodwill impairments.
18. Journal entries to apply the equity method of accounting for investments in securities. The 
following information summarizes data about the minority, active investments of Stebbins 
Corporation.
Security
Date 
Acquired
Acquisition 
Cost
Ownership 
Percentage
Carrying Value 
of Identifiable 
Net Assets on 
January 1, 2013
R  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1/1/2013
$250,000
 25%
$800,000
S  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1/1/2013
 325,000
40
 750,000
T  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1/1/2013
 475,000
50
 950,000
Earnings (Loss)
Dividends
Security
2013
2014
2013
2014
R  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 200,000
$225,000
$125,000
$130,000
S  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120,000
  75,000
  80,000
  80,000
T  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(150,000)
  50,000
—
—
 
Company R owns a building with 10 years of remaining life and with a fair value exceeding 
its carrying value by $160,000. $40,000 of this amount applies to the share Stebbins owns. 
Stebbins attributes the rest of any excess of acquisition cost over carrying value acquired 
to goodwill. The building has a 10-year remaining life. The fair values of the recorded net 
assets of Company S and Company T equal their carrying values. There are no goodwill 
impairments.
a. Give the journal entries to record the acquisition of these investments and to apply the 
equity method during 2013 and 2014.
b. Stebbins sells Security R on January 1, 2015, for $275,000. Give the journal entry to 
record the sale.
19. Working backward to consolidation relations. Laesch Company, as parent, owns shares in 
Lily Company. Laesch has owned the shares since it formed Lily. Lily has never declared a 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

573
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
dividend. Laesch has retained earnings from its own operations independent of intercorpo-
rate investments of $100,000. The consolidated balance sheet shows no goodwill and shows 
retained earnings of $156,000. Consider each of the following questions independently of 
the others:
a. If Laesch owns 80% of Lily, its consolidated subsidiary, what are the retained earnings 
of the subsidiary?
b. If Lily has retained earnings of $77,000, what fraction of Lily does Laesch own?
c. If Laesch had not consolidated Lily but instead had accounted for it using the equity 
method, how much revenue would Laesch have recognized from the investment?
20. Working backward from consolidated income statements. Dealco Corporation published a 
consolidated income statement for the year, shown in Exhibit 14.10. The unconsolidated 
affiliate retained 25% of its earnings of $140 million during the year, having paid out the 
rest as dividends. The consolidated subsidiary earned $280 million during the year and 
declared no dividends.
a. What percentage of the unconsolidated affiliate does Dealco Corporation own?
b. What amount of dividends did Dealco Corporation receive from the unconsolidated 
affiliate during the year?
c. What percentage of the consolidated subsidiary does Dealco Corporation own?
21. Consolidation policy and principal consolidation concepts. CAR Corporation manufactures 
computers in the United States. It owns 75% of the voting stock of Charles Electronics, 
80% of the voting stock of Alexandre du France Software Systems (in France), and 90% 
of the voting stock of R Credit Corporation (a finance company). CAR Corporation pre-
pares consolidated financial statements consolidating Charles Electronics, uses the equity 
method for R Credit Corporation, and treats its investment in Alexandre du France Soft-
ware Systems as securities available for sale. Data from the annual reports of these compa-
nies appear next. There are no intercompany transactions.
Dealco Corporation Consolidated Income Statement
(Exercise 20)
REVENUES
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,400,000
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    56,000
 
Total Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,456,000
EXPENSES
Cost of Goods Sold (Excluding Depreciation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  910,000
Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
140,000
Depreciation Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161,000
Amortization of Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,000
Income Tax Expenses:
 
 
Currently Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 58,800
 
 
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  14,000
    72,800
 
Total Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,290,800
Income of the Consolidated Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  165,200
Less Noncontrolling Interest in Earnings of Consolidated Subsidiary  . . . . . . .
   (42,000)
Net Income to Shareholders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  123,200
EXHIBIT 14.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

574
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
Percentage 
Owned
Net Income
Dividends
Accounting 
Method
CAR Corporation Consolidated . . .
—
$1,200,000
$ 84,000
—
Charles Electronics  . . . . . . . . . .
 75%
   120,000
  48,000
Consolidated
Alexandre du France Software 
Systemsa  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
    96,000
  60,000
Fair Value 
(Securities Available 
for Sale)
R Credit Corporation  . . . . . . . . .
90
   144,000
 120,000
Equity
aFair value of shares exceeds acquisition cost.
a. Which, if any, of the companies does CAR incorrectly account for according to U.S. 
GAAP?
 
 
Assuming the accounting methods and accounting itself for the three subsidiaries 
shown above are correct, answer the following questions:
b. How much of the net income reported by CAR Corporation Consolidated results from 
the operations of the three subsidiaries?
c. What is the amount of the noncontrolling, or minority, interest now shown on the con-
solidated income statement, and how does it affect net income of CAR Corporation 
Consolidated?
d. If CAR had consolidated all three subsidiaries, what would have been the net income of 
CAR Corporation Consolidated?
e. If CAR had consolidated all three subsidiaries, what noncontrolling, or minority, inter-
est would appear on the income statement?
22. Equity method entries. Vogel Company is a subsidiary of Joyce Company. Joyce Com-
pany accounts for its investment in Vogel Company using the equity method on its single- 
company books. Present journal entries for the following selected transactions and other 
information. Record the set of entries on the books of Vogel Company separately from the 
set of entries on the books of Joyce Company.
(1) On January 2, Joyce Company acquired on the market, for cash, 100% of the common 
stock of Vogel Company. The outlay was $420,000. The total contributed capital of 
Vogel Company’s stock outstanding was $300,000; the retained earnings balance was 
$80,000. Joyce attributes the excess of acquisition cost over the carrying value of the 
net assets acquired to an internally developed patent that has a 10-year remaining use-
ful life on January 2.
(2) Vogel Company purchased materials for $29,000 from Joyce Company on account at 
the latter’s cost.
(3) Vogel Company obtained an advance of $6,000 from Joyce Company. Vogel Company 
deposited the funds in the bank.
(4) Vogel Company paid $16,000 on the purchases in (2).
(5) Vogel Company repaid $4,000 of the loan received from Joyce Company in (3).
(6) Vogel Company declared and paid a dividend of $20,000 during the year.
(7) The net income of Vogel Company for the year was $30,000.
23. Working backward from data that has eliminated intercompany transactions. (Adapted from 
a problem by S. A. Zeff.) Alpha owns 100% of Omega and consolidates Omega in an entity 
called Alpha/Omega. Beginning in 2013, Alpha sold merchandise to Omega at a price 50% 
larger than Alpha’s costs. Omega sold some, but not all, of these goods to customers at a 
further markup. Excerpts from the single-company statements of Alpha and Omega and 
from the consolidated financial statements of Alpha/Omega appear next.
Single-Company Statements
Consolidated 
Financial 
Statements
Alpha
Omega
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$450,000
$250,000
$620,000
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 300,000
 210,000
 430,000
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  60,000
  50,000
 100,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

575
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. What was the total sales price at which Alpha sold goods to Omega during 2013?
b. What was Omega’s cost of the goods it had purchased from Alpha but has not yet sold 
by the end of 2013? What was Alpha’s cost of those goods? Which of those two num-
bers appears in the total Merchandise Inventory on the consolidated balance sheet?
24. Working backward from purchase data. (Adapted from a problem by S. A. Zeff.) On May 
1, 2013, Homer acquired the assets and agreed to take on and pay off the liabilities of 
Tonga in exchange for 10,000 of Homer’s common shares. Homer accounted for the acqui-
sition of the net assets of Tonga using the purchase method. On the date of acquisition, 
Tonga’s carrying value of depreciable assets exceeded Homer’s estimate of their fair value, 
but Homer judged all other items on Tonga’s books to reflect fair value on that date so that 
the purchase price exceeded the fair value of the identifiable assets, generating goodwill. 
On the date of the acquisition, Tonga’s shareholders’ equity was $980,000, and its liabilities 
totaled $80,000. Tonga reported no goodwill on its balance sheet.
 
 
Homer made the following journal entry to record the acquisition:
 
Current Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
210,000
Depreciable Assets (net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
700,000
Goodwill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120,000
 
Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80,000
 
Common Stock—Par . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
150,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
800,000
a. What was the carrying value on Tonga’s books of its total assets just before the 
acquisition?
b. What was the carrying value of depreciable assets of Tonga just before the acquisition?
25. Effect of equity method versus consolidation. Exhibit 14.11 presents a spreadsheet that we 
use to compare the effects of using the equity method with using consolidated financial 
statements. The Web site for this book contains an Excel spreadsheet that duplicates the 
one in Exhibit 14.11. Download this spreadsheet in preparing your solution to this exercise. 
You will change only the cell marked in yellow.
a. For this part, assume that Parent owns 80% of Sub. Respond to the following questions:
 
(1)  Why is net income the same independent of whether Parent uses the equity method 
or prepares consolidated financial statements with Sub?
 
(2)  Why is the ratio of liabilities to assets higher if Parent prepares consolidated finan-
cial statements with Sub than when it uses the equity method?
b. For this part, change Parent’s ownership interest in Sub from 80% to 60%. Respond to 
the following questions:
 
(1)  Why does net income decrease for the change in ownership percentage, indepen-
dent of whether Parent uses the equity method or prepares consolidated financial 
statements?
 
(2)  Why do total assets using the equity method decrease but total assets on the 
consolidated balance sheet remain the same with the decrease in the ownership 
percentage?
 
(3)  Why do total liabilities using the equity method remain the same with the decrease 
in the ownership percentage?
 
(4)  Why do total liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet remain the same with the 
decrease in the ownership percentage?
 
(5)  Why does total shareholders’ equity decrease using the equity method but remain 
the same on the consolidated balance sheet with the decrease?
 
(6)  Why does the ratio of liabilities to assets on the consolidated balance sheet remain 
the same with the decrease in the ownership percentage?
26. Effect of errors on financial statements. Using the notation O/S (overstated), U/S (under-
stated), or NO (no effect), indicate the effects on assets, liabilities, shareholders’ equity, and 
net income of each of the independent errors that follow. Ignore income tax effects.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

576
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
a. In applying the equity method, P correctly accrues its share of S’s net income for the 
year. When receiving a dividend, P credits Dividend Revenue.
b. P acquired 30% of S on January 1 of the current year for an amount in excess of the 
carrying value of S’s net assets. The excess relates to patents. P correctly accounted for 
its share of S’s net income and dividends for the year but neglected to amortize any of 
the excess purchase price.
c. During the current year, P sold inventory items to S, its wholly owned subsidiary, at a 
profit. S sold these inventory items, and S paid P for them before the end of the year. 
The firms made no elimination entry for this intercompany sale on the consolidation 
work sheet.
d. Refer to part c. Assume that S owes P $10,000 for intercompany purchases at year-end. 
The firm made no elimination entry for this intercompany debt.
e. P owns 90% of S. P treats the noncontrolling interest in consolidated subsidiaries as a 
liability. In preparing a consolidated work sheet, the firms made no entry to accrue the 
noncontrolling interest’s share of S’s net income or of S’s net assets.
PROBLEMS
27. Preparing a consolidated balance sheet. The first two columns of Exhibit 14.12 present 
information from the accounting records of Ely Company and Sims Company at the end 
of the current year. Ely Company acquired 100% of the common stock of Sims Company 
Spreadsheet for Studying the Effects of the 
Equity Method and Consolidation
(Exercise 25)
A
B
C
D
1
2
To see how things change, alter this number
80.0%
[Third column 
not meaningful 
unless ownership 
exceeds 50%]
3
Equity 
Method 
Parent Only
Percent 
Owned 
Sub
4
Income Statement
Consolidated
5
Revenues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000
$  400
$ 1,400
6
Equity in Earnings of Sub  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7
Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(700)
(300)
(1,000)
8
Noncontrolling Interest in Net Income of Sub [Note A]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (20)
9
Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  380
$  100
$   380
10
Note A: Noncontrolling Interest Owns (1 – Parent’s Fraction)
20.0%
11
Balance Sheet
12
Assets, Other Than Investment in Sub. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,000
$2,000
$ 5,000
13
Investment in Sub . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   400
    —
     —
14
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,400
$2,000
$ 5,000
15
Total Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,800
$1,500
$ 3,300
16
Noncontrolling Interest in Net Assets of Sub  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
100
17
Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,600
   500
  1,600
18
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,400
$2,000
$ 5,000
EXHIBIT 14.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

577
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
on January 1 of the current year for $70,000 cash. On this date, the balance in the Retained 
Earnings account of Sims Company was $42,000. Any excess purchase price relates to 
goodwill. Ely Company has not recorded a goodwill impairment. The receivables of Ely 
Company and the liabilities of Sims Company contain an advance from Ely Company to 
Sims Company of $7,500. Enter the appropriate amounts in the Consolidated column for 
a consolidated balance sheet of Ely Company and Sims Company on December 31 of the 
current year.
28. Preparing a consolidated balance sheet. The first two columns of Exhibit 14.13 present 
information from the accounting records of Company P and Company S on December 31, 
2014. Company P acquired 100% of the common stock of Company S on January 1, 2013, 
Ely Company and Sims Company Information from the 
Accounting Records on December 31 of the Current Year
(Problem 27)
Company P and Company S
Information from the Accounting Records on December 31, 2014
(Problem 28)
Ely 
Company
Sims 
Company
Consolidated
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 12,000
$  5,000
Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  25,000
  15,000
Investment in Sims Company  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  78,000
—
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  85,000
  80,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$200,000
$100,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 45,000
$ 40,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  50,000
  10,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 105,000
  50,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . .
$200,000
$100,000
Company P
Company S
Consolidated
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   36,000
$ 26,000
Accounts and Notes Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   180,000
  50,000
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   440,000
 250,000
Investment in Company S 
 
(Using the Equity Method)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   726,000
—
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Net). . . . . . . . . . . . .
   600,000
 424,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,982,000
$750,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts and Notes Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  110,000
$ 59,000
Other Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   286,000
  21,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,200,000
 500,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
 100,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   386,000
  70,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . .
$1,982,000
$750,000
EXHIBIT 14.12
EXHIBIT 14.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

578
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
Peak Company and Valley Company
Information from the Accounting Records 
on December 31 of the Current Year
Acquisition Cost Is $50,000
(Problem 29)
Peak 
Company
Valley 
Company
Consolidated
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  33,000
$  6,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42,000
20,000
Investment in Valley Company 
 
(Using the Equity Method)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56,000
—
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  123,000
  85,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 254,000
$111,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  80,000
$ 25,000
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50,000
30,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
5,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  114,000
  51,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . .
$ 254,000
$111,000
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 400,000
$125,000
Equity in Earnings of Valley Company. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
—
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(320,000)
(90,000)
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(44,000)
(20,000)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (12,000)
  (5,000)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  34,000
$ 10,000
EXHIBIT 14.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
when the balance in Company S’s retained earnings was $40,000. Company P attributes 
any excess of acquisition cost over the carrying value of the net assets of Company S to 
a building with a 10-year remaining life as of January 1, 2013. Company P holds a note 
issued by Company S in the amount of $16,400 on December 31, 2014.
a. Enter the appropriate amounts in the Consolidated column for a consolidated balance 
sheet of Company P and Company S on December 31, 2014.
b. Compute the acquisition cost of Company P’s investment in Company S on January 1, 
2013.
c. Prepare an analysis that explains the changes in the Investment in Company S account 
between January 1, 2013, and December 31, 2014.
29. Equity method and consolidated financial statements. The first two columns of Exhibit 14.14
present information from the accounting records of Peak Company and Valley Company 
on December 31 of the current year. Peak Company acquired 100% of the common stock 
of Valley Company on January 1 of this year for $50,000 cash. The shareholders’ equity of 
Valley Company on January 1 comprised $5,000 of common stock and $45,000 of retained 
earnings. Valley Company earned $10,000 and declared and paid dividends of $4,000 dur-
ing the current year. Advances from Peak Company to Valley Company on December 
31 total $8,000; Peak includes the advances in its Accounts Receivable; Valley shows the 
advances in its Accounts Payable.
a. Give the journal entries that Peak Company made on its books on January 1 of the 
current year to acquire the common stock of Valley Company and to apply the equity 
method during the current year.
b. Insert the amounts in the Consolidated column of Exhibit 14.14 for a consolidated 
balance sheet and a consolidated income statement for Peak Company and Valley 
Company.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

579
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
c. Assume for parts c, d, and e that Peak Company paid $70,000, instead of $50,000, for all 
of the common stock of Valley Company. The fair values of Valley Company’s recorded 
assets and liabilities equaled their carrying values. Valley Company holds a patent that 
resulted from the firm’s internal research and development efforts. The patent has a 
zero carrying value, a $20,000 fair value, and a 10-year remaining life on the date of 
the acquisition. Give the journal entries that Peak Company would make on its books 
on January 1 of the current year to acquire the common stock of Valley Company and 
to apply the equity method during the year. Peak Company included amortization of 
the patent in Selling and Administrative Expenses. The amortization of the patent is a 
permanent difference between book income and taxable income. That is, for financial 
reporting, Peak will amortize the cost of the patent to expense, but for tax reporting, 
none of that cost is ever a deduction. If Peak were to sell the patent, it would compute 
taxable gain or loss on sale as proceeds less the fair value allocated to the patent at the 
time of acquisition. Thus, income tax expense will not change as a result of the patent 
amortization.
d. Exhibit 14.15 presents information for Peak Company and Valley Company at the end 
of the current year assuming that Peak Company paid $70,000 for all of the common 
stock of Valley Company on January 1 of the current year. Enter the amounts indicated 
by a question mark (?) on the books of Peak Company as of December 31 of the cur-
rent year. Hint: Refer to the amounts in the entries in part c.
e. Insert the amounts in the Consolidated column of Exhibit 14.15 for a consolidated 
balance sheet and a consolidated income statement for Peak Company and Valley 
Company.
Peak Company and Valley Company
Information from the Accounting Records on 
December 31 of the Current Year
Acquisition Cost Is $70,000
(Problem 29)
Peak 
Company
Valley 
Company
Consolidated
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  13,000
$  6,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42,000
20,000
Investment in Valley Company 
 
(Using Equity Method) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
—
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  123,000
  85,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$       ?
$111,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  80,000
$ 25,000
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50,000
30,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
5,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
         ?
  51,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . .
$       ?
$111,000
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 400,000
$125,000
Equity in Earnings of Valley Company. . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
—
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(320,000)
(90,000)
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
?
(20,000)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (12,000)
   (5,000)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$       ?
$ 10,000
EXHIBIT 14.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

580
Chapter 14 
Intercorporate Investments in Common Stock
30. Equity method and consolidated financial statements with noncontrolling interest. The first 
two columns of Exhibit 14.16 present information from the accounting records of Par-
ent Company and Sub Company on December 31 of the current year. Parent Company 
acquired 80% of the common stock of Sub Company on January 1 of the current year for 
$96,000 cash. The shareholders’ equity of Sub Company on January 1 comprised $50,000 
of common stock and $70,000 of retained earnings. Sub Company earned $20,000 and 
declared and paid dividends of $8,000 during the current year. Insert the amounts in the 
Consolidated column of Exhibit 14.16 for a consolidated balance sheet and a consolidated 
income statement for Parent Company and Sub Company.
31. Effect of intercorporate investment policies on financial statements. Ganton follows a policy 
of holding less than a 50% ownership interest in the corporations that bottle its beverages. 
Exhibit 14.17 presents selected balance sheet data for Ganton and for its bottling affiliates 
on December 31, 2013. The first column shows amounts for Ganton as reported, with 
Ganton using the equity method to account for investments in its bottlers. The second 
column shows amounts for Ganton’s bottlers as reflected in a note to Ganton’s financial 
statements. Ganton’s investment in its bottlers exceeds its share of the carrying value of its 
share of the net assets of these bottlers by $785 million on December 31, 2013.
Parent Company and Sub Company
Information from the Accounting Records on 
December 31 of the Current Year
(Problem 30)
Parent 
Company
Sub 
Company
Consolidated
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  38,000
$ 12,000
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63,000
32,000
Investment in Sub Company (Using Equity Method)  . .
105,600
—
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  296,400
 160,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 503,000
$204,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  85,000
$ 32,000
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  150,000
  40,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 235,000
$ 72,000
Noncontrolling Interest in Net Assets 
 
of Sub Company  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  20,000
$ 50,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  248,000
  82,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 268,000
$132,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . .
$ 503,000
$204,000
Sales Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 800,000
$145,000
Equity in Earnings of Sub Company  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,000
—
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(620,000)
(85,000)
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (135,000)
(30,000)
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (24,000)
  (10,000)
Net Income of Consolidated Entity. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  37,000
$ 20,000
Noncontrolling Interest in Net Income 
 
of Sub Company  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       —
      —
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  37,000
$ 20,000
EXHIBIT 14.16
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

581
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
a. Suggest reasons why the amount for other noncurrent assets in the consolidated column 
exceeds the sum of the amounts for noncurrent assets on the accounting records of 
Ganton and of its bottling affiliates.
b. Compute the liabilities-to-assets ratio and the debt-equity ratio for Ganton assuming 
Ganton (1) accounts for its investments using the equity method, and (2) consolidates 
its bottlers.
c. Suggest reasons why Ganton might choose to own less than 50% of its bottlers.
Ganton Condensed Balance Sheet Data
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 31)
Ganton as 
Reported
Bottling 
Affiliates
Consolidated
ASSETS
Current Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,105
$14,251
$26,356
Investments in Bottling Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,289
—
—
Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 23,875
 44,636
 71,116
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$43,269
$58,887
$97,472
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$13,225
$13,930
$27,155
Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  8,300
 23,374
 31,674
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$21,525
$37,304
$58,829
Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$21,744
$21,583
$21,744
Noncontrolling Interest in Bottling Affiliates. . . . . . .
     —
     —
 16,899
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$21,744
$21,583
 38,643
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . .
$43,269
$58,887
$97,472
EXHIBIT 14.17
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapters 8–14 discussed the accounting for assets and liabilities under U.S. GAAP and IFRS. 
Changes in assets and liabilities often cause shareholders’ equity1 to change. Changes in share-
holders’ equity result from three types of transactions:
1. Capital contributions. Firms issue common or preferred stock to obtain funds to finance 
 operating and investing activities or to compensate employees.
2. Distributions. Firms distribute assets to shareholders as dividends or by repurchasing com-
mon stock.
3. Earnings (or losses). Firms use assets financed by creditors and owners to generate net income.
Exhibit 15.1 presents the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet of Great Deal, Inc., 
excerpted from the balance sheet displayed in Exhibit 1.1.
1. Shareholders’ equity is a residual interest. It represents the shareholders’ claim on the assets 
of a firm after the firm satisfies all other claims.
2. All corporations issue common shares. Some also issue preferred shares, which have a claim 
that is senior to that of the common shareholders. Great Deal had no preferred shares out-
standing in fiscal 2012.
3. Common stock usually has a par or stated value. Great Deal’s common stock has a $0.10 
par value per share. Firms report amounts received from issuing common stock in excess of 
the par or stated value as Additional Paid-In Capital, or Capital in Excess of Par Value, or a 
similar account title. Great Deal’s amount of Additional Paid-In Capital exceeds the amount 
in Common Stock, indicating that Great Deal issued common stock for more than $0.10 par 
value, a common practice among publicly traded firms.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Shareholders’ Equity: 
Capital Contributions 
and Distributions
C h a p t e r 
15
 1 Common business practice in the United States uses the terms shareholders’ equity and stockholders’ equity inter-
changeably. Because stock means inventory in the United Kingdom, the IFRS usage is, primarily, shareholders’ 
equity.
1. Understand the different priority claims 
of shareholders and the disclosure of 
those claims in the shareholders’ equity 
section of the balance sheet.
2. Understand the accounting for the 
 issuance of shares of stock.
3. Understand the accounting for 
 dividends and stock splits.
4. Understand the accounting for the 
acquisition and reissuance of treasury 
stock.
5. Understand the accounting for option 
arrangements.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

584
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
4. Firms accumulate information about revenues and expenses during a reporting period to 
prepare the income statement. Net income for a period increases retained earnings; a net 
loss reduces retained earnings.2
5. Retained earnings measures the cumulative net assets generated by earnings in excess of 
dividends declared. Great Deal’s retained earnings exceeds the capital provided by issuing 
common stock. Thus, for Great Deal, the retention of net assets generated by operations 
represents the primary source of funds. This is true for most successful businesses.
6. Firms may periodically distribute net assets generated by earnings to shareholders as a 
dividend. Firms reduce net assets and retained earnings for the distribution. Great Deal 
declared dividends of $234 million on its common stock during fiscal 2012.
This chapter explores these concepts in greater depth and expands the discussion of sharehold-
ers’ equity by considering the following:
1. The reasons for issuing common and preferred stock and the differences between the two 
types of stock.
2. The use of options in connection with the issuance of common stock.
3. The reasons for repurchasing shares of stock and the accounting for share repurchases.
As in previous chapters, we discuss both U.S. GAAP and IFRS. We begin with capital contri-
butions and then move to distributions. We then turn to option arrangements.
CAPITAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Most publicly traded firms operate as corporations. The corporate form has at least three 
advantages:
1. The corporate form provides the owner (shareholder) with limited liability. This means 
that, should the corporation become insolvent, creditors can claim only the assets of the 
corporate entity. Creditors cannot claim the assets of the individual owners. In contrast, 
creditors of partnerships and proprietorships have a claim on the owners’ business and 
personal assets.3
2. The corporate form allows the firm to raise funds by issuing shares to investors.
Great Deal, Inc.
Disclosure of Shareholders’ Equity
(amounts in millions of US$)
February 27
2013
2012
Preferred Stock ($1.00 par value; authorized shares: 400,000); 
issued and outstanding—none  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    0
$    0
Common Stock ($0.10 par value; authorized shares: 1.0 billion), 
issued and outstanding shares: 2013 and 2012: 418,815,000 
and 413,684,000 shares, respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42
41
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
441
205
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,797
4,714
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40
(317)
Noncontrolling Interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   644
   513
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,964
$5,156
EXHIBIT 15.1
 2 A debit balance in Retained Earnings is an accumulated deficit.
 3 In recent years, many partnerships and sole proprietorships have become limited liability companies (LLCs) or 
limited liability partnerships (LLPs). These arrangements limit the owners’ personal liability for business debts 
and other obligations arising from negative surprises involving the business, such as lawsuits filed by customers.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

585
Capital Contributions
3. The corporate form facilitates the transfer of ownership interests because owners can sell 
their shares without affecting the ongoing operations of the firm. The transfer is a transac-
tion between shareholders. It does not involve the firm whose shares change hands.
The corporation has legal status separate from its owners. Investors make capital contributions 
under a contract between themselves and the corporation. Various laws and contracts govern 
the rights and obligations of a shareholder:
1. The corporation laws of the jurisdiction in which incorporation takes place.
2. The articles of incorporation or the corporate charter. This contract sets out the agreement 
between the firm and the jurisdiction in which the business incorporates. The jurisdiction 
grants to the firm the privileges of operating as a corporation and of obtaining capital 
through the issue of shares of stock.
3. The corporate bylaws. The board of directors adopts bylaws, which are the rules and regu-
lations governing the internal affairs of the corporation.
4. The capital stock contract. Each type of capital stock has its own provisions on matters 
such as voting, sharing in earnings, distributing assets generated by earnings, and sharing 
in assets in case of dissolution of the firm. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the disclo-
sure of information about the rights of each type of capital stock outstanding.4
COMMON SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
All corporations issue common stock. Common shareholders have a claim on the assets of a 
firm after creditors and preferred shareholders have received amounts promised to them. Fre-
quently, corporations grant voting rights only to common shares. This means that common 
shareholders have the right to elect members of the board of directors and to decide certain 
corporate policies.
ISSUING CAPITAL STOCK
Firms may issue capital stock (preferred or common) for cash, or for noncash assets, or for ser-
vices rendered. Some issuances of common stock result from various option arrangements. We 
consider option arrangements later in this chapter.
 4 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 129, “Disclosure of Information about Capital Struc-
ture,” 1997 (Codification Topic 505); IASB, International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial 
Statements,” revised 2003.
T E R M I N O L O G Y  N O T E
The term capital can mean any of the following things:
■ Cash (“The firm raised capital with a stock issue”).
■  Long-term assets (“The firm’s capital assets have 
depreciable lives between 7 and 10 years”).
■  All sources of funding, that is, all items on the right side 
of the balance sheet (“The firm’s weighted-average 
cost of capital is 11%”).
■ Shareholders’ equity.
■  Contributed capital, that part of shareholders’ equity 
arising from owners’ contributions of cash and other 
assets in exchange for shares.
We recommend that you use this word to mean only 
contributed capital, but the rest of the world will 
continue to use the word to mean whatever is convenient 
for the speaker at the time. You should be attuned to the 
various meanings and understand what a particular user 
means at a particular time by the word capital. See the 
discussion in the Glossary for capital.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

586
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
Issue for Cash Firms usually issue shares for cash at the time of their initial incorporation 
and at periodic intervals when they need additional shareholder funds. Firms generally issue 
common shares, both at the time of initial incorporation and in subsequent years, for amounts 
greater than par (nominal or stated) value.5 The firm credits the excess of issue proceeds over 
par (or stated) value to the Additional Paid-In Capital account.
Example 1 Assume Great Deal issues 1,000 shares of its $0.10 par value common stock for 
$100,000. The journal entry is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Common Stock—$0.10 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
99,900
Issue for Noncash Assets Firms also issue common stock for assets other than cash, 
for example, to acquire another firm. The firm records the shares exchanged for noncash assets 
at the fair value of the shares given. If the firm cannot make a reasonable estimate of the fair 
value of the shares given, then the value of the shares exchanged is recorded as the fair value of 
the assets received.6 A firm might not be able to make a reasonable estimate of the fair value of 
its shares if the firm is a private company and its shares are not traded.
Example 2 Great Deal issues 1,000 shares of its $0.10 par value common stock (and a fair 
value of $100 per share) to acquire another firm’s assets having the following fair values: 
accounts receivable, $6,000; inventories, $12,000; land, $10,000; building, $62,000; and equip-
ment, $10,000. The journal entry to record the exchange is as follows:
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
62,000
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Common Stock—$0.10 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
99,900
Issue for Services Received If a firm issues common stock in return for services other 
than from employees (discussed later), the firm records the transaction at the fair value of the 
services received if it can more reliably measure this amount than the fair value of the shares 
issued. Otherwise, the firm records the transaction at the fair value of the shares issued.
Example 3 Great Deal issues 100 shares of its $0.10 par value common stock to attorneys for 
$10,000 of legal services. The journal entry is as follows:
 
Legal Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
9,900
 5 Not all common shares have a par or stated value; some firms issue no-par shares. The laws of the jurisdiction 
in which a firm incorporates determine whether the firm issues par value or no-par value shares. Par or stated 
values have less relevance now than they did years ago when the par value established the lower limit on the 
amount for which a firm could issue shares.
 6 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 141R (revised 2007), “Business Combinations,” 2007 
(Codification Topic 805); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 3, “Business Combinations,” revised 
2008.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

587
Corporate Distributions
PREFERRED SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Owners of preferred stock have a claim on the assets of a firm that is senior to the claim of 
common shareholders. Preferred shares also carry special rights. The senior status and special 
rights reduce the risks of preferred shareholders relative to common shareholders. Preferred 
shareholders should therefore expect a lower return than common shareholders. The rights of 
preferred shareholders and the obligations of the issuing firm vary and include the following:
Dividend Rights Preferred shares often entitle their holders to dividends at a certain 
rate, which the firm must pay before it can pay dividends to common shareholders. Firms 
may sometimes postpone or omit preferred dividends. Most preferred shares, however, have 
cumulative  dividend rights, which means that a firm must pay all current and previously post-
poned preferred dividends before it can pay any dividends on common shares.
Call Provisions Callable preferred shares provide the issuer with the right, but not the obli-
gation, to repurchase preferred shares at a specified price. The price may vary according to a 
preset schedule. A call provision is valuable to the issuing firm. To see why, suppose that financ-
ing becomes available at a cost lower than the rate specified for the preferred shares. The issu-
ing firm can reduce its financing costs by issuing new securities and then exercising its right to 
reacquire the preferred shares at a fixed price. This option to buy the shares reduces the value 
of those shares to potential preferred shareholders. Thus, a firm will receive a smaller amount 
from issuing callable shares than from issuing non-callable shares.
Convertible Feature Convertible preferred shares give the holder of preferred shares the 
right, but not the obligation, to convert the preferred shares into common shares under certain 
conditions. Convertible preferred shares provide the security holders with a relatively assured 
dividend, a claim that is senior to that of common shareholders, and the possibility of capi-
tal appreciation (by converting the preferred shares into common shares if the market price of 
the common shares rises). Because of the conversion option, changes in the market price of 
convertible preferred shares often parallel changes in the market price of common shares. The 
firm benefits from issuing convertible preferred shares because these shares usually have a lower 
dividend rate than purchasers otherwise would have required to buy the shares. We describe the 
accounting treatment for convertible preferred stock later in this chapter.
 PROBLEM  15.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for capital contributions. Prepare journal entries to record the following 
transactions for Healy Corporation during the current year under U.S. GAAP. The 
accounting period of Healy Corporation ends on December 31.
a. Issued 100,000 of $10 par value common stock for $14 per share on January 2.
b. Issued 10,000 shares of common stock on January 2 in the acquisition of a patent. 
The firm has no separate information about the fair value of the patent.
c. Issued 5,000 shares of $5 par value preferred shares on January 31 for $10 per share.
CORPORATE DISTRIBUTIONS
Firms use net assets to generate more net assets through the earnings process. Firms typically 
retain some or all of the net assets generated by earnings, causing net assets to increase, along 
with retained earnings. The retention of net assets generated by earnings generally increases the 
market price of the firm’s common shares. Some firms pay periodic dividends to the common 
shareholders. Each common shareholder receives the same dividend per share. This section dis-
cusses corporate dividend policies and the accounting for dividends.
Firms may also choose to use the net assets generated by earnings to repurchase common 
shares. Repurchases result in cash outflows for a firm, similar to paying a cash dividend. In the 
case of share repurchases, only those shareholders that choose to sell their shares receive cash. This 
section discusses business reasons for stock repurchases and the accounting for such repurchases.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

588
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
DIVIDENDS
The board of directors has the legal authority to declare dividends. Directors must conclude 
that declaring a dividend is both legal and financially desirable.
Legal Limits on Dividends—Statutory (by Law) Jurisdiction-specific corporate 
laws limit directors’ freedom to declare dividends. Without these limits, directors might dis-
sipate the firm’s assets for the benefit of common shareholders, harming creditors and other 
non-shareholding stakeholders.
One example of a limitation of the declaration of dividends provides that the board may 
not declare dividends “out of capital.” This means that the board may not pay dividends by 
debiting the contributed capital accounts (which result from fund-raising transactions with 
owners). Rather, the board must pay dividends “out of earnings” by debiting them against the 
Retained Earnings account (which results from earnings transactions). Some jurisdictions allow 
corporations to declare dividends out of the earnings of the current period even if the Retained 
Earnings account has a debit (negative) balance because of accumulated losses from previous 
periods.
Statutory limits generally do not influence the accounting for shareholders’ equity and divi-
dends. A balance sheet does not provide the details of amounts legally available for dividends, 
but it should disclose information necessary for the user to apply the rules of the corporation’s 
jurisdiction of incorporation.
Legal Limits on Dividends—Contractual Contracts with bondholders, other lenders, 
and preferred shareholders often limit dividend payments. For example, a bond contract may 
require that total liabilities not exceed the total amount of shareholders’ equity. Such a provi-
sion involves curtailing dividends so that the necessary ratio is achieved. Financial statement 
notes must disclose significant limitations on dividend declarations.7
Dividends and Corporate Financial Policy Directors usually declare dividends less 
than the legal maximum and thereby allow retained earnings to increase for several reasons:
1. Available cash did not increase by as much as the amount of earnings, so paying the maxi-
mum legally permitted dividends would require raising more cash.
2. Restricting dividends in prosperous years may permit stable or growing dividend payments 
in poor years.
3. The firm may need funds for expansion of working capital or for plant and equipment.
4. Using cash to reduce the amount of borrowings, rather than pay dividends, may be prudent.
ACCOUNTING FOR DIVIDENDS
A firm may pay dividends in cash, other assets, or shares of its common stock.
Cash Dividends When the board of directors declares a cash dividend equal to 150,000, the 
entry is as follows:
 
Retained Earnings (Dividends Declared). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
150,000
 
Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
150,000
Once the board of directors declares a dividend, the dividend becomes a legal liability of 
the corporation. Dividends Payable appears as a current liability on the balance sheet if the 
firm has not yet paid the dividends by the end of the accounting period. When the firm pays 
the dividends, the entry is as follows:
 7 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 5, “Accounting for Contingencies,” 1975 (Codification 
Topic 450). The required disclosure is implicit in IASB, International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of 
Financial Statements,” revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

589
Corporate Distributions
 
Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
150,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
150,000
Property Dividends Corporations sometimes distribute assets other than cash; such a div-
idend is known as a dividend in kind or a property dividend.
The accounting for property dividends resembles that for cash dividends, except that when 
the firm pays the dividend, it credits the asset given up, rather than Cash. The amount debited 
to Retained Earnings equals the fair value of the assets distributed. When this fair value dif-
fers from the carrying value of the assets distributed, the firm recognizes a gain or loss in net 
income.8
Stock Dividends The retention of earnings may lead to a substantial increase in sharehold-
ers’ equity, as the firm accumulates net assets that it keeps invested in the business. To indi-
cate such a commitment of assets generated by reinvested earnings, the board of directors may 
declare a stock dividend. The accounting involves a debit to Retained Earnings and credits to 
contributed capital accounts. The stock dividend does not affect total shareholders’ equity. It 
reallocates amounts from Retained Earnings to the contributed capital accounts. When the 
firm declares a stock dividend, shareholders receive additional shares of stock in proportion 
to their existing holdings. If, for example, the firm issues a 5% stock dividend, each shareholder 
receives one additional share for every 20 shares held before the dividend. Both U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS require firms to record the shares issued in a stock dividend at their fair value.9
Example 4 A firm has 1,000,000 shares of no-par common stock outstanding prior to declar-
ing a 5% stock dividend. The shares traded at a price of $18 per share. The 5% stock dividend 
resulted in the issuance of 50,000 (= 0.05 × 1,000,000) additional shares. The journal entry to 
record the stock dividend is as follows:
 
Retained Earnings (Dividends Declared). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
900,000
 
Common Stock—No Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
900,000
The stock dividend re-labels a portion of the retained earnings that was legally available 
for dividend declarations as a more permanent form of shareholders’ equity. The firm does not 
have this cash available for dividends. The stock dividend signals to readers of the balance sheet 
the commitment to investment.
STOCK SPLITS
Stock splits resemble stock dividends. The corporation issues additional shares of stock to 
shareholders in proportion to their existing holdings. The firm receives no additional assets. 
Firms typically execute a stock split in one of two ways:10
1. Reduce the par value of the common stock in proportion to the new number of shares issued. 
A corporation may, for example, have 1,000 shares of $10 par value stock outstanding and 
exchange those shares for 2,000 shares of $5 par value stock (a two-for-one split) or for 
4,000 shares of $2.50 par value stock (a four-for-one split).
2. Make no change in par value but issue additional shares of the same par value. For example, 
a corporation executing a two-for-one stock split would issue additional shares equal to the 
number of shares already outstanding.
 8 FASB, Opinion No. 29, “Accounting for Nonmonetary Transactions,” 1973 (Codification Topic 845). This 
accounting is consistent with IASB pronouncements on related topics.
 9 Committee on Accounting Procedure, Accounting Research Bulletin No. 43, 1953, “Restatement and Revision 
of Accounting Research Bulletins Nos. 1–42,” 1953 (Codification Topic 505). This accounting is consistent with 
IASB pronouncements on related topics.
10 Firms may also execute a reverse stock split. In this case, firms reduce the number of outstanding shares, either 
by increasing the par value of the stock or by simply cancelling outstanding shares.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

590
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
A stock split accomplished by altering the par value in direct proportion to the number 
of new shares does not require a journal entry. If the change in par value is not proportional 
to the new number of shares or if the firm does not change the par value, the firm decreases 
Additional Paid-In Capital or Retained Earnings. The amount shown in the Common Stock 
account represents a different number of shares. Of course the firm must record the new num-
ber of shares held by each shareholder in the subsidiary capital stock records.
STOCK DIVIDENDS AND STOCK SPLITS: COMMONALITIES AND DIFFERENCES
Distinguishing a stock dividend from a stock split can be difficult. For example, consider a 50% 
increase in the number of shares. Does the firm account for this distribution as a stock divi-
dend, using the market value of the stock, or as a 1.5-for-one stock split, using the par value of 
the stock? Usually firms treat small-percentage distributions, say less than a 25% increase in the 
number of shares, as stock dividends and larger ones as stock splits.
Stock dividends and stock splits have little economic substance for shareholders. A pro-
portionate increase in the number of shares held by each shareholder does not change that 
shareholder’s ownership interest or proportionate voting power. Although the book value per 
common share (total common shareholders’ equity divided by the number of common shares 
outstanding) decreases, each shareholder has a proportionately larger number of shares, so the 
total book value of each shareholder’s interest remains unchanged.
Stock splits and stock dividends reduce the market value per share in inverse proportion to 
the split or dividend. For example, a two-for-one split results in a 50% reduction in the market 
price per share. Managers and governing boards might use stock splits and dividends to keep 
the market price per share within some target trading range. For example, the board of direc-
tors might think that a market price of $60 to $80 is an effective trading range for its stock. If 
the share price has risen to $150 in the market, the board of directors may declare a two-for-
one split, thus reducing the share price to $75.
 PROBLEM  15.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for dividends and stock splits. The shareholders’ equity section of the 
balance sheet of Baker Corporation on January 1 of the current year appears below:
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock, $10 par value, 25,000 shares issued and outstanding . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$250,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
50,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 150,000
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$450,000
Prepare journal entries for each of the following transactions of Baker Corporation for 
the current year. Ignore income taxes.
a. March 31: The board of directors declares a cash dividend of $0.50 per share. The 
firm will pay the dividend on April 15.
b. April 15: The firm pays the dividend declared on March 31.
c. June 30: The board of directors declares and distributes a 10% stock dividend. The 
market price per share on this date is $15.
d. December 31: The board of directors declares a two-for-one stock split and changes 
the par value of the common shares from $10 to $5.
STOCK REPURCHASES
Treasury stock or treasury shares are shares a firm has previously issued and later reacquired. 
Treasury shares do not receive dividends, do not have voting rights, and do not enter the calcu-
lation of earnings per share. This is because corporation laws do not consider treasury shares 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

591
Corporate Distributions
to be outstanding shares. Reasons for reacquiring outstanding common stock include the 
following:
1. To use in option arrangements. A firm can reacquire shares to fulfill commitments to deliver 
shares to its employees under employee stock option plans. Often the firm does this in 
order to maintain a roughly constant number of shares outstanding. Doing so avoids dilut-
ing existing shareholders’ voting interest and perhaps maintaining earnings per share.
2. To invest excess cash. Some firms believe that their own shares provide a good investment. 
Evidence supports the notion that share prices often increase after a firm announces a 
share repurchase program.
3. To defend against an unfriendly takeover bid. Two different motives are possible:
■ Share repurchases reduce common shareholders’ equity and increase the proportion of 
debt in the capital structure, making the firm more risky and therefore less attractive to 
an unfriendly bidder. Some firms even borrow cash to repurchase shares, which affects 
the debt ratios even more.
■ Share repurchases use cash and thereby reduce the attractiveness of the company to 
outsiders who believe that cash makes the company an attractive target.
4. To distribute cash to shareholders in a tax-advantaged way. Rather than pay dividends to 
all shareholders, many of whom will owe personal income taxes on the entire dividend 
amount, the firm can buy back shares from those who wish to receive cash. Some share-
holders will have lower tax rates on receipts from sales of shares than on dividend receipts.
ACCOUNTING FOR TREASURY SHARES
U.S. GAAP and IFRS on accounting for repurchases and reissuances of treasury shares fol-
low the principle that a corporation must never report a gain or loss on transactions involving 
its own shares.11 Even though the firm may sell the treasury shares for more, or less, than their 
acquisition cost, accounting does not report the gain, or loss, as a component of income. The 
required accounting views treasury stock purchases and sales as financing, not operating, trans-
actions. Therefore, accounting debits (for losses) or credits (for gains) the contributed capital 
account for these adjustments.
The two most common approaches for accounting for treasury shares under U.S. GAAP 
are:12
1. The cost method.
2. The constructive retirement method.
Both approaches reduce shareholders’ equity but the specific accounts affected differ. Both 
approaches are consistent with IFRS. IFRS requires only that firms reduce shareholders’ equity 
for the acquisition cost of the shares and report no gain or loss on treasury share transactions.13 
To illustrate these two approaches, assume that a firm originally issued 1,000 shares of $1 par 
value common stock for $40 per share and later reacquired them for $50 each.
Cost Method for Repurchasing Shares When a firm reacquires common shares under the cost 
method, it debits the Treasury Shares (or Treasury Stock) account with the total amount paid to 
reacquire the shares.
 
Treasury Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
The Treasury Stock account has a debit balance and therefore reduces total shareholders’ 
equity.
11 Accounting Principles Board, APB Opinion No. 6, “Status of Accounting Research Bulletins,” 1965 (Codification 
Topic 505); IASB, International Accounting Standard 32, “Financial Instruments: Presentation,” revised 2003.
12 A third approach, the par value method, is less widely used.
13 Committee on Accounting Procedure, Accounting Research Bulletin 43, “Restatement and Revision of Account-
ing Research Bulletins 1–42,” 1953 (Codification Topic 505); International Accounting Standards Board, Inter-
national Accounting Standard 32, “Financial Instruments: Presentation,” revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

592
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
Cost Method for Reissued Treasury Shares If the firm later reissues treasury shares for 
cash, it debits Cash for the amount received and credits Treasury Shares (or Treasury Stock) for 
the cost of the shares. The reissue price will usually differ from the amount paid to acquire the 
treasury shares. If the reissue price exceeds the acquisition price, the credit to make the entry 
balance is to Additional Paid-In Capital.14 If the firm reissued the 1,000 shares in this example 
for $55 a share, the entry under the cost method is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
55,000
 
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
5,000
Constructive Retirement Method for Repurchasing Shares When a firm uses the construc-
tive retirement method to account for treasury shares, it debits Common Stock for the par 
value of the repurchased shares, debits Additional Paid-In Capital for the difference between 
the original issue price of the shares and par value, and plugs Retained Earnings for any dif-
ference between the repurchase price ($50 in this case) and the original issue price ($40 in this 
case). Firms use this method when management and the governing board do not intend to reis-
sue shares within a reasonable amount of time or when laws define reacquired shares as retired 
shares. The journal entry to repurchase the shares under the constructive retirement method is 
as follows:
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,000
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
Constructive Retirement Method for Reissued Treasury Shares Firms that use the con-
structive retirement method do not have treasury shares to reissue. Any subsequent issuances 
of shares reflect issuances of new shares. The entry to record new share issuances is the same 
as described earlier in this chapter: credit Common Stock for the par value of the issued shares 
and credit Additional Paid-In Capital for the excess of the issue price over the par value. The 
journal entry is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
55,000
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
54,000
 PROBLEM  15.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for treasury stock transactions. Prepare journal entries for the following 
transactions of Crissie Corporation using the cost method to account for treasury stock 
transactions:
a. Reacquired 2,000 shares of $10 par value common stock on January 15 for $45 per 
share.
b. Issued 1,200 shares of treasury stock to employees upon the exercise of stock options 
at a price of $28 per share on April 26.
c. Reacquired 3,000 shares of $10 par value common stock for $52 per share on August 15.
(continued)
14 In some cases, the amount paid by the firm to reacquire the treasury shares exceeds the subsequent reissue price. 
Under the cost method, the firm debits the balance to Additional Paid-In Capital so long as that account has 
a sufficiently large credit balance. To the extent the required debit exceeds the credit balance in the Additional 
Paid-In Capital account, the firm reduces that account to zero and debits the excess to Retained Earnings.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

593
Corporate Distributions
d. Issued 1,600 shares of treasury stock to holders of 800 shares of convertible preferred 
stock, which had a carrying value of $80,000 on November 24. Crissie Corporation 
uses a first-in, first-out assumption on reissues of treasury stock and uses carrying 
values to record conversions of preferred stock.
e. Sold 1,500 shares of treasury stock on the open market for $47 per share on Decem-
ber 20.
OPTION ARRANGEMENTS
Corporations often sell, or exchange for goods and services, call options on their shares. 
A call option gives the holder the right to acquire shares of stock at a fixed price, called the 
strike price or exercise price. If the market price of the shares increases above the exercise price, 
the option holder benefits by exercising the option to purchase shares. The excess of the market 
price over the exercise price is the option’s intrinsic value.
Stock Options Many firms pay part of employees’ compensation by issuing call options on 
their own shares. These employee stock options (ESOs) permit the employees to purchase shares 
of the employer’s stock in the future at a fixed exercise price. Firms adopt stock option plans 
to motivate employees to take actions that will increase the market value of the firm’s common 
shares, to conserve cash, and, in the United States, to take advantage of the favorable tax treat-
ment that income tax laws accord this form of compensation.
Stock Purchase Rights Firms may also grant or sell stock purchase rights (or 
stock rights) to current shareholders. Stock rights give the shareholders the right to purchase 
shares of common stock at a specified price.
Stock Warrants Firms sometimes issue bonds with stock warrants that have the same fea-
tures as call options. The bond gives the holder the right to receive periodic interest payments 
and the principal amount at maturity. The stock warrant permits the holder to exchange the 
warrant and a specified amount of cash for shares of the firm’s stock. Attaching a stock war-
rant permits the firm to issue bonds at a lower interest cost than the market would require for 
bonds without a warrant.
Arrangements such as stock options, stock rights, and stock warrants have economic value. 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to recognize the fair value of employee stock options 
in the accounting records,15 as discussed next.
Employee Stock Option Plans An understanding of the accounting for employee 
stock options (ESOs) requires several definitions. Refer to Figure 15.1. The grant date is the 
date a firm awards a stock option to employees. The vesting date is the first date employees 
can exercise their stock options. The vesting period is the period between the grant date and the 
vesting date. Vesting periods usually depend on one or more conditions being met, such as the 
following:
■  A vesting period that depends only on the passage of time is a service condition;
■  A vesting period that depends on achieving a specified level of profitability is an example 
of a performance condition;
■  A vesting period that depends on the firm’s stock price reaching a specified target is a 
market condition.
Vesting conditions serve two purposes:
1. They increase the likelihood that employees continue to work for the firm.
2. They motivate employees to take actions that increase the stock price.
15 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 123R, “Share-Based Payment,” 2004 (Codification 
Topic 718); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 2, “Share-Based Payment,” 2004.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

594
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
The exercise date is the date employees exchange the option and cash for shares of stock. 
The exercise price is the price specified in the stock option contract for purchasing the stock. 
The market price is the price of the stock as it trades in the market.
The value of a stock option results from two elements:
1. The benefit element refers to the benefit realized on the exercise date because the market 
price of the stock exceeds the exercise price. This difference is the intrinsic value of the 
option on the exercise date.
2. The time value element is the length of the period during which the holder can exercise the 
option.
It is not possible to measure the amount of the benefit element before the exercise date. Stock 
options with exercise prices less than the current market price of the stock (described as in the 
money) have a higher value than stock options with exercise prices exceeding the current market 
price of the stock (described as out of the money). The time value element results from the pos-
sibility of increases in the market price of the stock during the exercise period. Time value is 
larger the longer the exercise period and the more volatile the market price of the stock. A stock 
option whose exercise price exceeds the current market price (zero intrinsic value and therefore 
zero value for the benefit element) has economic value because of the possibility that the market 
price will exceed the exercise price on the exercise date (positive value for the second element). As 
the expiration date of the option approaches, the value of the second element approaches zero.16
The accounting for employee stock options involves the following:
1. Measure the fair value of stock options on the date of the grant using an option- pricing 
model.17 Total compensation cost is the number of options the firm expects to vest times 
the fair value per option. Firms use their historical experience on forfeitures due to employ-
ees terminating employment prior to vesting to estimate the expected number of options 
that will vest.
2. Amortize the fair value of the stock options on the date of the grant over the requisite 
service period. The requisite service period is the period over which employees provide ser-
vices in order to vest in the options. The firm debits Compensation Expense and credits 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) for the amount amortized. The firm does not 
re-compute the fair value of the option at each succeeding balance sheet date to reflect new 
information.
3. When employees exercise their options, the firm debits Cash for the proceeds, debits Addi-
tional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) for any amounts credited to that account in step 2
above, credits Common Stock for the par value of the shares issued, and credits Additional 
Paid-In Capital for any excess of the cash received plus the amount amortized in step 2
above over the par value of the shares issued.
Market
Price 
Exercise
Price 
Grant
Date
Vesting
Date
Exercise
Date
Graphic Depiction of Stock Option Arrangement
FIGURE 15.1
16 For an elaboration on the theory of option pricing, see Fischer Black and Myron Scholes, “The Pricing of 
Options and Corporate Liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy (May–June 1973), pp. 637–654.
17 To calculate the fair value of the option, option pricing models incorporate information about the current mar-
ket price, exercise price, expected time between grant and exercise, expected market price volatility of the stock, 
expected dividends, and risk-free interest rate.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

595
Corporate Distributions
Example 5 Fulton Group awards options to employees on March 1, 2013, to acquire 1,000 
shares of $0.10 par value common stock at an exercise price of $35 per share. The firm uses an 
option-pricing model to value the options at $8,000. The requisite service period is two years. 
All of the options vest, and employees exercise the options on December 31, 2016, when the 
market price of the stock is $50 per share. Fulton Group’s fiscal year ends on December 31. 
Fulton Group makes the following entries:
 
March 1, 2013
No entry
 
December 31, 2013
Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
 
December 31, 2014
Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
 
December 31, 2015
Cash (1,000 × $35) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
 
Common Stock—Par Value (1,000 × $0.10). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (8,000 + [1,000 × ($35 – $0.10)]) . . . . . 
 
42,900
This accounting recognizes an expense as the firm receives the benefits ($4,000 each in both 
fiscal 2013 and 2014) and increases contributed capital for the cash equivalent value of employ-
ees’ services rendered to obtain the stock ($8,000) and the cash received when employees exer-
cise their options ($35,000).
Stock Rights Like stock options, stock rights give their holder the right to acquire shares of 
stock at a specified price. The major differences between stock options and stock rights are as 
follows:
■ 
Firms grant stock options to employees. Employees receive them as a form of compensation 
and in general may not transfer or sell them to others. Therefore, employee stock options 
do not trade in public markets.
■ 
Firms grant stock rights to current shareholders. Shareholders may exercise the stock rights 
or sell them to others. Stock rights usually trade in public markets.
Firms often issue stock rights to raise new capital from current shareholders. The granting of 
stock rights to current shareholders requires no accounting entries. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do 
not require recognition of the rights on the date of the grant. When holders exercise the rights, 
the firm records the issue of shares at the price paid.
Stock Warrants Firms issue stock warrants to the general investing public for cash or 
attached to bonds. Assume that a firm issues warrants for $15,000 cash. The warrants allow 
holders to purchase 10,000 shares for $20 each. The entry is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
When warrant holders exercise their rights, the firm issues 10,000 shares of $5 par value 
common stock in exchange for the warrants plus $200,000 and makes the following entry:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Common Stock—$5 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
165,000
If the warrants expire before the holders exercise them, the firm records the following entry:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

596
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
Holders of a bond or preferred stock with common stock warrants attached can detach and 
redeem the warrants separately from the bond or preferred stock. The holder receives periodic 
interest or preferred dividends and holds a call option to purchase common shares. U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS require the firm to measure the fair value of the stock warrants separately from the 
value of the bond or preferred stock and allocate the issue price between the two securities.18
Example 6 Suppose that Great Deal issues 20-year, $1,000,000 bonds with 7% semiannual 
coupons. The bonds contain stock warrants, which their holders can sell on the open market 
or exercise to acquire 10,000 shares of common stock for $200,000. The issue price for the 
bonds and warrants is $1,050,000. Immediately after issue, the bonds sell on the market for 
$1,035,000, and the warrants sell for $15,000. The journal entry to record the issue of the bonds 
is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,050,000
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,035,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
15,000
The subsequent accounting for the bonds follows the procedures discussed in Chapter 11 
for bonds issued above par value. The accounting for the warrants follows the procedures illus-
trated above for warrants issued for cash.
Convertible Bonds or Preferred Stock Convertible bonds permit the bondholder to 
convert the bond into shares of common stock. Convertible preferred stock permits the pre-
ferred shareholder to convert the preferred shares into shares of common stock. The owner 
cannot detach and transfer the conversion option the same way that the owner can for a bond 
or preferred stock issued with a stock warrant. The issue price of a convertible bond is payment 
for both debt and the conversion option. Similarly, the issue price of convertible preferred stock 
is for preferred stock and the conversion option. No one, however, can observe the fair value of 
these separate components. U.S. GAAP and IFRS differ in their treatment of the issuance of 
convertible securities.
U.S. GAAP—Issue of Convertible Bonds or Convertible Preferred Stock In 
most cases U.S. GAAP requires firms to allocate the full issue price to the bonds or preferred 
stock and none of the price to the conversion feature.19
Example 7 Great Deal’s credit rating would allow it to issue either $100,000 of 10-year, 8% 
semiannual coupon bonds at par or $100,000 of convertible 6% semiannual coupon bonds that 
permit the holder of each $1,000 bond to convert it into 50 shares of Great Deal’s $0.10 par 
value common stock. (Holders in aggregate can convert the entire issue into 5,000 shares.) The 
conversion price, which is the exercise price on the call option embedded in the conversion fea-
ture, is $20 per share (= $1,000/50 shares). U.S. GAAP requires the following entry:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Convertible Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
This entry effectively treats convertible bonds like nonconvertible bonds, and it records the 
value of the conversion feature at zero.
18 Accounting Principles Board, Opinion No. 14, “Accounting for Convertible Debt and Debt Issued with Stock 
Purchase Warrants,” 1969 (Codification Topic 470); IASB, International Accounting Standard 32, “Financial 
Instruments: Presentation,” revised 2003.
19 Accounting Principles Board, Opinion No. 14, “Accounting for Convertible Debt and Debt Issued with Stock 
Purchase Warrants,” 1969 (Codification Topic 470).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

597
Corporate Distributions
IFRS—Issue of Convertible Bonds or Convertible Preferred Stock IFRS20 requires firms to 
allocate a portion of the issue price to the conversion feature. The calculation of this amount 
requires knowing the proceeds of an issue of nonconvertible bonds that otherwise resemble the 
convertible bonds.
Example 8 Refer to Example 7. Great Deal can borrow at 8% without a conversion feature 
and at 6% with a conversion feature. The present value of 6%, 10-year, semiannual (noncon-
vertible) coupon bonds discounted at 8% is $86,410. For Great Deal to issue 6% convertible 
bonds at par, the conversion feature must be worth $13,590 (= $100,000 – $86,410). That is, the 
bond buyers have paid $13,590 for the conversion feature. IFRS would recognize the value of 
the conversion feature separately, as a credit to Additional Paid-In Capital.21
Conversion of Convertible Bonds and Convertible Preferred Stock Accounting for the con-
version of bonds or preferred stock into common stock uses either carrying values or fair val-
ues to record the conversion, although practice is evolving.
The usual entry to record the conversion of convertible bonds or preferred stock into com-
mon shares ignores current market prices and shows the swap of common shares for bonds or 
preferred stock at their carrying value.22
Example 9 Assume that the market price of Great Deal’s common stock increases to $30 a 
share, so that the holder of one $1,000 bond, convertible into 50 shares, can convert it into 
shares with a market value of $1,500. If holders convert all the convertible bonds into common 
shares at this time, Great Deal would issue 5,000 shares of $0.10 par value stock on conversion 
and make the following journal entry when using carrying values of the bonds:
 
Convertible Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
 
Common Stock—$0.10 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
99,500
An allowable alternative treatment recognizes that market prices provide information useful 
in quantifying the value of the shares issued. Under the alternative treatment, with $30 market 
price per share and $150,000 fair market value of the 5,000 shares issued on conversion, the 
journal entry would be as follows:
 
Convertible Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100,000
Loss on Conversion of Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Common Stock—$0.10 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
149,500
 PROBLEM  15.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for capital contributions. Refer to Problem 15.1 for Self Study. Prepare 
journal entries to record the following transactions for Healy Corporation during the 
current year under U.S. GAAP.
a. Issued 2,000 shares of $100 convertible preferred stock on March 1 for $100 per 
share. Holders may convert each share of preferred stock into four shares of common 
stock.
(continued)
20 IASB, International Accounting Standard 32, “Financial Instruments: Presentation,” revised 2003.
21 The FASB is reconsidering the accounting for convertible bonds. There is some possibility that the FASB could 
adopt the IFRS accounting treatment for convertible bonds.
22 The carrying value of the bonds under IFRS will be less than $100,000 because a portion of the issue price 
was initially allocated to the conversion option. A firm following IFRS and using carrying values to record the 
conversion would use the carrying value of the debt at the time of conversion in this entry.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

598
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
b. Sold 10,000 common warrants on the open market on June 1 for $5 per warrant. 
Holders can exchange each warrant and $24 in cash for a share of common stock.
c. Holders of 600 shares of convertible preferred stock (see a) exchanged their shares for 
common stock on September 15. The market price of the common stock on this date 
was $26 per share. Record the conversion using the carrying values.
d. Holders of 4,000 common stock warrants exchanged their warrants (see b) and 
$96,000 in cash for common stock on November 20. The market price of the common 
stock on this date was $32 per share.
e. Granted options to employees to purchase 5,000 shares of common stock for $35 per 
share on January 2. The fair value of these options is $30,000 and the requisite service 
period is three years. The firm expects all the options to vest.
SUMMARY
The shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet reports the sources of financing provided 
by common and preferred shareholders. The equity of the common shareholders equals the 
sum of the amounts appearing in the Common Stock, Additional Paid-In Capital, Retained 
Earnings, Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, Treasury Stock, and other common-
share equity accounts. The user of the financial statements gains insight into capital contribu-
tions, net income, other comprehensive income, dividends, and treasury stock transactions only 
by studying changes in the individual accounts.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 15.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Healy Corporation; journal entries for capital contributions.)
a. 
January 2
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,400,000
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400,000
b. 
January 2
Patent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
140,000
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
c. 
January 31
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Preferred Stock—$5 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

599
Solutions to Self-Study Problems
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 15.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Baker Corporation; journal entries for dividends and stock splits.)
a. 
March 31
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,500
 
Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,500
b. 
April 15
Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,500
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,500
c. 
June 30
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
37,500
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
25,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
12,500
d. 
December 31
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
275,000
 
Common Stock—$5 Par Value  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
275,000
Alternatively, the firm need make no entry because the reduction in par value is directly 
proportional to the additional number of shares.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 15.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Crissie Corporation; journal entries for treasury stock transactions.)
a. 
January 15
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
90,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
To record the reacquisition of 2,000 common shares at $45 per share.
b. 
April 26
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
33,600
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,400
 
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
54,000
c. 
August 15
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
156,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
156,000
d. 
November 24
Preferred Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000
 
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
77,600
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2,400
e. 
December 20
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70,500
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,500
 
Treasury Stock—Common  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
78,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

600
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 15.4 FOR SELF-STUDY 
(Healy Corporation; journal entries for capital contributions.)
a. 
March 1
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
 
Preferred Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200,000
b. 
June 1
Cash 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
c. 
September 15
Preferred Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
60,000
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
24,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
36,000
d. 
November 20
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
96,000
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Warrants)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20,000
 
Common Stock—$10 Par Value. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
76,000
e. 
Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (Stock Options) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Corporation
Limited liability
Corporate charter
Corporate bylaws
Capital stock contract
Capital stock
Common stock, common share
Par (nominal or stated) value
Additional Paid-In Capital
Preferred stock, preferred shares
Cumulative dividend rights
Callable preferred shares
Convertible preferred shares
Cash dividend
Dividend in kind or property dividend
Stock dividend
Stock split
Treasury stock, treasury shares
Call options
Strike price or exercise price
Intrinsic value
Employee stock options (ESOs)
Stock purchase rights, stock rights
Stock warrants
Benefit element
Time value element
Convertible bonds or convertible 
preferred stock
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the meaning of the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. A firm contemplates issuing 10,000 shares of $100 par value preferred stock. The preferred 
stock promises a $4 per share annual dividend. The firm considers making this preferred 
stock callable or convertible. Will the issue price be the same in the two cases? Explain.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

601
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 3. Common shareholders have voting rights, but preferred shareholders have higher seniority. 
What does the difference in seniority mean?
 4. Compare and contrast a stock option, a stock right, and a stock warrant. How does the 
accounting for these three differ?
 5. Stock option valuation models indicate that the value of a stock option increases with the 
volatility of the stock, increases with the time between the grant date and the expected 
exercise date, and decreases with increases in the discount rate. Explain.
 6. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to amortize the fair value of stock options as an 
expense over the periods the firm expects to receive employee services as a result of grant-
ing the options. What is the theoretical rationale for this amortization?
 7. “The accounting for stock options, stock dividends, and treasury stock clouds the distinc-
tion between capital transactions and income transactions.” Explain.
 8. Compare the position of a shareholder who receives a cash dividend, a property dividend, 
and a stock dividend.
 9. A firm that sells inventory for more than its acquisition cost realizes an economic gain that 
accountants include in net income, but a firm that sells treasury stock for more than its 
acquisition cost realizes an economic gain that accountants exclude from net income. What 
is the rationale for the difference in treatment of these economic gains?
10. Consider the following statement: “When a firm repurchases its shares, the shares disap-
pear.” Do you agree?
EXERCISES
11. Issuing common stock. Carter, Inc., issued 100,000 shares of $1 par value common stock 
on December 1, 2013. On that date, the market price of the shares was $18 per share. What 
journal entry did Carter record to reflect this transaction?
12. Issuing common stock. On September 30, 2014, Homing Corporation issued 500,000 shares 
of $0.10 par value common stock. The market price of the shares on this date was $30 per 
share. What journal entry did Homing record to reflect this transaction?
13. Journal entries for dividends. Give journal entries, if required, for the following transactions 
pertaining to Grable:
a. Grable declares the regular quarterly dividend of $1.50 per share on its $100 par value 
preferred stock. There are 30,000 shares authorized and 15,000 shares issued, of which 
Grable has previously reacquired 2,000 shares and holds them as treasury shares.
b. Grable pays the dividend on the preferred stock (see part a).
c. Grable declares and issues a stock dividend of $300,000 of no-par common stock to its 
common shareholders.
d. The shares of no-par stock of Grable sell on the market for $200 a share. To bring the 
market value down to a more popular price and thereby broaden the distribution of its 
stockholdings, Grable’s board of directors votes to issue four extra shares to sharehold-
ers for each share they already hold. Grable issues the shares.
14. Journal entries for dividends. Prepare journal entries for the following transactions of Watt 
Corporation. Watt has 20,000 shares of $15 par value common stock outstanding on Janu-
ary 1, 2013. The balance in the Additional Paid-In Capital account on this date is $200,000.
a. Declares a cash dividend of $0.50 per share on March 31, 2013.
b. Pays the dividend in part a on April 15, 2013.
c. Declares and distributes a 10% stock dividend on June 30, 2013. The market price of 
the stock is $20 on this date.
d. Declares a cash dividend of $0.50 per share on September 30, 2013.
e. Pays the dividend in part d on October 15, 2013.
f. Declares a three-for-two stock split on December 31, 2013, but does not alter the par 
value.
15. Journal entries for treasury stock transactions. Prepare journal entries under the cost 
method to record the following treasury stock transactions of Danos Corporation.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

602
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
a. Purchases 10,000 shares of its own $10 par value common stock for $30 per share.
b. Issues 6,000 treasury shares to employees under stock option plans. The exercise price is 
$32 per share. Assume that the market price of the common stock on the exercise date 
is $35 per share. The stock options had a value of $6 per option when issued, which the 
firm has already amortized to expense.
c. Purchases 7,000 shares of its own common stock for $38 per share.
d. Issues 8,000 treasury shares in the acquisition of land valued at $300,000. Danos Cor-
poration uses a FIFO assumption for reissues of treasury stock.
e. Sells the 3,000 remaining shares of treasury stock for $36 per share.
16. Journal entries for treasury stock transactions. Prepare journal entries under the cost 
method to record the following treasury stock transactions of Melissa Corporation.
a. Purchases 10,000 shares of its own $5 par value common stock for $12 per share.
b. Issues 6,000 treasury shares upon the conversion of bonds with a carrying value of 
$72,000. Melissa Corporation records bond conversions using the carrying value 
method.
c. Purchases 20,000 shares of its own $5 par value common stock for $15 per share.
d. Issues 24,000 treasury shares and 6,000 newly issued shares of common stock in the 
acquisition of land with a market value of $540,000.
17. Accounting for stock options. Intelliant granted stock options to employees on January 
1, 2013, permitting them to purchase 24.6 million shares of Intelliant common stock for 
$22.63 per share. An option-pricing model indicates that the value of each option on this 
date is $5.79. Intelliant expects to receive the benefit of enhanced employee services for the 
next three years. On December 31, 2016, employees exercise these options when the market 
price of the stock is $40 per share. Compute the pre-tax effect of this option plan on the 
net income of Intelliant for 2013 through 2017.
18. Journal entries for employee stock options. Morrissey Corporation grants 50,000 stock 
options to its managerial employees on December 31, 2013, to purchase 50,000 shares of 
its $1 par value common stock for $60 per share. The market price of a share of common 
stock on this date is $60 per share. Employees must wait two years before the options vest 
and they can exercise the options, and this two-year period is the expected period of benefit 
from the stock options. An option-pricing model indicates that the value of these options 
on the grant date is $400,000. On June 30, 2016, holders of 30,000 options exercise their 
options at a time when the market price of the stock is $65 per share. On November 15, 
2016, holders of the remaining options exercise them at a time when the market price of 
the stock is $72 per share.
 
 
Present journal entries to record the effects of the transactions related to stock options 
during 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016. The firm reports on a calendar-year basis. Ignore 
income tax effects.
19. Journal entries for employee stock options. Watson Corporation grants 20,000 stock options 
to its managerial employees on December 31, 2013, to purchase 20,000 shares of its $10 
par value common stock for $25 per share. The market price of a share of common stock 
on this date is $25 per share. Employees must work for another three years before they 
can exercise the options. An option-pricing model indicates that the value of these options 
on the grant date is $75,000. On April 30, 2017, holders of 15,000 options exercise their 
options at a time when the market price of the stock is $30 per share. On September 15, 
2017, holders of the remaining options exercise them at a time when the market price of 
the stock is $38 per share.
 
 
Present journal entries to record these transactions on December 31, 2014, 2015, and 
2016; on April 30, 2017; and on September 15, 2018. Assume that the firm receives any 
benefits of the stock option plan during 2015, 2016, and 2017 and that the firm reports on 
a calendar-year basis. Ignore income tax effects.
20. Journal entries for convertible bonds. Higgins Corporation issues $1 million of 20-year, 
$1,000 face value, 10% semiannual coupon bonds at par on January 2, 2013. Each $1,000 
bond is convertible into 40 shares of $1 par value common stock. Assume that Higgins 
Corporation’s credit rating is such that it could issue 15% semiannual, nonconvertible 
bonds at par. On January 2, 2017, holders convert their bonds into common stock. The 
common stock has a market price of $45 per share on January 2, 2017.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

603
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 
 
Present the journal entries made under U.S. GAAP on January 2, 2013, and January 
2, 2017, to record the issue and conversion of these bonds. Use the carrying value method 
to record the conversion.
21. Accounting for conversion of bonds. Symantec has convertible bonds outstanding with a 
face value of $10,000,000 and a carrying value of $10,255,000. Holders of the bonds con-
vert them into 100,000 shares of $10 par value common stock. The common stock sells 
for $105 per share on the market. Give the journal entries to record the conversion of the 
bonds using (1) the carrying value method and (2) the fair value method.
22. Journal entries for stock warrants. Kiersten Corporation sells 60,000 common stock war-
rants for $4 each on February 26, 2013. Each warrant permits its holder to purchase a 
share of the firm’s $10 par value common stock for $30 per share at any time during the 
next two years. The market price of the common shares was $20 per share on February 26, 
2013. Holders of 40,000 warrants exercised their warrants on June 6, 2015, at a time when 
the market price of the stock was $38 per share. Kiersten Corporation experienced a major 
uninsured loss from a fire late in 2015, and its market price fell immediately to $22 per 
share. The market price remained around $22 until the stock warrants expired on Febru-
ary 26, 2017. Present journal entries on February 26, 2013; June 6, 2015; and February 26, 
2017, relating to these stock warrants.
23. Journal entries for stock warrants. On December 7, 2008, Alpharm issued shares of con-
vertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase additional shares of preferred stock for 
an aggregate issue price of $46,180,000 in a private placement of securities. Investment 
bankers estimated the fair value of the warrants on this date to be $2,730,000. Alpharm 
therefore allocated $43,450,000 to the preferred stock and $2,730,000 to the warrants. 
Between the issue date and January 15, 2013, dividends of $19,083,000 accrued on the 
preferred stock but remain unpaid. The preferred stock carries cumulative dividends rights. 
Because of a deficit in Retained Earnings, Alpharm debited the dividends to Additional 
Paid-In Capital each year and credited Convertible Preferred Stock. On January 15, 2013, 
Alpharm made its initial public offering of common stock. Holders of the preferred stock 
converted their shares into 5,269,705 shares of $0.01 par value common stock. The war-
rants to purchase preferred stock became warrants to purchase common stock. Give the 
journal entry on December 7, 2008, to issue the preferred stock and warrants and the entry 
on January 15, 2013, to convert the preferred stock to common stock. Use the carrying 
value method to record the conversion. The warrants remain outstanding.
PROBLEMS
24. Journal entries to record the issuance of capital stock. Prepare journal entries under U.S. 
GAAP to record the issuance of capital stock in each of the following independent cases. 
You may omit explanations for the journal entries. A firm does the following:
a. Issues 50,000 shares of $5 par value common stock for $30 per share.
b. Issues 20,000 shares of $100 par value convertible preferred stock at par.
c. Issues 16,000 shares of $10 par value common stock in the acquisition of a patent. The 
shares of the firm traded on a stock exchange for $15 per share on the day of the trans-
action. The seller listed the patent for sale at $250,000.
d. Issues 25,000 shares of $1 par value common stock in exchange for convertible preferred 
stock with a par and carrying value of $400,000. The common shares traded on the 
market for $18 per share on the date of the transaction. Use the carrying value method 
to record the conversion.
e. Issues 5,000 shares of $10 par value common stock to employees as a bonus for reach-
ing sales goals for the year. The shares traded for $12 per share on the day of the 
transaction.
25. Journal entries for the issuance of capital stock. Prepare journal entries to record the issu-
ance of capital stock in each of the following independent cases. You may omit explana-
tions for the journal entries. A firm does the following:
a. Issues 20,000 shares of $10 par value common stock in the acquisition of inventory with 
a market value of $175,000, land valued at $220,000, a building valued at $1,400,000, 
and equipment valued at $405,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

604
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
b. Issues 10,000 shares of $100 par value preferred stock at par.
c. Issues 5,000 shares of $1 par value common stock upon the exercise of stock warrants. 
The firm had issued the stock warrants several years previously for $8 per warrant and 
properly recorded the sale of the warrants in the accounts. The exercise price is $24 plus 
one warrant for each share of common stock.
d. Issues 20,000 shares of $10 par value common stock upon the conversion of 10,000 
shares of $50 par value convertible preferred stock originally issued for par. Record the 
conversion using carrying values.
26. Transactions to incorporate and run a business. The following events relate to shareholders’ 
equity transactions of Wilson Supply Company during the first year of its existence. Pre-
sent journal entries for each of the transactions.
a. January 2: The firm files articles of incorporation with the State Corporation Commis-
sion. The authorized capital stock consists of 5,000 shares of $100 par value preferred 
stock that offers an 8% annual dividend, and 50,000 shares of no-par common stock. 
The original incorporators acquire 300 shares of common stock at $30 per share; the 
firm collects cash for the shares. It assigns a stated value of $30 per share to the com-
mon stock.
b. January 6: The firm issues 2,000 shares of common stock for cash at $30 per share.
c. January 8: The firm issues 4,000 shares of preferred stock at par.
d. January 9: The firm issues certificates for the shares of preferred stock.
e. January 12: The firm acquires the tangible assets and goodwill of Richardson Supply, a 
partnership, in exchange for 1,000 shares of preferred stock and 12,000 shares of com-
mon stock. It values the tangible assets acquired as follows: inventories, $50,000; land, 
$80,000; buildings, $210,000; and equipment, $120,000.
f. July 3: The directors declare the semiannual dividend on preferred stock outstanding, 
payable July 25, to shareholders of record on July 12.
g. July 5: The firm operated profitably for the first six months, and it decides to expand. 
The company issues 25,000 shares of common stock for cash at $33 per share.
h. July 25: It pays the dividend on preferred stock declared on July 3.
i. October 2: The directors declare a dividend of $1 per share on the common stock, pay-
able October 25, to shareholders of record on October 12.
j. October 25: The firm pays the dividend on common stock declared on October 2.
27. Reconstructing transactions involving shareholders’ equity. Fisher Company began business 
on January 1. Its balance sheet on December 31 contained the shareholders’ equity section 
in Exhibit 15.2. During the year, Fisher Company engaged in the following transactions:
(1) Issued shares for $15 each.
(2) Acquired a block of 600 shares for the treasury in a single transaction.
(3) Reissued some of the treasury shares.
(4) Sold for $10,000 securities available for sale with original acquisition cost of $6,000. 
At the end of the year, securities available for sale, still on hand, had originally cost 
$12,000 and had a fair value of $14,000.
Fisher Company
Shareholders’ Equity as of December 31
(Problem 27)
Common Stock ($10 par value)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$60,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31,440
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,000
Plus Unrealized Holding Gain on Securities Available for Sale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,000
Less 360 Shares Held in Treasury—At Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (7,200)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$98,240
EXHIBIT 15.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

605
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Assuming that these were all of the common stock transactions during the year and that 
the firm used the cost method to account for treasury stock transactions, answer the fol-
lowing questions:
a. How many shares did Fisher Company issue for $15?
b. What was the price at which it acquired the treasury shares?
c. How many shares did it reissue from the block of treasury shares?
d. What was the price at which it reissued the treasury shares?
e. What journal entries did it make during the year for items (1) to (4)?
f. In which statement or statements will Fisher Company report the various gains and 
losses on its holdings of securities available for sale?
28. Reconstructing transactions involving shareholders’ equity. Shea Company began business 
on January 1. Its balance sheet on December 31 contained the shareholders’ equity sec-
tion shown in Exhibit 15.3. During the year, Shea Company engaged in the following 
transactions:
(1) Issued shares for $30 each.
(2) Acquired a block of 2,000 shares for the treasury in a single transaction.
(3) Reissued some of the treasury shares.
(4) Sold for $12,000 securities available for sale that had originally cost $14,000. At the end 
of the year, securities available for sale, still on hand, that had originally cost $25,000 
had a fair value of $18,000.
Assuming that these were the only common stock transactions during the year and that the 
firm used the cost method to account for treasury stock transactions, answer the following 
questions:
a. How many shares did Shea Company issue for $30 each?
b. What was the price at which it acquired the treasury shares?
c. How many shares did it reissue from the block of treasury shares?
d. What was the price at which it reissued the treasury shares?
e. What journal entries did it make during the year for items (1) to (4)?
f. In which statement or statements will Shea Company report the various gains and losses 
on its holdings of securities available for sale?
29. Accounting for stock options. Lowen Corporation grants stock options to its managerial 
employees on December 31 of each year. Employees may acquire one share of common 
stock with each stock option. Lowen sets the exercise price equal to the market price of its 
common stock on the date of the grant. Employees must continue working for two years 
after the date of the grant before the options vest and employees can exercise them. This 
two-year period is the period of benefit. Exhibit 15.4 presents information for the stock 
options granted by Lowen on December 31 of each year.
 
Calculate the effect of the stock options on net income before income taxes for 2013 
to 2017.
Shea Company
Shareholders’ Equity as of December 31
(Problem 28)
Common Stock ($5 par value) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
509,600
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50,000
Less Unrealized Holding Loss on Securities Available for Sale. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(7,000)
Less 1,200 Shares Held in Treasury—At Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (33,600)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$619,000
EXHIBIT 15.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

606
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
30. Accounting for stock options. Pramble Company grants stock options to its managerial 
employees on December 31 of each year. Employees may acquire one share of common 
stock with each stock option. Pramble sets the exercise price equal to the market price of 
its common stock on the date of the grant. Employees must continue working for two years 
after the date of the grant before the options vest and employees can exercise them. This 
two-year period is the period of benefit. Exhibit 15.5 presents information for the stock 
options granted by Pramble on December 31 of each year.
 
Calculate the effect of the stock options on net income before income taxes for 2013 
to 2017.
31. Reconstructing transactions affecting shareholders’ equity. Exhibit 15.6 reproduces a portion 
of the statement of changes in shareholders’ equity for Microtel Corporation for 2013. 
When Microtel repurchases its common stock, it cancels the outstanding shares. Prepare 
journal entries for each of the seven listed transactions in Exhibit 15.6. Record the effect 
of items affecting accumulated other comprehensive income using the amounts in Exhibit 
15.6 (that is, treating those net-of-tax amounts as if they were pre-tax amounts).
32. Journal entries for changes in shareholders’ equity. Exhibit 15.7 presents a portion of the 
statement of changes in shareholders’ equity for Sirens, Inc., for 2013. Prepare journal 
entries for each of the six listed transactions in Exhibit 15.7. Transactions (4) and (5) were 
not with employees. Transaction (5) did not require the tendering of cash. Record the con-
version of the notes in transaction (6) at carrying value.
33. Journal entries for changes in shareholders’ equity. Exhibit 15.8 presents a portion of the 
statement of changes in shareholders’ equity for Busch Corporation for 2013. Prepare jour-
nal entries for each of the eight transactions listed in Exhibit 15.8. Record the effect of 
items affecting accumulated other comprehensive income using the amounts in Exhibit 
15.8 (that is, as if they were pre-tax amounts).
Lowen Corporation
Stock Option Data
(Problem 29)
Pramble Company
Stock Option Data
(Problem 30)
Year
Options 
Granted 
at End of 
Year
Exercise 
Price per 
Share
Fair 
Value per 
Option
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
$18
$2.40
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
$22
$3.00
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7,000
$25
$3.14
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000
$30
$3.25
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,000
$38
$5.33
Year
Options 
Granted 
at End of 
Year
Exercise 
Price per 
Share
Fair 
Value per 
Option
2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35,759
$35.75
$10.99
2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40,866
$51.06
$12.50
2015. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29,100
$53.75
$14.34
2016. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,904
$59.97
$16.30
2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,091
$63.33
$17.29
EXHIBIT 15.4
EXHIBIT 15.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

607
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
Microtel Corporation
Excerpt from Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 31)
2013
COMMON STOCK AND ADDITIONAL PAID-IN CAPITAL
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 59,005
(1) Common Stock Issued. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6,783
(2) Common Stock Repurchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(6,162)
(3) Stock-Based Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
889
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      42
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 60,557
RETAINED EARNINGS
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(20,130)
(4) Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14,065
(5) Common Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,837)
(2) Common Stock Repurchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (21,212)
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$(31,114)
ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  1,229
(6) Net Change in Unrealized Gains and Losses on Marketable Securities (net of taxes)  . . . . .
326
(7) Net Change in Unrealized Gains and Losses on Derivatives (net of taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Net Change in Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment (net of taxes). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      85
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  1,654
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 14,065
Net Change in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     425
Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 14,490
EXHIBIT 15.6
Sirens, Inc.
Excerpt from Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 32)
Number of 
Common 
Shares
Par 
Value of 
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,434,635,501
$1,435
$3,443,214
(1) Common Stock Issued to Third Parties. . . . . . . . 
22,058,824
22
82,919
(2) Common Stock Issued to Employees  . . . . . . . . . 
4,279,097
4
19,242
(3) Stock-Based Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . 
    52,683
(4) Exercise of Options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,859,232
3
3,529
(5) Exercise of Warrants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,988,726
5
(5)
(6) Exchange of Convertible Notes. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    2,322,190
     2
     3,182
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,471,143,570
$1,471
$3,604,764
EXHIBIT 15.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

608
Chapter 15 
Shareholders’ Equity: Capital Contributions and Distributions
34. Treasury shares and their effects on performance ratios. Exhibit 15.9 presents the changes in 
common shareholders’ equity of Monk Corporation for 2013 through 2015. Monk regu-
larly purchases shares of its common stock and reissues them in connection with stock 
option plans. It will usually issue a small number of new common shares when it requires 
fractional shares to complete a stock option transaction. Earnings per common share were 
$2.70 for 2013, $3.20 for 2014, and $3.83 for 2015.
a. Give the journal entries for 2013 to record (1) the issue of common shares in connection 
with stock option plans, and (2) the purchase of treasury stock.
Busch Corporation
Excerpt from Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(amounts in millions of US$, except per share amounts)
(Problem 33)
2013
COMMON STOCK, $1 PAR VALUE
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  1,473.7
(1) Shares Issued Under Stock Plans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       8.8
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  1,482.5
ADDITIONAL PAID-IN CAPITAL
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  2,962.5
(1) Shares Issued Under Stock Plans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
283.5
(2) Stock Compensation Related  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     136.1
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  3,382.1
RETAINED EARNINGS
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 16,741.0
(3) Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,115.3
(4) Common Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (932.4)
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 17,923.9
TREASURY STOCK, AT COST
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$(16,007.7)
(5) Treasury Stock Acquired  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(2,707.2)
(2) Stock Compensation Related  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
       0.2
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$(18,714.7)
ACCUMULATED OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Balance, Beginning of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (1,230.8)
(6) Net Change in Unrealized Gains and Losses on Marketable Securities (net of taxes)  . . . 
(0.3)
(7) Net Change in Cash Flow Hedges (net of taxes). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(2.0)
Net Change in Foreign Currency Translation Adjustment (net of taxes). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105.2
(8) Pension Liability Adjustment (net of taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
205.2
Net Change in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     308.1
Balance, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   (922.7)
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  2,115.3
Net Change in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     308.6
Comprehensive Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  2,423.9
EXHIBIT 15.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

609
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
b. Compute the percentage change in net income and in earnings per share between 2013 
and 2014, and between 2014 and 2015. Why do the percentage changes in earnings per 
share exceed the percentage changes in net income in both 2014 and 2015?
c. Compute the book value per outstanding common share at the end of 2013, 2014, and 
2015, and the percentage change in book value per share between 2013 and 2014, and 
between 2014 and 2015. Why are the percentage changes in book value per common 
share less than the percentage changes in both net income and earnings per share?
d. Compute the rate of return on common shareholders’ equity for 2013, 2014, and 2015.
e. Does Monk appear to acquire the treasury stock primarily to satisfy commitments 
under stock option plans? Explain.
Monk Corporation
Analysis of Changes in Common Shareholders’ Equity
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 34)
Common Stock
Treasury Stock
Shares
Amount
Retained 
Earnings
Shares
Amount
 Total
December 31, Year 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,483.168
$4,667.8
$10,942.0
(235.342)
$(4,470.8)
$11,139.0
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
3,376.6
—
—
3,376.6
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
(1,578.0)
—
—
(1,578.0)
Stock Options Exercised . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.295
74.7
—
14.104
294.3
369.0
Treasury Stock Purchased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
     —
      —
 (33.377)
 (1,570.9)
 (1,570.9)
December 31, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,483.463
$4,742.5
$12,740.6
(254.615)
$(5,747.4)
$11,735.7
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
3,870.5
—
—
3,870.5
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
(1,793.4)
—
—
(1,793.4)
Stock Options Exercised . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.156
225.0
—
15.982
426.0
651.0
Treasury Stock Purchased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
     —
      —
(38.384)
 (2,493.3)
 (2,493.3)
December 31, 2014 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,483.619
$4,967.5
$14,817.7
(277.017)
$(7,814.7)
$11,970.5
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
4,596.5
—
—
4,596.5
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
(2,094.8)
—
—
(2,094.8)
Stock Options Exercised . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0.307
286.5
—
14.183
427.6
714.1
Treasury Stock Purchased . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
     —
      —
(27.444)
 (2,572.8)
 (2,572.8)
December 31, 2015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,483.926
$5,254.0
$17,319.4
(290.278)
$(9,959.9)
$12,613.5
EXHIBIT 15.9
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

FACMU14
P a r t
4
Synthesis
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

C
hapter 6 introduces the statement of cash flows, discussing its rationale and illustrating a 
T-account approach for its preparation. Subsequent chapters describe the effect of various 
transactions on the income statement and the balance sheet but do not consider their effect on the 
statement of cash flows. This chapter discusses the effect of these transactions on the statement of 
cash flows, using a comprehensive example.
REVIEW OF CONCEPTS UNDERLYING 
THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Chapter 6 discusses the following concepts underlying the statement of cash flows:
1. The statement of cash flows explains the reasons for the change in cash and cash equivalents 
during a period. This statement classifies the reasons as relating to operating or investing or 
financing decisions.
2. Revenues from sales of goods or services to customers during a period do not necessarily 
equal cash received from customers during that period. The receipt of cash can precede, coin-
cide with, or follow the recognition of revenue. Expenses incurred to generate revenues during 
a period do not necessarily equal cash spent for the goods and services consumed in opera-
tions during that period. The expenditure of cash can precede, or coincide with, or follow the 
recognition of expenses. Thus, net income for a period will likely differ from cash flow from 
operations for that period.
3. Most, but not all, firms report cash flows from operations using the indirect method. The 
indirect method starts with net income, adds any expense amount that does not use cash, and 
subtracts any revenue amount that does not provide cash. The adjustments to convert net 
income to cash flow from operations generally involve
(1) Adding the amount by which an expense exceeds the related cash expenditure for the 
period (for depreciation, adding the entire amount as there was no cash expenditure in the 
current period).
(2) Subtracting (or adding) the amount by which a revenue item exceeds (or is less than) the 
related cash receipt for the period. An common example of an arrangement in which 
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Statement of Cash Flows: 
Another Look
C h a p t e r 
16
1. Review the rationale for the statement 
of cash flows, emphasizing why net 
income differs from cash flows.
2. Review the T-account procedure, intro-
duced in Chapter 6, for preparing the 
statement of cash flows.
3. Solidify your understanding of the cash 
flow effects of various transactions 
presented in Chapters 8 through 15.
4. Develop skills in analyzing and inter-
preting the statement of cash flows.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

614
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
revenue is less than the related cash receipt is a customer payment in advance, for a 
good or service to be delivered in a later accounting period.
(3) Adjusting for non-cash income elements that are not revenue and expenses, including 
gains and losses from dispositions of noncurrent assets; equity method earnings that 
do not equal dividends received and equity method losses.
(4) Adding credit changes1 in operating non-cash working capital accounts, such as 
accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts payable.
(5) Subtracting debit changes in operating working capital accounts.
4. Cash flow from investing activities includes cash purchases and cash sales of most non-
current assets, including marketable securities that are not classified as trading securities; 
property, plant, and equipment; intangibles; and investments in securities.
5. Cash flow from financing activities includes cash issues and cash redemptions of long-term 
borrowings, cash sales and cash repurchases of common and preferred shares, and cash 
dividends.
REVIEW OF T-ACCOUNT PROCEDURE FOR 
PREPARING THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The accountant prepares the statement of cash flows after completing the balance sheet and the 
income statement. Chapter 6 describes and illustrates a procedure for preparing the statement 
of cash flows using a T-account work sheet. A summary of the procedure follows:
Step 1 Obtain a balance sheet for the beginning and the end of the period for which you wish 
to prepare the statement of cash flows.
Step 2 Prepare a T-account work sheet. A master T-account for cash appears at the top of 
the work sheet. This master T-account has three sections labeled, respectively, Operations, 
Investing, and Financing. Enter the beginning and the ending balances in cash and cash equiva-
lents in the master T-account. Cash equivalents represent short-term, highly liquid investments 
in which a firm has temporarily placed excess cash. Generally, only investments with maturi-
ties of three months or less qualify as cash equivalents. We use the term cash flows to refer 
to changes in cash and cash equivalents. Complete the T-account work sheet by preparing a 
T-account for each balance sheet account other than cash and cash equivalents, and enter the 
beginning and the ending balances.
Step 3 Explain the change in the master Cash account between the beginning and the end of 
the period by accounting for, the changes in the other balance sheet accounts. Do this by recon-
structing the entries originally made in the accounts during the period and entering them in 
appropriate T-accounts on the work sheet. By explaining the changes in balance sheet accounts 
other than cash and cash equivalents, this process also explains the change in cash and cash 
equivalents. We make such extensive use of the Cash Change Equation in this chapter that we 
abbreviate words into symbols, as follows:
Cash Change Equation
Change 
in Cash = Change in 
Liabilities +
Change in 
Shareholders’ 
Equity
−
Change in 
Non-cash 
Assets
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
Step 4 Prepare a statement of cash flows using information in the T-account work sheet.
 1 With respect to a single account, the term credit change means a decrease in an asset account or an increase in a 
liability (or shareholders’ equity) account. So, “credit changes in operating working capital accounts” means “a 
decrease in a current operating asset account or an increase in a current operating liability account.” In parallel, 
with respect to a single account, the term debit change means an increase in an asset account or a decrease in a 
liability (or shareholders’ equity) account.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

615
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
COMPREHENSIVE ILLUSTRATION OF 
THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
The comprehensive illustration that follows uses data for Ellwood Corporation for 2013. 
Exhibit 16.1 presents an income statement for 2013; Exhibit 16.2 presents a comparative bal-
ance sheet for December 31, 2013 and 2012; and Exhibit 16.3 presents a statement of cash 
flows. The calculation of cash flow from operations first presents the indirect method. The 
sections that follow explain each of the line items in Exhibit 16.3. Exhibit 16.4 shows the 
T-account work sheet. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $790 during the year, from 
$2,670 (= $1,150 + $1,520) to $1,880 (= $1,090 + $790).
LINE 1: NET INCOME
The income statement indicates net income of $760 for the period. The work sheet entry pre-
sumes that cash provisionally increases by the amount of net income.
(1a) Cash (Operations—Net Income) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
760
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
760
The effect of net income on the Cash Change Equation is as follows:
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
Operations + $760 (1a) =
$0
+
$760 (1a)
−
$0
Throughout this chapter, entries with a number followed by the letter a indicate entries on 
the statement of cash flows work sheet. Entries with a number and not followed with the letter 
a indicate entries made during the year in the accounting records of Ellwood Corporation.
Ellwood Corporation
Consolidated Income Statement
For the Year 2013
REVENUES AND OTHER INCOME
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,500
Interest and Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
320
Equity in Earnings of Affiliate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
480
Gain on Disposal of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     40
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,340
EXPENSES
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 6,000
Selling and Administrative Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,550
Compensation Expense (Employee Stock Options). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170
Impairment Loss on Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80
Loss on Sale of Marketable Equity Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
450
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    300
 
Total Expenses and Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,580
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   760
EXHIBIT 16.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

616
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
Ellwood Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheet
December 31
2013
2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,090
$ 1,150
Certificate of Deposit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
790
1,520
Marketable Equity Securities Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
190
280
Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,300
3,400
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,350
1,500
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    600
    800
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 9,320
$ 8,650
Investments
Investment in Company A (15%—Available for Sale)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,280
$ 1,250
Investment in Company B (40%). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,420
  2,100
 
Total Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 3,700
$ 3,350
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 920
$ 1,000
Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,900
8,600
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11,540
10,840
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (6,480)
 (6,240)
 
Total Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$14,880
$14,200
Intangible Assets
Patent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,550
$ 2,550
Less Accumulated Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (750)
   (600)
 
Total Intangible Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,800
$ 1,950
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$29,700
$28,150
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Bank Notes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,750
$ 2,000
Accounts Payable (for Inventory)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,230
2,450
Warranty Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
900
1,200
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,000
    600
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,880
$ 6,250
Noncurrent Liabilities
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,370
$ 2,820
Capitalized Lease Obligation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,100
1,800
Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    650
    550
 
Total Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,120
$ 5,170
Shareholders’ Equity
Preferred Shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,200
$ 1,000
Common Shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,110
2,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,400
4,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income:
 
Unrealized Loss on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(40)
(30)
 
Unrealized Gain on Investments in Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
50
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 10,330
  9,960
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$18,080
$16,900
Less Cost of Treasury Shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (380)
   (250)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$17,700
$16,730
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$29,700
$28,150
EXHIBIT 16.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

617
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
Ellwood Corporation
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
For the Year 2013
OPERATIONS
 (1) Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   760
Non-cash Revenues, Expenses, Gains, and Losses Included in Income:
 (2) Depreciation of Buildings and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
700
 (3) Amortization of Patent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
150
 (4) Compensation Expense (in Form of Employee Stock Options)  . . . . . . . . 
170
 (5) Loss on Impairment of Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80
 (6) Loss on Sale of Marketable Equity Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 (7) Deferred Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
 (8) Excess of Coupon Payments over Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(50)
 (9) Gain on Disposal of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(40)
(10) Equity in Undistributed Earnings of Affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(320)
(11) Decrease in Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
(12) Increase in Accounts Payable (for Inventory). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
780
(13) Increase in Advances from Customers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
(14) Increase in Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(900)
(15) Increase in Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(850)
(16) Decrease in Warranty Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (300)
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   910
INVESTING
(17) Sale of Marketable Equity Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    50
(18) Sale of Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180
(19) Acquisition of Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,300)
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(1,070)
FINANCING
(20) Short-Term Bank Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   750
(21) Long-Term Bonds Issued. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
(22) Preferred Shares Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
(23) Retirement of Long-Term Debt at Maturity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(1,500)
(24) Acquisition of Common Shares. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(130)
(25) Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(390)
(26) Common Shares (Issued on Exercise of Employee Options) . . . . . . . . . . 
     40
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (630)
Net Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    (790)
Cash, Beginning of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  2,670
Cash, End of 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,880
EXHIBIT 16.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
LINE 2: DEPRECIATION OF BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT
Internal records indicate that depreciation on manufacturing facilities totaled $450 and on selling 
and administrative facilities totaled $250 during the year. The firm included these amounts in cost 
of goods sold and selling and administrative expenses, respectively, in the income statement in 
Exhibit 16.1. None of this $700 of depreciation required an operating cash flow during 2013. The 
firm reported cash expenditures for these assets as investing activities in the earlier periods when it 
acquired them. Thus, the work sheet entry to explain the change in the Accumulated Depreciation 
account adds back depreciation to net income in deriving cash flow from operations.
(2a)  Cash (Operations—Depreciation Expense Addback)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
700
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
700
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

618
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
Ellwood Corporation
T-Account Work Sheet
Cash
✓
2,670
Operations
Net Income
(1a)
760
   50
 (8a)
Excess Coupon Payments
Depreciation Expense
(2a)
700
   40
 (9a)
Gain on Sale of Equipment
Amortization Expense
(3a)
150
  320
(10a)
Equity in Undistributed Earnings of Affiliate
Employee Stock Option Compensation
(4a)
170
  900
(14a)
Increase in Accounts Receivable (Net)
Impairment Loss on Land
(5a)
80
  850
(15a)
Increase in Inventories
Loss on Sale of Marketable Securities
(6a)
30
  300
(16a)
Decrease in Warranty Liability
Deferred Income Taxes
(7a)
100
Decrease in Prepayments
(11a)
200
Increase in Accounts Payable
(12a)
780
Increase in Advances from Customers
(13a)
400
Investing
Sale of Marketable Securities
(6a)
50
1,300
(19a)
Acquisition of Equipment
Sale of Equipment
(9a)
180
Financing
Short-Term Borrowing
(20a)
750
1,500
(23a)
Retirement of Long-Term Debt
Long-Term Bonds Issued
(21a)
400
  130
(24a)
Acquisition of Common Shares
Preferred Shares Issued
(22a)
200
  390
(25a)
Dividends
Common Shares Issued
(26a)
40
✓
1,880
Marketable Equity Securities 
Available for Sale
Accounts Receivable (Net)
Inventories
✓
280
✓
3,400
✓
1,500
(6b)
10
80
(6a)
(14a)
900
(15a)
850
20
(27a)
✓
190
✓
4,300
✓
2,350
Prepayments
Investment in Company A 
Available for Sale
Investment in Company B
✓
800
✓
1,250
✓
2,100
200
(11a)
(28a)
30
(10a)
320
✓
600
✓
1,280
✓
2,420
Land
Buildings
Equipment
✓
1,000
✓
8,600
✓
10,840
80
(5a)
(29a)
300
(19a)
1,300
600
(9a)
✓
920
✓
8,900
✓
11,540
Accumulated Depreciation
Patent
Accumulated Amortization
6,240
✓
✓
2,550
600
✓
(9a)
460
700
(2a)
150
(3a)
6,480
✓
✓
2,550
750
✓
Bank Notes Payable
Accounts Payable (for Inventory)
Warranty Liability
2,000
✓
2,450
✓
1,200
✓
750
(20a)
780
(12a)
(16a)
300
2,750
✓
3,230
✓
900
✓
(continued)
EXHIBIT 16.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

619
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
Addback for Depreciation as a Product Cost The addback for the $450 of depreci-
ation on manufacturing facilities requires elaboration. Chapter 9 explains that accountants treat 
such depreciation charges as a product cost, not a period expense. The accountant debits Work-
in-Process Inventory for this $450 and credits Accumulated Depreciation. If, during the period, 
the firm sells all the goods it produces, cost of goods sold includes this $450. Because cost of 
goods sold includes an amount that does not use cash, the addback to net income adjusts for 
the portion of depreciation charges that cost of goods sold includes.
If the firm does not sell all the goods it produces during the period, the ending inventory of 
Work-in-Process Inventory or Finished Goods Inventory includes a portion of the $450 depre-
ciation charge. Assume, for example, that the firm sold 80% of the units produced during the 
period. Cost of goods sold includes $360 (= 0.80 × $450) of the depreciation, and inventory 
accounts include the remaining $90. The statement of cash flows adds back to net income the 
entire $450 of depreciation on manufacturing facilities for the period. The $90 of depreciation 
included in the cost of units not sold caused the inventory accounts to increase by $90. Under 
the indirect method of computing cash flow from operations, the accountant subtracts this 
increase in inventories in computing cash flow from operations. The $450 addition for deprecia-
tion less the $90 subtraction for the increase in inventories nets to a $360 adjustment to income 
on the statement of cash flows. Because cost of goods sold includes only $360 of depreciation, 
the addition required to adjust for the depreciation included in cost of goods sold equals $360. 
Thus, the work sheet entry 2a shows an addback for the full amount of depreciation for the 
period (both as a product cost and as a period expense), not just the amount included in cost 
of goods sold; then line 15 of the statement of cash flows includes a subtraction for the $90 
increase in inventories caused by adding depreciation to work in process.
Ellwood Corporation
T-Account Work Sheet (continued)
Advances from Customers
Bonds Payable
Capitalized Lease Obligation
600
✓
2,820
✓
1,800
✓
400
(13a)
 (8a)
50
400
(21a)
300
(29a)
(23a)
1,500
(30a)
300
1,000
✓
1,370
✓
2,100
✓
Deferred Income Taxes
Preferred Shares
Common Shares
550
✓
1,000
✓
2,000
✓
100
(7a)
200
(22a)
100
(30a)
10
(26a)
650
✓
1,200
✓
2,110
✓
Additional Paid-In Capital
Unrealized Loss on 
Marketable Securities
Unrealized Gain on 
Investments in Securities
4,000
✓
✓
30
50
✓
170
(4a)
10
(6b)
30
(28a)
200
(30a)
(27a)
20
30
(26a)
4,400
✓
✓
40
80
✓
Retained Earnings
Treasury Shares
9,960
✓
✓
250
(25a)
390
760
(1a)
(24a)
130
10,330
✓
✓
380
EXHIBIT 16.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

620
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
LINE 3: AMORTIZATION OF PATENT
The effect of patent amortization on cash flow is conceptually identical to that for depreciation 
charges, both for period expenses and for product costs. Company records indicate that cost of 
goods sold for 2013 includes patent amortization of $150. The work sheet entry to explain the 
change in the Accumulated Amortization account is as follows:
(3a)  Cash (Operations—Amortization Expense Addback) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
150
 
Accumulated Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
150
LINE 4: STOCK OPTION COMPENSATION EXPENSE
Notes to the financial statements of Ellwood Corporation indicate that part of the compensa-
tion to executives took the form of options to buy shares of Ellwood Corporation. Chapter 15 
discusses that firms use an option pricing model to calculate a fair-value-related measure of 
stock options granted during a period; this measure is the amount of compensation cost to be 
recognized during the expected period of benefit, typically, the vesting period. Ellwood Cor-
poration amortized $170 as compensation expense during 2013. Following is the entry in the 
accounting records to record the expense:
(4)  Compensation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
170
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−170
IncSt → RE
+170
ContriCap
The $170 of compensation reduced net income but did not require a cash outflow during 
2013. The entry explains part of the change in the Additional Paid-In Capital account. The 
work sheet entry for the recognition of compensation cost related to employee stock options is 
as follows:
(4a)  Cash (Operations—Compensation Expense Addback)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
170
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
170
Income Tax Effects of Employee Stock Option Tax laws in certain jurisdictions 
permit firms to claim an income tax deduction for stock options. For example, the income tax 
law in the United States currently permits firms to deduct the intrinsic value (= market price on 
the date of exercise – exercise price) of a nonqualified stock option in the year employees exer-
cise stock options. The issues raised by the income tax benefits and their effects on the state-
ment of cash flows are too advanced to include in the example for Ellwood Corporation in 
Exhibit 16.3.
LINE 5: IMPAIRMENT LOSS ON LAND
Notes to the financial statements of Ellwood Corporation indicate that the sum of the expected 
rentals on land that the company rents to others plus the amounts it expects to receive on the 
eventual sale of the land has dropped so much that the land has become impaired. The differ-
ence between the carrying value of the land and its fair value at the end of 2013 is $80. The fol-
lowing entry is made in the accounting records to record the loss:
(5)  Loss on Impairment of Land. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80
 
Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

621
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
The $80 of impairment loss reduced net income and the carrying value of land, but did 
not require a cash outflow during 2013. The work sheet entry to reflect the change in the Land 
account is as follows:
(5a)  Cash (Operations—Asset Impairment Loss Addback)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80
 
Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
80
LINE 6: LOSS ON SALE OF MARKETABLE EQUITY SECURITIES
The accounting records indicate that Ellwood Corporation sold marketable equity securities held 
as securities available for sale during 2013. Ellwood Corporation acquired these securities for $80 
during 2012, wrote them down to their fair value of $70 at the end of 2012, and sold them dur-
ing 2013 for $50. The firm made the following entry in the accounting records to record this sale:
(6)  Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
Realized Loss on Sale of Marketable Equity Securities (IncSt)  . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Marketable Equity Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
70
 
Unrealized Loss on Securities Available for Sale 
 
 (Other Comprehensive Income). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+50
−30
IncSt → RE
−70
+10
OCI → AOCI
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+50
(Invst.)
0
−20
−70
Recall that journal entry numbers without letters, such as this one numbered (6), refer to 
actual entries Ellwood recorded in its books. For some such entries, we give the effect on the 
Cash Change Equation, derived from the balance sheet equation. For some complex transac-
tions, such as this one, we give the Balance Sheet Equation. For some, we give both.
The work sheet entries to reflect this transaction are as follows:
(6a)  Cash (Investing—Sale of Marketable Equity Securities)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
Cash (Operations—Loss on Sale of Marketable Equity 
 Securities Addback). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Marketable Equity Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
70
 
Unrealized Loss on Securities Available for Sale 
 
 (Other Comprehensive Income). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10
The statement of cash flows classifies the $50 cash proceeds as an investing activity on line 
17. Net income on line 1 in Exhibit 16.3 includes a subtraction for the loss on the sale of mar-
ketable equity securities. To avoid understating the amount of cash flow from operations, the 
accountant adds back the loss to net income. This addback offsets the loss included in the cal-
culation of net income and eliminates its effect on cash flow from operations. Line 17 shows 
the entire cash proceeds from the sale as an investing activity. The analyst might reasonably 
view purchases and sales of marketable equity securities as operating activities because these 
transactions involve the use of temporarily excess cash. Most, but not all, firms consider these 
transactions sufficiently peripheral to the firms’ principal operating activity—selling goods and 
services to customers—that they classify such purchases and sales as investing activities.
LINE 7: DEFERRED INCOME TAXES
Notes to the financial statements of Ellwood Corporation indicate that income tax expense of 
$300 comprises $200 currently payable taxes and $100 deferred to future periods. Ellwood Cor-
poration made the following entry during the year to recognize income tax expense.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

622
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
(7) 
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
 
Deferred Income Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−200
+100
−300
IncSt → RE
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−200
(Opns.)
+100
−300
0
In the United States, a common account title for the debit is “Provision for Income Taxes,” 
but see the Glossary entry for provision.
The $100 of deferred income taxes reduced net income but did not require a cash outflow 
during 2013. To explain the change in the Deferred Income Tax Liability account, the work 
sheet must add back the increase in the deferred tax liability to net income to derive cash flow 
from operations.
(7a)  Cash (Operations—Deferred Tax Addback)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
100
 
Deferred Income Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
We have prepared the statement of cash flows for Ellwood Corporation using U.S. GAAP. 
If Ellwood were using IFRS, Ellwood would split income tax expense into operating, investing, 
and financing portions depending on the activity that caused the portion of income tax expense 
and to report each portion in the corresponding section of the statement.
LINE 8: EXCESS OF COUPON PAYMENTS OVER INTEREST EXPENSE
Bonds Payable on the balance sheet includes one series of bonds initially issued at a premium 
(that is, the coupon rate exceeded the required market rate of interest when Ellwood Corpora-
tion issued the bonds, so the initial issue proceeds exceeded the face value of the bonds). The 
amortization of the bond premium causes the amount of interest expense recognized over the 
life of the bonds to be less than the periodic cash debt service payments for the coupons. The 
entry made in the accounting records for interest expense during the period was as follows:
(8)  Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
450
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−500
(Opns.)
−50
−450
0
The firm spent $500 of cash even though it subtracted only $450 of interest expense in com-
puting net income. To explain the change in the Bonds Payable account, the work sheet sub-
tracts an additional $50 from net income to derive cash flow from operations.
(8a)  Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50
 
Cash (Operations—Excess Coupon Payments Subtraction). . . . . . . . . 
 
50
The statement of cash flows classifies cash used for interest expense as an operating activ-
ity because it views interest as a cost of carrying out operations. Some security analysts suggest 
that this $50 use of cash for principal repayment is a financing activity for debt service, not 
an operating activity, and would place it in the financing section. IFRS allows, but does not 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

623
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
require, showing interest payments as a financing use of cash. U.S. GAAP, however, classifies 
the $50 cash outflow as an operating activity, which IFRS allows.
LINE 9: GAIN ON DISPOSAL OF EQUIPMENT
The accounting records indicate that Ellwood Corporation sold for $180 during 2013 a 
machine originally costing $600, with accumulated depreciation of $460. The journal entry to 
record this disposal is as follows:
(9)  Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
460
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
 
Gain on Disposal of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
40
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+180
(Invst.)
0
+40
+460
−600
Line 18 shows all the cash proceeds of $180 as an increase in cash from an investing activ-
ity. Net income reported in line 1 includes the $40 gain on sale. To avoid overstating the amount 
of cash derived from this sale, the accountant subtracts the $40 gain from net income in com-
puting cash flow from operations.
(9a)  Cash (Investing—Sale of Equipment)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
180
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
460
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
 
Cash (Operations—Gain on Sale of Equipment Subtraction)  . . . . . . . 
 
40
The statement of cash flows classifies all cash proceeds from selling equipment as an invest-
ing activity and none as an operating activity. Most firms acquire and sell fixed assets with the 
objective of providing the capacity to carry out operations rather than as a means of generating 
operating income.
Illustration of Loss, Alternative to Main Ellwood Example. Fixed assets disposed of for cash 
at a loss instead of a gain require an addback to net income in deriving cash flow from opera-
tions. The work sheet entry, assuming the same data as in the preceding entry except that Ell-
wood Corporation sells the equipment for $110, would be as follows:
 
Cash (Investing—Disposal of Equipment)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
110
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
460
Cash (Operations—Loss on Disposal of Equipment Addback) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
LINE 10: EQUITY IN UNDISTRIBUTED EARNINGS OF AFFILIATE
The balance sheet indicates that Ellwood Corporation owns 40% of the common stock of 
Company B. During 2013 Company B earned $1,200 and paid $400 of dividends. Ellwood Cor-
poration made the following entries on its books during the year:
(10) Investment in Company B  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
480
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
480
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+480
+480
IncSt → RE
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
0
0
+480
+480
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

624
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
To record equity in earnings of Company B of $480 (= 0.40 × $1,200).
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
160
 
Investment in Company B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
160
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+160
(Opns.)
0
0
−160
To record dividends received of $160 (= 0.40 × $400).
Net income of Ellwood Corporation on line 1 of Exhibit 16.3 includes $480 of equity 
income, but Ellwood Corporation received only $160 of cash. Thus, the work sheet subtracts 
$320 (= $480 − $160) from net income in deriving cash from operations.
(10a) Investment in Company B  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
320
 
Cash (Operations—Equity in Undistributed Earnings of Affiliate 
 
 Subtraction)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
320
LINE 11: DECREASE IN PREPAYMENTS
Because prepayments decreased by $200 during 2013, the firm paid cash during 2013 for new 
prepayments in an amount smaller than the amount it expensed for prepayments of earlier 
years. Assume that all prepayments relate to selling and administrative activities. The journal 
entries that Ellwood Corporation made in the accounting records during the year had the fol-
lowing combined effect:
(11) Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,550
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
3,550
 
Prepayments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−3,350
(Opns.)
0
−3,550
−200
To explain the change in the work sheet for prepayments, add back $200 to net income 
for the credit change2 in an operating current asset account so that cash flow from operations 
reports the amount for expenditures.
(11a) Cash (Operations—Decrease in Prepayments) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Prepayments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
LINE 12: INCREASE IN ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
An increase in accounts payable indicates that new purchases on account during 2013 exceeded 
payments during 2013 for previous purchases on account. This increase in accounts payable, an 
operating current liability account, implicitly provides cash. Suppliers have provided financing 
so that Ellwood Corporation can acquire goods on account. You might think of it this way: 
Imagine a firm borrows cash from a supplier, debiting Cash and crediting Notes Payable. Then 
the firm uses the cash to acquire inventory or other items. You can see that the supplier has 
provided cash, and the firm increases a current liability account. A firm buying on account has 
achieved the same result, except that it credits Accounts Payable, not Notes Payable. Because 
the supplier ties the financing to the purchase of goods used in operations, accounting classifies 
this source of cash in the operating, not financing, section of the statement of cash flows.
 2 Because prepayments declined, the amount of the decline is an addback. Had prepayments increased, a debit 
change, the amount of the increase would be a subtraction.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

625
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
(12a) Cash (Operations—Increase in Accounts Payable) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
780
 
Accounts Payable (for inventory)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
780
We explore how the adjustment for the change in accounts payable affects the equation for 
the change in cash when we discuss the adjustment for inventory.
LINE 13: INCREASE IN ADVANCES FROM CUSTOMERS
The $400 increase in customer advances means that the firm received $400 more cash during 
2013 than it recognized as revenue. The work sheet adds this excess to net income in deriving 
cash flow from operations.
(13a) Cash (Operations—Increase in Advances from Customers). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
We consider how the adjustment for the change in advances for customers affects the equa-
tion for the change in cash next, when we discuss the adjustment for accounts receivable.
LINE 14: INCREASE IN ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
The increase in accounts receivable indicates that the firm collected less cash from customers 
than the amount shown for sales on account. The work sheet subtracts the increase in accounts 
receivable in deriving cash flow from operations.
(14a) Accounts Receivable (Net). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
900
 
Cash (Operations—Increase in Accounts Receivable) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
900
This entry automatically incorporates the effect of any change in the Allowance for Uncol-
lectible Accounts. The work sheet could show separate entries for the change in gross accounts 
receivable and the change in the allowance for uncollectible accounts.
We can now summarize how changes in accounts receivable and changes in advances from 
customers affect the equation for changes in cash. The single journal entry below combines the 
actual journal entries Ellwood Corporation made for transactions 13 and 14:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
10,000
Accounts Receivable, Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
900
 
Advances from Customers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,500
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+10,000
(Opns.)
+400
+10,500
+900
LINE 15: INCREASE IN INVENTORIES
The increase in inventories indicates the firm purchased more raw materials and supplies than it 
sold during 2013. The work sheet subtracts this change in inventory in deriving cash flow from 
operations.
(15a) Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
850
 
Cash (Operations—Increase in Inventories) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
850
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

626
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
We can now consider the effect on cash of the change in inventories and the change in 
accounts payable. The single journal entry below combines the actual journal entries Ellwood 
Corporation made for transactions 12 and 15:
 
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
850
 
Accounts Payable (for Inventory) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
780
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
6,070
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−6,070
(Opns.)
+780
−6,000
+850
LINE 16: DECREASE IN WARRANTY LIABILITY
As Chapter 9 explains, firms estimate future warranty costs on current sales using the allow-
ance method for warranties. The Warranty Liability account increases for the estimated cost of 
future warranty services on products sold during the period and decreases by the actual cost of 
warranty services performed during the same period. During 2013 the firm paid $300 more in 
warranty claims than it reported as expenses on the income statement. Ellwood Corporation 
estimated warranty expense of $920 and included that amount in selling and administrative 
expenses in its income statement in Exhibit 16.1. The firm made entries during the year with the 
following combined effect:
(16) Selling and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
920
Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,220
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−1,220
(Opns.)
−300
−920
0
The work sheet subtracts this decrease in Warranty Liability so that cash flow from opera-
tions reports the amount of cash expenditures, not the amount for expenses.
(16a) Warranty Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Cash (Operations—Decrease in Warranty Liability). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
Cash flow from operations, summed for the transactions recorded as affecting operating 
activities, is $910 for 2013.
LINES 17 AND 18
See the discussion for lines 6 and 9.
LINE 19: ACQUISITION OF EQUIPMENT
The firm acquired equipment costing $1,300 during 2013. The entry for this investing activity is 
as follows:
(19a) Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,300
 
Cash (Investing—Acquisition of Equipment)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,300
Cash flow from investing, summed for the transactions recorded as affecting investing activ-
ities for 2013, is a net outflow of $1,070.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

627
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
LINE 20: SHORT-TERM BANK BORROWING
Ellwood Corporation borrowed $750 during 2013 from its bank under a short-term borrowing 
arrangement. Even though this loan is short term, the statement of cash flows classifies it as a 
financing instead of an operating activity. The entry on the work sheet is as follows:
(20a) Cash (Financing—Short-Term Bank Borrowing) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
750
 
Bank Note Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
750
LINE 21: LONG-TERM BONDS ISSUED
The firm issued long-term bonds totaling $400 during 2013.
(21a) Cash (Financing—Long-Term Bonds Issued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400
 
Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400
LINE 22: PREFERRED SHARES ISSUED
The firm issued preferred shares for $200 cash during the year.
(22a) Cash (Financing—Preferred Shares Issued). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200
 
Preferred Shares. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
LINE 23: RETIREMENT OF LONG-TERM DEBT AT MATURITY
Ellwood Corporation retired $1,500 of long-term debt at maturity. The income statement in 
Exhibit 16.1 shows no gain or loss on retirement of this debt. Thus, Ellwood Corporation must 
have retired the debt at its carrying value. We make the following work sheet entry:
(23a) Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,500
 
Cash (Financing—Retirement of Long-Term Debt) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,500
If the firm had retired the debt prior to maturity, the firm would likely have recognized a gain 
or loss. The work sheet would eliminate the gain or loss from net income in computing cash flow 
from operations and classify as a financing activity the full amount of cash used to retire the debt.
LINE 24: ACQUISITION OF COMMON SHARES
The firm acquired shares of its own common stock at a cost of $130 during 2013 and accounts 
for the transaction using the treasury stock method. The entry on the work sheet is as follows:
(24a) Treasury Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
130
 
Cash (Financing—Acquisition of Common Shares) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
130
LINE 25: DIVIDENDS
Ellwood Corporation declared and paid $390 of dividends to its shareholders during 2013. The 
entry is as follows:
(25a) Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
390
 
Cash (Financing—Dividends) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
390
IFRS allows firms to show cash used for dividends as an operating use.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

628
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
LINE 26: EXERCISE BY EMPLOYEES OF THEIR STOCK OPTIONS
During 2013, employees of Ellwood Corporation exercised certain stock options. In a previous 
year the employees had received options for which Ellwood Corporation had recognized $20 
compensation expense (and credited Additional Paid-In Capital). (See entry (4) for the same 
sort of entry made this year.) During 2013, the employees exercised those options by paying 
$40 cash to acquire common shares with par value of $10. The entry made in the accounting 
records to record the exercise is as follows:
(26) Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 
Common Shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+40
−20
ContriCap
+10
ContriCap
+50
ContriCap
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
40
0
−20
0
+10
+50
The accountant reflects this financing transaction on the T-account work sheet by making 
the following entry:
(26a) Cash (Financing—Common Shares Issued) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 
Common Shares (par value) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50
Summing the transactions that affect financing activities, we compute a net cash outflow for 
financing of $630 for the year.
NON-CASH INVESTING AND FINANCING TRANSACTIONS
Some investing and financing transactions do not involve cash and therefore do not appear in 
the operating, investing, and financing sections of the statement of cash flows. These transac-
tions nevertheless help explain changes in balance sheet accounts. The accountant must enter 
these transactions in the T-account work sheet to account fully for all balance sheet changes 
and to compute correctly the portion of the changes affecting cash.
Remeasurement of Marketable Equity Securities to Fair Value During 2013, 
Ellwood Corporation remeasured marketable equity securities to fair value. The journal entry is 
as follows:
(27) Unrealized Loss on Marketable Equity Securities
 
 Available for Sale (OCI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 
Marketable Equity Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−20
−20
OCI → AOCI
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
0
0
−20
−20
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

629
Comprehensive Illustration of the Statement of Cash Flows
This entry does not affect cash and therefore does not appear in the statement of cash 
flows. The unrealized loss is not included in net income because these securities are classified as 
available for sale. The journal entry helps explain the change during the year in the marketable 
equity securities account above, and it requires the following entry in the T-account work sheet:
(27a) Unrealized Loss on Marketable Equity Securities
 
 Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
20
 
Marketable Equity Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20
Remeasurement of Investment in Company A to Fair Value During 2013, Ell-
wood Corporation also remeasured its Investment in Company A, a security available for sale, 
to reflect a change in fair value. The journal entry is as follows:
(28) Investment in Company A  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Unrealized Gain on Investment in Securities (OCI)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+30
+30
OCI → AOCI
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
0
0
+30
+30
This entry does not affect cash flows, and the change in fair value does not affect net 
income. The entry helps to explain the change during the year in the Investment in Company A 
account and requires the following entry in the T-account work sheet:
(28a) Investment in Company A  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30
 
Unrealized Gain on Investment in Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30
Capitalized Lease During 2013, Ellwood Corporation signed a long-term lease for a 
building. It classified the lease as a capital lease and recorded it in the accounts as follows:3
(29) Building (or Leasehold). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Capitalized Lease Obligation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+300
+300
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
0
+300
0
+300
This entry does not affect cash and does not affect income. It does affect the investing and 
financing activities of Ellwood Corporation and requires disclosure in a supplementary sched-
ule to the statement of cash flows or notes to the financial statements. The accountant makes 
the following entry in the T-account work sheet:
(29a) Building (or Leasehold). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Capitalized Lease Obligation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300
 3 Technically, the account debited is not Building, but Leasehold on Building. Our research into actual practice 
suggests that many firms call it, merely, Building.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

630
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
The firm must disclose transactions such as this one, but does not include these non-cash 
transactions in the operating, or financing or investing sections of the statement of cash flows.
Conversion of Debt into Equity During 2013, investors in convertible bonds of Ell-
wood Corporation exercised their option to convert their debt securities into shares of common 
stock. The entry made in the accounting records to record the conversion is as follows:
(30) Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−300
+100
ContriCap
+200
ContriCap
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
0
−300
+100
0
+200
This transaction is, like the capitalized lease arrangement, a material non-cash transaction 
that the firm must separately disclose even though the Statement of Cash Flows does not show 
any of its effects. The accountant reflects this financing transaction on the T-account work 
sheet by making the following entry:
(30) Bonds Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300
 
Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100
 
Additional Paid-In Capital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
200
Exhibit 16.4 presents a T-account work sheet for Ellwood Corporation for 2013.
 PROBLEM  16.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Effects of transactions on the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 in Chapter 6 presents a 
simplified statement of cash flows. For each of the transactions that follow, indicate the 
number(s) of the line(s) in Exhibit 6.12 affected by the transaction and the amount and 
direction (increase or decrease) of the effect. Expand the definition of Line (1) to include 
receipts from other operating revenue sources. If the transaction affects net income, be 
sure to indicate whether it increases or decreases. Ignore income tax effects.
a. A firm sells for $12,000 equipment that originally cost $30,000 and has accumulated 
depreciation of $16,000 at the time of sale.
b. A firm owns 25% of the common stock of an investee acquired several years ago 
at its net book value and uses the equity method. The investee had net income of 
$80,000 and paid dividends of $20,000 during the period.
c. A firm, as lessee (tenant), records lease payments of $50,000 on capital leases for the 
period, of which $35,000 represents interest expense.
d. Income tax expense for the period totals $120,000, of which the firm pays $90,000 
immediately and defers the remaining $30,000 because of temporary differences between 
the accounting principles used for financial reporting and those used for tax reporting.
e. A firm owns 10% of the common stock of an investee, and accounts for it as an 
available for sale security classified as a long-term investment. The investee had net 
income of $100,000 and paid dividends of $40,000 during the period. The fair value 
of the investment at the end of the period equaled the fair value at the beginning of 
the period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

631
Illustration of the Direct Method for Cash Flow from Operations
Ellwood Corporation
Deriving Direct Method Cash Flow from Operations
Using Data from T-Account Work Sheet
EXHIBIT 16.5
ILLUSTRATION OF THE DIRECT METHOD 
FOR CASH FLOW FROM OPERATIONS
Exhibit 16.5 derives Cash Flow from Operations presented with the direct method for Ellwood 
Corporation. While the direct method’s presentation of cash flow requires less understanding 
of the contrast between cash and accrual accounting, its derivation requires the same under-
standing as does the indirect method. Every addback and subtraction in the indirect presenta-
tion appears in the direct method’s derivation.
To see the relation between the indirect and direct methods, consider the following contrast 
of the equivalent arithmetic used for the two derivations of cash flow from operations.
1. Copy Income Statement [column (a)] and Cash Flow from Operations [column (b)]
2. Copy Information from T-Account Work Sheet Next to Related Income Statement Item [columns (b) and (c)]
3. Sum Across Rows to Derive Direct Receipts and Expenditures [columns (d) and (e)]
Operations 
 
 
Changes in Related
Income Statement: Revenues, 
 
Indirect 
Balance Sheet Accounts 
Direct 
From Operations:
Gains, Expenses, and Losses 
 
Method 
from T-Account Work Sheet 
Method 
Receipts less Expenditures
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e)
Sales   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $10,500 
$   400 = Advances from Customers 
$10,000 
Receipts from Customers
 
 
 
  
 Increase
 
 
 
(900) = Accounts Receivable Increase
Interest and Dividends   . . . . . .  
320 
  
 
320 
Receipts from Investments
Equity in Earnings
 of Affiliate   . . . . . . . . . . . .  
480 
(320) Dividends Received were only $160 
160 
Receipts from Equity
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Method Investments
Gain on Disposal
 of Equipment . . . . . . . . . . .  
40 
(40) Gain Produces No Cash from Operations 
—
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . .  (6,000) 
450 Depreciation on Manufacturing Facilities 
(5,470) Payments for Inventory
 
 
 
150 Amortization of Patents Used
 
 
 
  in Manufacturing
 
 
 
780 = Accounts Payable Increase
 
 
 
(850) = Inventory Increase
Selling and Administrative
 Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (3,550) 
250 Depreciation on Administrative 
(3,400) Payments for Selling and
 
 
 
  Buildings and Equipment 
 
 Administrative Services
 
 
 
200 = Prepayments Decrease
 
 
 
(300) = Warranties Payable Decrease
Compensation Expense
 Employee Stock Options  . . . .   (170) 
170 Compensation Paid in Options 
—
Loss on Impairment of Land . . .  
(80) 
80 Loss Reduces Land Carrying Amount 
—
Loss on Sale of Marketable
 Equity Securities   . . . . . . . .  
(30) 
30 Loss Uses No Cash 
—
Interest Expense   . . . . . . . . . .  
(450) 
(50) Coupon Payments in Excess 
(500) Payments for Debt Service
 
 
 
  of Interest Expense
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . .  
(300) 
100 Deferred Income Taxes Use No Cash 
(200) Payments for Income Taxes
 
 
 
  This Period
Net Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  $   760 =     760         Totals   . . . . . . . . . .   $   910 
= Cash Flow from Operations
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Derived via Direct Method
 
 
 
$   910 = Cash Flow from Operations Derived
 
 
 
  
 via Indirect Method
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

632
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
■ 
The indirect method starts with the total for net income. Then it adds amounts for expenses 
not using cash in the amount of the expense and subtracts amounts for revenues not pro-
ducing cash in the amount of the revenue. Then it removes the effects of non-operating 
gains and losses—subtracting the amount of the gains and adding back the amount of 
the losses. Finally, it adds or subtracts balance sheet changes involving non-cash operating 
accounts.
■ 
The direct method starts with the components of income, the individual revenues and 
expenses, but not gains and losses, and adds or subtracts the same balance sheet changes 
involving the same operating accounts. Take an income statement line, and then list next to 
it, horizontally, additions and subtractions.
The indirect method presents the net of revenues less expenses, and adds to, and subtracts 
from, that total. The direct method starts with a line of the income statement, and then adds to, 
and subtracts from, that component. Because the amounts for balance sheet changes added and 
subtracted are the same, the final result—cash flow from operations—must be the same.
We think you will better understand cash flow from operations if you master the direct 
method, because its presentation, if not its derivation, will match your intuition. In addition, 
understanding the cause of changes from period to period in cash flow from operations comes 
easier from the direct method’s presentation. Few firms, however, use the direct method in their 
audited financial reports.
INTERPRETING THE STATEMENT 
OF CASH FLOWS
Chapter 6 points out that the proper interpretation of information in the statement of cash 
flows requires:
■ 
An understanding of the economic characteristics of the industries in which a firm con-
ducts operations.
■ 
A multi-period view.
This section discusses the interpretation of the statement of cash flows more fully.
RELATION BETWEEN NET INCOME AND CASH FLOW FROM OPERATIONS
Net income (= Revenues – Expenses) differs from Cash Flow from Operations (= Receipts 
from operations – Expenditures for operations). The balance sheet reflects these differences in 
the changes in current and noncurrent accounts:
1. Changes in noncurrent assets and noncurrent liabilities.
2. Changes in operating working capital accounts.
Changes in Noncurrent Assets and Noncurrent Liabilities The extent to which 
a firm adjusts net income for changes in noncurrent assets and noncurrent liabilities in deriving 
cash flow from operations depends on the nature of its operations. Capital-intensive firms will 
likely show a substantial addback to net income for depreciation expense, whereas service firms 
will show a smaller amount. Rapidly growing firms usually show an addback for deferred tax 
expense, whereas firms that stop growing or that shrink show a subtraction. Firms that grow or 
diversify by acquiring minority ownership positions in other businesses will often show a sub-
traction from net income for equity in undistributed earnings. Firms that decrease in size will 
usually show additions or subtractions for losses and gains on the disposal of assets.
Changes in Working Capital Accounts The adjustment for changes in working capi-
tal accounts depends in part on a firm’s rate of growth. Rapidly growing firms usually expe-
rience significant increases in accounts receivable and inventories. Some firms use suppliers 
or other creditors to finance these working capital needs (classified as operating activities), 
whereas other firms use short- or long-term borrowing or equity financing (classified as financ-
ing activities).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

633
Effects of Transactions Involving Derivatives and Fair Value Option on Statement of Cash Flows
RELATIONS AMONG CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING, 
INVESTING, AND FINANCING ACTIVITIES
The product life-cycle concept from microeconomics and marketing provides useful insights 
into the relations among cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
During the introduction phase, cash outflow exceeds cash inflow from operations because 
operations are not yet earning profits while the firm must invest in accounts receivable and 
inventories. Investing activities result in a net cash outflow to build productive capacity. Firms 
must rely on external financing during this phase to overcome the negative cash flow from 
operations and investing.
The growth phase portrays cash flow characteristics similar to the introduction phase. The 
growth phase reflects sales of successful products, and net income turns positive. A growing 
firm makes more sales, but it also needs to acquire more goods, and create more services, to 
sell. Because a firm often must pay for the goods it acquires before it collects for the goods it 
sells, the growing firm finds itself often short of cash from operations. The faster it grows (even 
though profitable), the more cash it needs. The maturing of a product alters these cash flow 
relations. Net income usually reaches a peak, and working capital stops growing. Operations 
generate positive cash flow, enough to finance expenditures on property, plant, and equipment. 
Capital expenditures usually maintain, rather than increase, productive capacity. Firms use the 
excess cash flow to repay borrowing from the introduction and growth phases and, possibly, to 
begin paying dividends to shareholders.
Weakening profitability—from reduced sales or reduced profit margins on existing sales—
signals the beginning of the decline phase, but ever-declining accounts receivable and invento-
ries can produce positive cash flow from operations. In addition, sales of unneeded property, 
plant, and equipment can result in positive cash flow from investing activities. Firms can use 
the excess cash flow to repay remaining debt or diversify into other areas of business.
THE EFFECTS OF TRANSACTIONS INVOLVING 
DERIVATIVES AND THE FAIR VALUE OPTION 
ON THE STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Chapter 13 introduces the reasons firms engage in transactions involving derivatives and shows 
the accounting for them. For the most part, the complex parts of these transactions occur after 
the firm has acquired the derivative, but those subsequent transactions do not affect cash flows 
until, possibly, their settlement. The following discussion refers to a statement of cash flows 
that uses the indirect method for presenting cash flows from operations.
■ 
The firm acquires a derivative for cash. Most such derivative acquisitions represent mar-
ketable securities held as current assets. The cash flow from operations section shows a 
subtraction for the increase in the current asset accounts in an amount equal to the firm’s 
expenditure to acquire the derivative. If the firm classifies the derivative as a non-operating 
asset, then the cash outflow appears in the investing section of the statement of cash flows.
■ 
Subsequent to acquisition, the firm may report4 changes in the fair value of the derivative 
in income. Those changes do not affect cash flow. A subtraction in the operating section of 
cash flows from operations offsets the amount of any gain reported in income. An addition 
in the operating section offsets the amount of any loss reported in income.
■ 
Subsequent to acquisition, the firm may report5 changes in fair value of derivatives in 
Other Comprehensive Income. These changes have no effect on any lines of the statement 
of cash flows and no effect on net income.
■ 
As the derivative transaction settles, there can be various effects. Some of these settlements 
involve net cash flow, such as for a derivative that is not a hedge. Derivatives with cash 
settlement can involve cash flows even when the firm uses them as a hedge; often, however, 
the cash inflow or outflow from the derivative offsets another cash outflow or inflow from 
 4 See Chapter 13 for the situations.
 5 See Chapter 13 for the situations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

634
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
the other side of the hedge. Other settlements involve the receipt of assets such as inventory 
or equipment, which do not involve cash. A discussion of all the possibilities goes beyond 
the scope of this textbook.
Chapter 13 discusses, as well, the fair value option for certain financial assets and financial lia-
bilities. Firms using the fair value option remeasure the carrying value of the asset to fair value 
each period.
■ 
If the change in fair value increases carrying value, then the firm reports a gain in income 
equal to the amount of the increase in carrying value during the current period. The cash 
flow from operations section starts with the resulting higher income. That higher income 
does not, however, result in increased cash inflows during the current period, so the cash 
flow from operations sections shows a subtraction for the amount of the gain.
■ 
If the change in fair value of the derivative decreases carrying value, then the firm reports 
the amount of that decrease as a loss during the current period. The cash flow from opera-
tions section shows lower income as a result. The loss does not, however, result in outflows 
or in decreased cash inflows during the current period, so the cash flow from operations 
sections shows an addback for the loss.
THE EFFECTS OF TRANSACTIONS 
INVOLVING INVESTMENTS ON THE 
STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS
Chapter 14 discusses the accounting for investments. Exhibit 14.8 summarizes the effect on the 
balance sheet and income statement of the various forms of investment. Here, we summarize 
the effects on the statement of cash flows in U.S. GAAP.
Accounting Method
Effects on Statement of Cash Flows
•  Fair value method for securities available for 
sale and cash flow hedge. Realized gains and 
losses appear in net income. Unrealized gains 
and losses appear in Other Comprehensive 
Income.
•  Dividends received from investee included in investor’s 
cash flow from operations. In indirect method, add back 
realized holding losses, and subtract realized holding gains 
included in income for the period to derive cash flow from 
operations. All proceeds of sale of securities available for 
sale appear as a cash inflow from investing activities.
•  Fair value method for trading securities and 
fair value hedges. Both realized and unrealized 
gains and losses appear in net income.
•  Dividends received from investee included in investor’s 
cash flow from operations. In indirect method, add back 
both realized and unrealized holding losses, and subtract 
both realized and unrealized holding gains included in 
income for the period. All proceeds of sale of trading 
securities appear as a cash inflow from investing activities.
•  Amortized cost method for debt where investor 
has both ability and intent to hold to maturity. 
Investor reports interest revenue using 
methods like those illustrated in Exhibit 13.4.
•  If investor acquired the debt at a price below par, then 
cash flow from operations includes only the interest 
coupon received. If the investor acquired the investment in 
debt at a price above par, then cash flow from operations 
will include the amount of interest revenue for the 
period, with source of the remainder of the cash received 
appearing as a cash inflow from investing activities, the 
same as the proceeds of selling an investment.
•  Equity method, where investor reports its share 
of investee’s income.
•  Investor’s cash flow from operations increases by only the 
amount of dividends received. In the indirect method, 
deduct the investor’s share of the undistributed earnings 
of the investee. If the investee reports a loss, then the 
investor reports its share of the loss in income and using 
the indirect method, adds back the amount of that loss, as 
it uses no cash.
•  Consolidation, where investor reports all 
income of consolidated subsidiaries and 
subtracts the noncontrolling interest in income 
of less than 100% owned subsidiaries.
•  In indirect method, add back the subtraction for the 
noncontrolling interest in earnings of consolidated, but 
less than 100% owned subsidiaries to derive cash flow 
from operations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

635
Solution to Self-Study Problem 
SUMMARY
This chapter provides a comprehensive example of the statement of cash flows, which includes 
many of the transactions that the text introduces after Chapter 6.
SOLUTION TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEM
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 16.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Effects of transactions on the statement of cash flows.)
a. The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
12,000
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16,000
Loss on Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
30,000
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+12,000
(Invst.)
0
−2,000
+16,000
−30,000
 
 
The debit to Cash results in an increase on line (11) of $12,000. Selling equipment is 
an investing transaction, so line (6) increases by $12,000. The loss on the sale reduces net 
income, so line (3) decreases by $2,000. Because the loss does not use cash, line (4) increases 
by $2,000 to add back the loss to net income when computing cash flow from operations.
b. The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5,000
Investment in Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
20,000
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+5,000
(Opns.)
0
+20,000
+15,000
 
 
The debit to Cash results in an increase on line (11) of $5,000. Line (1) increases by 
$5,000 for the receipt from the investment, considered an operating source of cash. Line 
(3) increases by $20,000 for the equity in earnings of the affiliate. Because the firm receives 
only $5,000 in cash, line (5) must increase by $15,000 to subtract from earnings the excess 
of equity in earnings over the dividends received.
c. The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows:
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
Capitalized Lease Obligation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
15,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
50,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−50,000
−15,000
−35,000
IncSt → RE
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−50,000
(Opns.)
−15,000
−35,000
0
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

636
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
 
 
The credit to Cash reduces line (11) by $50,000. Line (2) increases by $35,000 for the 
increased use of cash, the expenditure for the portion of the debt-service payment for inter-
est. The recognition of interest expense reduces net income on line (3) by $35,000. This 
amount represents an operating use of cash and, therefore, requires no addback or subtrac-
tion in computing cash flow from operations. The remaining cash payment of $15,000 is a 
financing use of cash, so line (9) increases by $15,000.
d. The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows:
 
Income Tax Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
120,000
Deferred Tax Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
90,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−90,000
+30,000
−120,000
IncSt → RE
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
−90,000
(Opns.)
+30,000
−120,000
0
 
 
The credit to Cash results in a reduction on line (11) of $90,000. Line (2) increases by 
$90,000 for the expenditure related to income taxes. The recognition of income tax expense 
reduces net income on line (3) by $120,000. Because the firm used only $90,000 in cash for 
income taxes this period, line (4) increases by $30,000 for the portion of the expense that 
did not use cash.
e. The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Dividend Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
4,000
∆Cash
=
∆L
+
∆SE
−
∆N$A
+4,000
(Opns.)
0
+4,000
0
 
 
The debit to Cash results in an increase on line (11) of $4,000. The recognition of 
dividend revenue increases net income on line (3) by $4,000. Because dividends received 
from investments in securities are operating transactions and the amount of the dividends 
revenue equals the amount of cash received, the accountant makes no adjustment to net 
income when computing cash flow from operations. IFRS allows the firm to show the cash 
received from dividend investments either as from operations or from investing activities.
PROBLEMS
 1. Effects of transactions on statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 in Chapter 6 provides a 
simplified statement of cash flows. For each of the transactions that follow, indicate the 
number(s) of the line(s) in Exhibit 6.12 affected by the transaction and the amount and 
direction (increase or decrease) of the effect. If the transaction affects net income on line 
(3) or cash on line (11), be sure to indicate if it increases or decreases the line. Expand 
the definition of Line (1) to include receipts from other operating revenue sources. Ignore 
income tax effects. Indicate the effects of each transaction on the Cash Change Equation.
a. A firm declares cash dividends of $15,000, of which it pays $12,000 immediately to its 
shareholders; it will pay the remaining $3,000 early in the next accounting period.
b. A firm borrows $75,000 from its bank.
c. A firm sells for $20,000 machinery originally costing $40,000 and with accumulated 
depreciation of $35,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

637
Problems
d. A firm as lessee records lease payments on operating leases of $28,000 for the period.
e. A firm acquires, with temporarily excess cash, marketable equity securities costing 
$39,000.
f. A firm writes off a fully depreciated truck originally costing $14,000.
g. A marketable equity security (available for sale) acquired during the current period for 
$90,000 has a fair value of $82,000 at the end of the period. Indicate the effect of any 
year-end adjusting entry to apply the market value method.
h. A firm records interest expense of $15,000 for the period on bonds issued several years 
ago at a discount, comprising a $14,500 cash payment and a $500 addition to Bonds 
Payable.
i. A firm records an impairment loss of $22,000 for the period on goodwill arising from 
the acquisition several years ago of an 80% investment in a subsidiary.
 2. Effects of transactions on statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 in Chapter 6 provides a 
simplified statement of cash flows. For each of the transactions that follow, indicate the 
number(s) of the line(s) in Exhibit 6.12 affected by the transaction and the amount and 
direction (increase or decrease) of the effect. If the transaction affects net income on line 
(3) or cash on line (11), be sure to indicate if it increases or decreases the line. Expand 
the definition of Line (1) to include receipts from other operating revenue sources. Ignore 
income tax effects. Indicate the effects of each transaction on the Cash Change Equation.
a. A firm acquires a building costing $400,000, paying $40,000 cash and signing a promis-
sory note to the seller for $360,000.
b. A firm using the allowance method records $32,000 of bad debt expense for the period.
c. A firm using the allowance method writes off accounts totaling $28,000 as uncollectible.
d. A firm owns 30% of the common stock of an investee acquired several years ago at 
carrying value. The investee had net income of $40,000 and paid dividends of $50,000 
during the period.
e. A firm sells for $22,000 marketable equity securities (available for sale) originally costing 
$25,000 and with a carrying value of $23,000 at the time of sale.
f. Holders of a firm’s preferred stock with a carrying value of $10,000 convert their 
preferred shares into common stock with a par value of $2,000. Use the book value 
method.
g. A firm gives land with an acquisition cost and market value of $5,000 in settlement of 
the annual legal fees of its corporate attorney.
h. A firm reduces the liability account Rental Fees Received in Advance for $8,000 when it 
provides rental services.
i. A firm reclassifies long-term debt of $30,000, maturing within the next year, as a cur-
rent liability.
 3. Effects of transactions on statement of cash flows. Exhibit 6.12 in Chapter 6 provides a 
simplified statement of cash flows. For each of the transactions that follow, indicate the 
number(s) of the line(s) in Exhibit 6.12 affected by the transaction and the amount and 
direction (increase or decrease) of the effect. If the transaction affects net income on line 
(3) or cash on line (11), be sure to indicate if it increases or decreases the line. Expand 
the definition of Line (1) to include receipts from other operating revenue sources. Ignore 
income tax effects. Indicate the effects of each transaction on the Cash Change Equation.
a. A firm using the percentage-of-completion method for long-term contracts recognizes 
$15,000 of revenue for the period.
b. A local government donates land with a fair value of $50,000 to a firm as an induce-
ment to locate manufacturing facilities in the area.
c. A firm writes down long-term investments in securities by $8,000 to reflect a decrease in 
fair value.
d. A firm records $60,000 depreciation on manufacturing facilities for the period. The firm 
has sold all goods it manufactured this period.
e. A firm using the allowance method recognizes $35,000 as warranty expense for the 
period.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

638
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
f. A firm using the allowance method makes expenditures totaling $28,000 to provide war-
ranty services during the period.
g. A firm recognizes income tax expense of $80,000 for the period, comprising $100,000 
paid currently and a $20,000 reduction in the Deferred Income Tax Liability account.
h. A firm writes down inventories by $18,000 to reflect the lower-of-cost-or-market 
valuation.
 4. Working backward from the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.6 presents an income state-
ment and a statement of cash flows for Metals Company for 2014 (based on financial 
statements of Alcoa). Give the entry made on the T-account work sheet for each of the 
numbered line items. For example, the work sheet entry for line (1) is as follows (amounts 
in millions of US$):
 
Cash (Operations—Net Income) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,367.4
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,367.4
5. Deriving direct method presentation of cash flow from operations using data from the 
T-account work sheet. Refer to the data in Exhibit 16.6 for Metals Company for 2014 
(based on financial statements of Alcoa). Derive a presentation of cash flow from opera-
tions using the direct method.
6. Working backward from the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.7 presents a statement of 
cash flows from Ingers Company for 2013. Give the entry made on the T-account work 
sheet for each of the numbered line items. For example, the work sheet entry for line (1) is 
as follows (amounts in millions of US$):
 
Cash (Operations—Net Income) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
270.3
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
270.3
7. Preparing a statement of cash flows. (Adapted from CPA examination.) The management 
of Warren Corporation, concerned over a decrease in cash, provides you with the compara-
tive analysis of changes in account balances between June 30, 2013, and June 30, 2014, 
appearing in Exhibit 16.8.
 
 
During the year ended June 30, 2014, Warren Corporation engaged in the following 
transactions:
(1) Purchased new machinery for $463,200. In addition, it sold certain obsolete machinery, 
having a carrying value of $73,200, for $57,600. It made no other entries in Machinery 
and Equipment or related accounts other than provisions for depreciation.
(2) Paid $2,400 of legal costs in a successful defense of a new patent, which it correctly 
debited to the Patents account. It recorded patent amortization amounting to $5,040 
during the year ended June 30, 2014.
(3) Purchased 120 preferred shares, par value $100, at $110 and subsequently canceled the 
shares. Warren Corporation debited the premium paid to Retained Earnings.
(4) On June 10, 2014, the board of directors declared a cash dividend of $0.24 per share, 
payable to holders of common stock on July 10, 2014.
(5) The following illustration presents a comparative analysis of retained earnings as of 
June 30, 2013, and June 30, 2014:
June 30
2014
2013
Balance, June 30, Beginning of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$321,600
$157,200
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 234,000
 206,400
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$555,600
$363,600
Dividends Declared  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(48,000)
(42,000)
Premium on Preferred Stock Repurchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (1,200)
       —
Balance, June 30, End of Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$506,400
$321,600
(6) Warren Corporation wrote off accounts totaling $3,600 as uncollectible during 2014.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

639
Problems
Metals Company
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 4)
Income Statement for 2014
Sales Revenues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$20,465.0
Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20.8
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    214.0
 
Total Revenues and Gains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$20,699.8
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 9,963.3
General and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5,570.2
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,887.3
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    911.6
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$19,332.4
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,367.4
Statement of Cash Flows for 2014
OPERATIONS
 
 (1) Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,367.4
Adjustments for Non-cash Transactions:
 
 (2) Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
664.0
 
 (3) Increase in Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82.0
 
 (4) Equity in Undistributed Earnings of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(47.1)
 
 (5) Gain from Sale of Marketable Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(20.8)
 
 (6) (Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74.6
 
 (7) (Increase) Decrease in Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(198.9)
 
 (8) (Increase) Decrease in Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(40.3)
 
 (9) Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable for Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33.9
 
(10) Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (110.8)
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,804.0
INVESTING
 
(11) Sale of Marketable Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    49.8
 
(12) Acquisition of Marketable Securities Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(73.2)
 
(13) Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(875.7)
 
(14) Acquisition of Subsidiaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (44.5)
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   (943.6)
FINANCING
 
(15) Common Stock Issued to Employees. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    34.4
 
(16) Repurchase of Common Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(100.9)
 
(17) Dividends Paid to Shareholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(242.9)
 
(18) Additions to Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127.6
 
(19) Additions to Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121.6
 
(20) Payments on Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (476.4)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   (536.6)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   323.8
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    506.8
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   830.6
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
 
(21) Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment by Mortgaged Borrowing. . . . . . . . . .
$    76.9
 
(22) Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment by Capital Leases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98.2
 
(23) Conversion of Debt into Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47.8
 
(24) Other Current Liabilities represents obligations for General and Administrative Expenses.
EXHIBIT 16.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

640
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows.
b. Prepare a formal statement of cash flows for Warren Corporation for the year ending 
June 30, 2014, using the indirect method for presenting cash flow from operations.
 8. Preparing a statement of cash flows. (Adapted from CPA examination.) Roth Company 
has prepared its financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2013, and for the 
three months ended March 31, 2014. You will prepare a statement of cash flows for the 
three months ended March 31, 2014. Exhibit 16.9 presents the company’s balance sheet at 
December 31, 2013, and March 31, 2014, and Exhibit 16.10 presents its income statement 
for the three months ended March 31, 2014. You believe that the amounts presented are 
correct.
 
Your discussion with the company’s controller and a review of the financial records 
reveal the following information:
Ingers Company
Statement of Cash Flows, 2013
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 6)
OPERATIONS
 
 (1) Net Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 270.3
Adjustments for Non-cash Transactions:
 
 (2) Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179.4
 
 (3) Gain on Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3.6)
 
 (4) Equity in Earnings of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(41.5)
 
 (5) Deferred Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15.1
 
 (6) (Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50.9
 
 (7) (Increase) Decrease in Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(15.2)
 
 (8) (Increase) Decrease in Other Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(33.1)
 
 (9) Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(37.9)
 
(10) Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   19.2
Cash Flow from Operations
$ 403.6
 
(11) Capital Expenditures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (211.7)
 
(12) Proceeds from Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26.5
 
(13) (Increase) Decrease in Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(4.6)
 
(14) Advances from Equity Companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   18.4
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (171.4)
FINANCING
 
(15) Decrease in Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (81.5)
 
(16) Issue of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147.6
 
(17) Payment of Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(129.7)
 
(18) Proceeds from Exercise of Stock Options  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47.9
 
(19) Proceeds from Sale of Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59.3
 
(20) Dividends Paid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (78.5)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (34.9)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
197.3
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   48.3
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 245.6
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
 
(21) New Capital Leases Signed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 147.9
 
(22) Conversion of Preferred Stock into Common Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62.0
 
(23) Issue of Common Stock to Acquire Investments in Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94.3
EXHIBIT 16.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

641
Problems
(1) On January 8, 2014, the company sold marketable securities for cash. The firm had 
purchased these securities on December 31, 2013. The firm purchased no marketable 
securities during 2013.
(2) The company’s preferred stock is convertible into common stock at a rate of one share 
of preferred for two shares of common. The preferred stock and common stock have 
par values of $2 and $1, respectively.
(3) On January 17, 2014, the local government condemned three acres of land. Roth Com-
pany received an award of $48,000 in cash on March 22, 2014. It does not expect to 
purchase additional land as a replacement.
(4) On March 25, 2014, the company purchased equipment for cash.
(5) Interest expense on bonds payable exceeded the cash coupon payments by $225 during 
the three-month period. On March 29, 2014, the company issued bonds payable for 
cash.
(6) Roth Company declared $12,000 in dividends during the first three months of 2014.
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows, defin-
ing funds as cash and cash equivalents.
b. Prepare a formal statement of cash flows for Roth Company for the three months end-
ing March 31, 2014. Use the indirect method.
c. Derive a presentation of cash flows from operations using the direct method.
 9. Preparing a statement of cash flows. (Adapted from CPA examination.) Exhibit 16.11 pre-
sents a comparative statement of financial position for Biddle Corporation as of December 
31, 2013 and 2014. Exhibit 16.12 presents an income statement for 2014. Additional infor-
mation follows after Exhibit 16.11:
Warren Corporation
Changes in Account Balances
Between June 30, 2013 and June 30, 2014
(Problem 7)
June 30
2014
2013
DEBIT BALANCES
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  174,000
$  223,200
Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
306,000
327,600
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
579,600
645,600
Securities Held for Plant Expansion Purposes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
180,000
—
Machinery and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,112,400
776,400
Leasehold Improvements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104,400
104,400
Patents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    33,360
    36,000
 
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,489,760
$2,113,200
CREDIT BALANCES
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   19,200
$   20,400
Accumulated Depreciation of Machinery and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
499,200
446,400
Accumulated Amortization of Leasehold Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69,600
58,800
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279,360
126,000
Cash Dividends Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48,000
—
Current Portion of 6% Serial Bonds Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60,000
60,000
6% Serial Bonds Payable (noncurrent portion). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
300,000
360,000
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108,000
120,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
600,000
600,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   506,400
   321,600
 
Totals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,489,760
$2,113,200
EXHIBIT 16.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

642
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
Roth Company
Balance Sheet
(Problem 8)
March 31, 
2014
December 31, 
2013
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$131,100
$ 37,950
Marketable Securities Available for Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,200
24,000
Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73,980
36,480
Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  72,885
  46,635
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$288,165
$145,065
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28,050
60,000
Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
375,000
375,000
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122,250
—
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(24,375)
(22,500)
Investment in 30% Owned Company (Using Equity Method). . . . . . . . . . .
100,470
91,830
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  22,650
  22,650
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$912,210
$672,045
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 25,995
$ 31,830
Dividend Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12,000
—
Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  51,924
        —
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 89,919
$ 31,830
Other Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
279,000
279,000
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169,275
71,550
Deferred Income Tax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,269
765
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
45,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165,000
120,000
Unrealized Holding Loss on Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(750)
(750)
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 208,497
 124,650
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$912,210
$672,045
EXHIBIT 16.9
Roth Company
Income Statement Data
For the Three Months Ended March 31, 2014
(Problem 8)
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$364,212
Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,600
Equity in Earnings of 30% Owned Company. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,640
Gain on Condemnation of Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  16,050
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$392,502
Cost of Sales  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$207,612
General and Administrative Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33,015
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,875
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,725
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  52,428
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$296,655
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 95,847
EXHIBIT 16.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

643
Problems
(1) On February 2, 2014, Biddle issued a 10% stock dividend to shareholders of record 
on January 15, 2014. The market price per share of the common stock on February 2, 
2014, was $15.
(2) On March 1, 2014, Biddle issued 1,900 shares of common stock for land. The common 
stock and land had current fair values of approximately $20,000 on March 1, 2014.
(3) On April 15, 2014, Biddle repurchased long-term bonds with a face and carrying value 
of $25,000. It reported a gain of $6,000 on the income statement.
(4) On June 30, 2014, Biddle sold equipment costing $26,500, with a carrying value of 
$11,500, for $9,500 cash.
(5) On September 30, 2014, Biddle declared and paid a $0.04 per share cash dividend to 
shareholders of record on August 1, 2014.
(6) On October 10, 2014, Biddle purchased land for $42,500 cash.
(7) Deferred income taxes represent temporary differences relating to the use of different 
depreciation methods for income tax and financial statement reporting.
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows.
b. Prepare a formal statement of cash flows for Biddle Corporation for the year ended 
December 31, 2014. Use the indirect method.
Biddle Corporation
Statement of Financial Position
(Problem 9)
December 31
2014
2013
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 50,000
$ 45,000
Accounts Receivable (Net of Allowance for Doubtful 
 
Accounts of $10,000 and $8,000, Respectively) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
105,000
70,000
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 130,000
 110,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$285,000
$225,000
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
162,500
100,000
Plant and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
290,000
316,500
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(45,000)
(50,000)
Patents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  15,000
  16,500
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$707,500
$608,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$130,000
$100,000
Accrued Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 100,000
 105,000
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$230,000
$205,000
Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70,000
50,000
Long-Term Bonds (Due December 15, 2020)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  65,000
  90,000
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$365,000
$345,000
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock, Par Value $5, Authorized 50,000 Shares, Issued and 
 
Outstanding 25,000 at the End of 2014 and 21,000 at the End of 2013 . . . 
$125,000
$105,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
116,500
85,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
101,000
73,000
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$342,500
$263,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$707,500
$608,000
EXHIBIT 16.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

644
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
10. Preparing a statement of cash flows. (Adapted from CPA examination.) Exhibit 16.13 pre-
sents the comparative balance sheets for Plainview Corporation for 2013 and 2014.
The following additional information relates to 2014 activities:
(1) The Retained Earnings account changed as follows:
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$755,700
Add Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 236,580
Subtotal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$992,280
Deduct:
 
Cash Dividends . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$130,000
 
Loss on Reissue of Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,000
 
Stock Dividend  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 100,200
 233,200
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2014. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$759,080
(2) On January 2, 2014, Plainview Corporation sold for $127,000 marketable securities 
with an acquisition cost and a carrying value of $110,000. The firm used the proceeds 
from this sale, the funds in the bond sinking fund, and the amount received from the 
issuance of the 8% debentures to retire the 6% mortgage bonds.
(3) The firm reissued treasury stock on February 28, 2014. It treats “losses” on the reissue 
of treasury stock as a charge to Retained Earnings.
(4) The firm declared a stock dividend on October 31, 2014, when the market price of 
Plainview Corporation’s stock was $12 per share.
(5) On April 30, 2014, a fire destroyed a warehouse that cost $100,000 and on which depre-
ciation of $65,000 had accumulated. The firm carried no insurance of this loss. Plain-
view Corporation properly included the loss in the Continuing Operations section of 
the income statement.
(6) Plant and equipment transactions consisted of the sale of a building at its carrying 
value of $4,000 and the purchase of machinery for $28,000.
Biddle Corporation
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2014
(Problem 9)
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$500,000
Gain on Repurchase of Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   6,000
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$506,000
Expenses:
 
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$280,000
 
Salary and Wages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95,000
 
Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10,000
 
Patent Amortization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,500
 
Loss on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,000
 
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,000
 
Miscellaneous. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   4,000
Expenses Before Income Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$400,500
Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$105,500
Income Taxes
 
Current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 25,000
 
Deferred  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  20,000
Provision for Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 45,000
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 60,500
Earnings Per Share  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   2.45
EXHIBIT 16.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

645
Problems
(7) The firm wrote off accounts receivable as uncollectible totaling $16,300 in 2013 and 
$18,500 in 2014. It recognized expired insurance of $4,100 in 2013 and $3,900 in 2014.
(8) The subsidiary, which is 40% owned, reported a loss of $44,800 for 2014.
a. Prepare a T-account work sheet for Plainview Corporation for 2014 for preparing a 
statement of cash flows.
b. Prepare a formal statement of cash flows using the indirect method for the year ending 
December 31, 2014.
11. Preparing and interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.14 presents a comparative 
balance sheet and Exhibit 16.15 presents a comparative income statement for Airlines Cor-
poration for 2013 and 2014 (based on financial statements of UAL). Expenditures on new 
property, plant, and equipment were $1,568 million in 2013 and $2,821 million in 2014. 
Changes in other noncurrent assets are investing activities, and changes in other noncur-
rent liabilities are financing activities.
a. Prepare T-account work sheets for 2013 and 2014 for a statement of cash flows.
b. Prepare a comparative statement of cash flows for 2013 and 2014 using the indirect 
method.
c. Comment on the relations between cash flows from operating, investing, and financing 
activities for 2013 and 2014.
12. Preparing and interpreting the statement of cash flows. Irish Paper Company (Irish) manu-
factures and markets various paper products around the world. Paper manufacturing is a 
Plainview Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheets
December 31, 2014 and 2013
(Problem 10)
2014
2013
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  142,100
$  165,300
Marketable Securities (at Fair Value)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122,600
129,200
Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
312,200
371,200
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
255,200
124,100
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23,400
22,000
Bond Sinking Fund  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
63,000
Investment in Subsidiary (at Equity)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
134,080
152,000
Plant and Equipment (Net) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,443,700
 1,534,600
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,433,280
$2,561,400
SOURCES OF FINANCING
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  238,100
$  213,300
Notes Payable—Current . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
145,000
Accrued Payables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16,500
18,000
Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97,500
31,000
Deferred Income Taxes (Noncurrent). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
127,900
128,400
6% Mortgage Bonds Payable (Due 2022). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
310,000
8% Debentures Payable (Due 2029) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125,000
—
Common Stock, $10 Par Value . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,033,500
950,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67,700
51,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 
Unrealized Holding Gain on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,500
2,500
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
759,080
755,700
Treasury Stock—at Cost of $3 per Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (34,500)
   (43,500)
 
Total Sources of Financing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$2,433,280
$2,561,400
EXHIBIT 16.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

646
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
capital-intensive activity. A firm that does not adequately use its manufacturing capacity 
will experience poor operating performance. Sales of paper products tend to be cyclical 
with general economic conditions, although consumer paper products are less cyclical than 
business paper products.
Exhibit 16.16 on page 647 presents comparative income statements and Exhibit 16.17
on page 648 presents comparative balance sheets for Irish Paper Company for 2012, 2013, 
and 2014. Additional information appears below (amounts in millions of US$).
(1)
Cash Flow Information
2014
2013
2012
Investments in Affiliatesa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (13)
$  86
$ (92)
Expenditures on Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(315)
(931)
(775)
Long-Term Debt Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36
890
449
aExcludes earnings and dividends.
Airlines Corporation
Comparative Balance Sheet
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 11)
December 31
2014
2013
2012
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   221
$   465
$ 1,087
Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,066
1,042
—
Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
913
888
741
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
323
249
210
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    209
    179
    112
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,732
$ 2,823
$ 2,150
Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,587
7,704
7,710
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,838)
(3,805)
(3,769)
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    605
    570
    610
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 8,086
$ 7,292
$ 6,701
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   552
$   596
$   540
Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
447
446
121
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
84
110
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
843
661
619
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,826
  1,436
  1,485
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 3,757
$ 3,223
$ 2,875
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,475
1,334
1,418
Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
368
64
352
Other Noncurrent Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    721
    719
    715
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,321
$ 5,640
$ 5,360
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   120
$   119
$   119
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
48
48
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income 
 
Unrealized Holding Gain on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . .
92
85
—
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,613
1,512
1,188
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (112)
   (112)
    (14)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,765
$ 1,652
$ 1,341
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 8,086
$ 7,292
$ 6,701
EXHIBIT 16.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

647
Problems
(2) Depreciation expense was $306 million in 2012, $346 million in 2013, and $353 million 
in 2014.
(3) During 2012, Irish purchased outstanding stock warrants for $201 million. It recorded 
the transaction by debiting the Common Stock account.
(4) During 2012, Irish sold timberlands at a gain. It received cash of $5 million and a long-
term note receivable for $220 million, which it includes in Other Assets on the balance 
sheet.
Airlines Corporation
Comparative Income Statement
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 11)
2014
2013
REVENUES
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,037
$ 9,794
Interest Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
123
121
Gains on Dispositions of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    286
    106
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,446
$10,021
EXPENSES
Compensation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,550
$ 3,158
Fuel  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,811
1,353
Commissions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,719
1,336
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
560
517
Other Operating Costs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,514
2,950
Interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
121
169
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     70
    214
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,345
$ 9,697
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   101
$   324
EXHIBIT 16.15
Irish Paper Company
Comparative Income Statements
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 12)
For the Year Ended December 31
2014
2013
2012
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$4,976
$5,356
$5,066
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
38
31
Interest Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
23
34
Gain (Loss) on Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . .
    (34)
    19
   221
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,032
$5,436
$5,352
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$3,388
$3,721
$3,493
Selling Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,005
925
857
Administrative Expenses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
581
414
303
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
221
199
158
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (21)
     8
   165
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,174
$5,267
$4,976
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (142)
$  169
$  376
EXHIBIT 16.16
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

648
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
(5) In addition to the preceding cash expenditures, Irish acquired property, plant, and 
equipment during 2013 costing $221 million by assuming a long-term mortgage 
payable.
(6) During 2014, Irish resold treasury stock for an amount greater than its cost.
(7) Changes in Other Assets are investing activities.
a. Prepare T-account work sheets for a statement of cash flows for Irish for 2012, 2013, 
and 2014.
b. Prepare a comparative statement of cash flows for Irish for 2012, 2013, and 2014 using 
the indirect method.
c. Comment on the pattern of cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activi-
ties for each of the three years.
13. Preparing a statement of cash flows. (Adapted from a problem prepared by Stephen A. 
Zeff.) Selected information from the accounting records of Breda Enterprises, Inc., appears 
next. The firm uses a calendar year as its reporting period. Prepare a statement of cash 
flows for Breda Enterprises for 2014. Use the indirect method. Key all figures in the state-
ment of cash flows to the numbered items below.
(1) Net income for 2014 is $90,000.
(2) Beginning and ending balances in three accounts relating to the firm’s customers were 
as follows:
Irish Paper Company
Comparative Balance Sheets
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 12)
On December 31
2014
2013
2012
2011
ASSETS
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   184
$   114
$    49
$   374
Accounts Receivable (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
670
829
723
611
Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
571
735
581
522
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     56
     54
     54
    108
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,481
$ 1,732
$ 1,407
$ 1,615
Investments in Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
333
322
375
254
Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7,172
7,079
5,969
5,272
Accumulated Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2,977)
(2,698)
(2,392)
(2,160)
Other Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    484
    465
    387
    175
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,493
$ 6,900
$ 5,746
$ 5,156
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,314
$ 1,178
$   992
$   920
Current Portion of Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . .
158
334
221
129
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     38
     83
     93
     98
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,510
$ 1,595
$ 1,306
$ 1,147
Long-Term Debt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,333
2,455
1,678
1,450
Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    661
    668
    694
    607
 
 Total Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,504
$ 4,718
$ 3,678
$ 3,204
Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$     7
$     7
$     7
$     7
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
439
432
428
629
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,557
1,758
1,648
1,331
Treasury Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (14)
    (15)
    (15)
    (15)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,989
$ 2,182
$ 2,068
$ 1,952
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . .
$ 6,493
$ 6,900
$ 5,746
$ 5,156
EXHIBIT 16.17
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

649
Problems
December 31, 
2014
December 31, 
2013
Accounts Receivable (Gross) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$53,000
$41,000
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  3,200
  1,800
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,000
  3,700
 
 
On November 1, 2014, a customer gave the firm a six-month, 8%, $15,000 note in 
satisfaction of an account receivable of $15,000. Interest is payable at maturity. This 
was the only note receivable held by the company during 2014.
(3) The balances in Merchandise Inventory and Accounts Payable were as follows:
December 31, 
2014
December 31, 
2013
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$43,000
$47,000
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 39,000
 27,000
(4) During 2014 the firm sold, for $25,000 cash, equipment with a carrying value of 
$38,000. The firm also purchased equipment for cash. Depreciation expense for 2014 
was $42,000. The balance in the Equipment account at acquisition cost decreased 
$26,000 between the beginning and end of 2014. The balance in the Accumulated 
Depreciation account increased $11,000 between the beginning and end of 2014.
(5) The balances in the Leasehold Asset and Lease Liability accounts were as follows on 
various dates:
December 31, 
2014
December 31, 
2013
December 31, 
2012
Leasehold Asset (net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$71,000
$76,000
$0
Lease Liability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 73,600
 76,000
 0
 
On December 31, 2013, the firm signed a long-term lease, which, by its terms, qualified 
as a capital lease. The firm made a payment under the lease of $10,000 on December 
31, 2014.
(6) The firm declared cash dividends during 2014 of $26,000, of which $10,000 remains 
unpaid on December 31, 2014. During 2014 the firm paid $8,000 cash for dividends 
declared during 2013.
(7) The firm classifies all marketable securities as available for sale. It purchased no mar-
ketable securities during 2014 but sold marketable equity securities that had originally 
cost $4,500 for $9,100 cash in November 2014. The fair values of marketable equity 
securities were $4,000 on December 31, 2013, and $10,500 on December 31, 2014. 
These amounts were also the carrying values of the securities on these two dates.
(8) Investors in $100,000 face value of convertible bonds of Breda Enterprises converted 
them into 8,000 shares of the firm’s $12 par value common stock during 2014. The 
common stock had a market value of $15 per share on the conversion date. Breda 
Enterprises had originally issued the bonds at a premium. Their carrying value on the 
date of the conversion was $105,000. The firm chose the generally accepted (alterna-
tive) accounting principle of recording the issuance of the common stock at market 
value and recognizing a loss of $15,000. The loss is not an extraordinary item. The firm 
amortized $1,500 of the bond premium between January 1, 2014, and the date of the 
conversion.
14. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.18 presents a statement of cash flows 
for Gear Locker, manufacturer of athletic shoes and sportswear, for three recent years.
a. What is the likely reason for the negative cash flow from operations?
b. How did Gear Locker finance the negative cash flow from operations during each of the 
three years? Suggest reasons for Gear Locker’s choice of financing source for each year.
c. Expenditures on property, plant, and equipment substantially exceeded the addback 
for depreciation expense each year. What is the likely explanation for this difference in 
amounts?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

650
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
d. The addback for depreciation expense is a relatively small proportion of net income. 
What is the likely explanation for this situation?
e. Gear Locker had no long-term debt in its capital structure during 2012 through 2014. 
What is the likely explanation for such a financial structure?
15. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.19 presents a statement of cash flows 
for Canned Soup Company for three recent years (based on financial statements of Camp-
bell Soup Company). Canned Soup Company is in the consumer foods industry, a rela-
tively mature industry in the United States.
a. Cash flow from operations each year approximately equals net income plus addbacks for 
depreciation, deferred taxes, and other. What is the likely explanation for this relation?
b. In the Investing section of Canned’s statement of cash flows, what are the indications 
that the company is in a relatively mature industry?
c. In the Financing section of Canned’s statement of cash flows, what are the indications 
that the company is in a relatively mature industry?
16. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Prime Contracting Services provides various ser-
vices to government agencies under multi-year contracts. In 2006, the services primarily 
involved transportation of equipment and furniture. Beginning in 2012, the firm began 
exiting these transportation services businesses and began offering more people-based ser-
vices (clerical, training). Sales increased at a compounded annual rate of 28.9% during the 
five-year period. Exhibit 16.20 presents a statement of cash flows for Prime Contracting 
Services for 2006 to 2010. Changes in Other Current Liabilities primarily represent salaries.
a. What evidence do you see of the strategic shift from asset-based to people-based 
services?
Gear Locker
Statement of Cash Flows
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 14)
2014
2013
2012
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 55,059
$ 22,030
$  4,371
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,199
446
133
Non-cash Compensation to Employees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
558
—
—
Increase in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(51,223)
(34,378)
(12,410)
Increase in Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(72,960)
(50,743)
(1,990)
Increase in Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(8,624)
(2,432)
(599)
Increase in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
17,871
7,197
1,656
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . 
        10,587
        11,193
          (537)
 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$(47,533)
$(46,687)
$         (9,376)
INVESTING
Sale of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
—
$  5,661
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (6,168)
$ (2,546)
(874)
Acquisition of Other Noncurrent Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
           (246)
           (406)
          (241)
 
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ (6,414)
$ (2,952)
$  4,546
FINANCING
Increase (Decrease) in Short-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$(19,830)
$ 50,104
$  4,566
Issue of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  69,925
     495
           —
 
Cash Flow from Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 50,095
$ 50,599
$  4,566
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   (3,852)
$    960
$     (264)
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   4,205
   3,245
   3,509
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    353
$  4,205
$  3,245
EXHIBIT 16.18
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

651
Problems
Canned Soup Company
Statement of Cash Flows
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 15)
2014
2013
2012
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 274
$ 247
$ 223
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
171
145
127
Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
46
29
Other Addbacks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
34
21
(Increase) in Accounts Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(55)
(40)
(19)
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
(13)
13
(Increase) in Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(40)
(11)
(7)
Increase in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
53
27
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (1)
    2
   29
 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 469
$ 463
$ 443
INVESTING
Sale of Property, Plant, and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  41
$  21
$  30
Sale of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
319
535
328
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(245)
(250)
(275)
Acquisition of Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(70)
(680)
(472)
Acquisition of Investments in Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(472)
—
—
Other Investing Transactions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (48)
    (34)
     (5)
 
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (475)
$ (408)
$ (394)
FINANCING
Increase in Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  86
$   5
—
Increase in Long-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
29
$ 220
Issue of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
2
4
Decrease in Short-Term Borrowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(5)
—
(3)
Decrease in Long-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(106)
(27)
(168)
Acquisition of Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(28)
—
—
Dividends  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (103)
   (92)
   (84)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (53)
$  (83)
$    (31)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (59)
$  (28)
$  18
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  145
  173
  155
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  86
$ 145
$ 173
EXHIBIT 16.19
b. What are the likely reasons that net income decreased between 2006 and 2013 while cash 
flow from operations increased during the same period?
c. What are the likely reasons that net income increased between 2013 and 2010 while cash 
flow from operations was less during 2014 and 2010 than in 2013?
d. How has the risk of Prime Contracting Services changed during the five years?
17. Interpreting the statement of cash flows. Exhibit 16.21 presents a statement of cash flows 
for Cypress Corporation.
a. What are the likely reasons that net income increased between 2011 and 2013, but cash 
flow from operations decreased?
b. What are the likely reasons for the increased cash flow from operations between 2013 
and 2015?
c. How has the risk of Cypress Corporation changed over the five-year period?
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

652
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
Prime Contracting Services
Statement of Cash Flows
(all amounts in millions of US$)
(Problem 16)
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 593,518
$ 412,908
$  46,799
$ 249,438
$  261,243
Depreciation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
606,633
664,882
826,745
616,335
306,423
Deferred Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(154,000)
(110,116)
55,000
179,584
158,966
Loss (Gain) on Disposition of Assets  . . . . . . . . .
(35,077)
(117,804)
—
—
20,000
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9,100
(19,377)
(51,711)
(7,226)
2,200
(Increase) Decrease in Accounts Receivable  . . . .
175,408
(864,555)
(263,164)
(647,087)
(1,420,783)
(Increase) Decrease in Other Current Assets  . . . .
127,548
(9,333)
(40,067)
(25,792)
(38,031)
Increase (Decrease) in Accounts Payable  . . . . . .
(166,672)
(272,121)
(32,732)
(177,031)
507,386
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . .
 (416,856)
  927,478
  422,929
   99,417
   266,260
 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 739,602
$ 611,962
$ 963,799
$ 287,638
$     63,664
INVESTING
Fixed Assets Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 175,075
$ 117,804
—
—
$     80,000
Employee and Officer Loans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
$  62,894
(16,960)
Fixed Assets Acquired  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (48,296)
  (19,222)
$ (56,370)
 (911,470)
 (2,002,912)
 
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 126,779
$  98,582
$ (56,370)
$ (848,576)
$(1,939,872)
FINANCING
Net Increase (Decrease) in Notes Payable . . . . . .
$ 325,354
$  12,650
$ (126,932)
$ 275,475
$    204,817
Borrowings Under Equipment Loans . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
208,418
793,590
943,589
Borrowings Under Capital Leases . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
—
915,596
Borrowings from Shareholder Loans . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
117,422
127,500
Repayments Under Equipment Loans  . . . . . . . . .
(736,793)
(437,660)
(564,585)
(389,268)
(236,229)
Repayments Under Capital Leases  . . . . . . . . . . .
—
(304,054)
(296,495)
(268,556)
(124,012)
Repayments Under Shareholder Loans. . . . . . . . .
  (28,710)
         —
 (150,000)
         —
     (63,077)
 
Cash Flow from Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ (440,149)
$ (729,064)
$ (929,594)
$ 528,663
$ 1,768,184
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 426,232
$  (18,520)
$  (22,165)
$  (32,275)
$      (108,024)
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    5,913
  24,433
   46,598
   78,873
    186,897
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 432,145
$   5,913
$  24,433
$  46,598
$     78,873
EXHIBIT 16.20
18. Deriving cash flows from financial statement data; comprehensive review, including other 
comprehensive income. Exhibit 16.22 presents financial data, including a partial statement 
of cash flows, for LKR Company for the year. Fill in the numbers in the statement of 
cash flows. (Hint: Work from the bottom up.) Then respond to the following questions. 
Use positive numbers for cash inflows (receipts) and negative numbers for cash outflows 
(expenditures).
a. What were the proceeds of sale of the old Buildings and Equipment?
b. What were the proceeds of sale of the Securities Available for Sale?
c. What were the purchases during the year of new Securities Available for Sale?
d. During the year, the market value of the Securities Available for Sale changed while 
LKR held them. By how much did the aggregate market value increase or decrease? 
Give the amount and whether increase or decrease.
e. What dividends, if any, did LKR receive from its 40% owned affiliate?
f. What was the net income, if any, of the 90% owned subsidiary?
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

653
Problems
Cypress Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 17)
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
OPERATING
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,602
$ 6,583
$ 3,716
$ 1,733
$ 1,045
Depreciation and Amortization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
643
586
513
490
491
Other Addbacks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
299
151
243
25
20
Other Subtractions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (97)
      0
      0
      0
      0
 
Working Capital Provided by Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,447
$ 7,320
$ 4,472
$ 2,248
$ 1,556
(Increase) Decrease in Receivables  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,456
(5,452)
(3,589)
(2,424)
(750)
(Increase) Decrease in Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,068
1,867
(7,629)
(4,111)
(1,387)
Increase (Decrease) Accts. Pay—Trade . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2,608)
1,496
1,393
2,374
1,228
Increase (Decrease) in Other Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (1,508)
  1,649
  4,737
  2,865
    473
 
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 8,855
$ 6,880
$    (616)
$   952
$ 1,120
INVESTING
Fixed Assets Acquired (Net)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (1,172)
$  (1,426)
$    (749)
$   (849)
$   (347)
Marketable Securities Acquired  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,306)
0
0
0
0
Other Investment Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     39
            (64)
         81
      0
     45
 
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (4,439)
$  (1,490)
$    (668)
$   (849)
$   (302)
FINANCING
Increase in Short-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$     0
$     0
$ 2,800
$   700
$ 0
Increase in Long-Term Borrowing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
0
0
0
Issue of Capital Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
315
0
0
0
0
Decrease in Short-Term Borrowing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
(3,500)
0
0
0
Decrease in Long-Term Borrowing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(170)
(170)
(170)
(170)
(170)
Acquisition of Capital Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0
0
0
0
(27)
Dividends Paid to Shareholders  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(2,243)
(1,427)
(964)
(730)
(614)
Other Financing Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
         0
        0
        0
        0
        0
 
Cash Flow from Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  (2,098)
$  (5,097)
$ 1,666
$   (200)
$   (811)
Change in Cash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,318
$   293
$   382
$          (97)
$     7
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,540
  1,247
    865
    962
    955
Cash, End of Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 3,858
$ 1,540
$ 1,247
$   865
$   962
EXHIBIT 16.21
g. What was the amount of expenditure for the year for warranty service, repairs, and 
replacements?
h. What was the amount of accounts receivable LKR wrote off as uncollectible during the 
year?
i. What was the total depreciation deduction LKR claimed on its income tax return for 
the year?
j. What were total cash dividends LKR paid during the year?
k. What was total cash flow for or from Financing activities for the year?
l. What was total cash flow for or from Investing activities for the year?
m. What was total cash flow for or from Operations for the year?
n. What were the total receipts from customers for the year?
o. What were the total expenditures for inventory during the year?
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

654
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
EXHIBIT 16.22
LKR Company
Statement of Earnings and Comprehensive Income
(Problem 18)
 
 
 
For Year
Revenues   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   1,500,000
Gain on Sale of Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,300
Gain on Sale of Buildings and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
23,000
Equity in Earnings of Affiliate   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
1,600
Expenses:
 Cost of Goods Sold   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$788,000
 Wages and Salaries  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
280,000
 Depreciation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54,000
 Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125,000
 Warranty Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
34,000
 Interest   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,000
 Income Taxes (Current)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90,400
 Income Taxes (Deferred)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   1,600
 Total Expenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
(1,385,000)
Noncontrolling Interest in Subsidiary’s Earningsa . . . . . . . . . .
     (1,100)
Earnings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
$     141,800
Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        7,000
Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$     148,800
Statement of Cash Flows 
 
 For Year
Cash Flow from Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$       
[9]
Investing/Disinvesting:
 (Purchase) of Securities Available for Sale   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[8]
 Proceeds of Selling
 Sale of Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[7]
 (Purchase) of Land  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[6]
 Sale of Old Buildings and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[5]
 (Purchase) of New Buildings and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[4]
Financing:
 Increase (Decrease) Long-Term Debt   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[3]
Increase (Decrease) Common Shares   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[2]
Cash Dividends (Paid)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       
[1]
Net Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$13,000 
[0]
Cash, Beginning of Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 52,000
Cash, End of Year   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$65,000
aIFRS does not allow showing Noncontrolling Interest as an expense, and U.S. GAAP does not allow this after June 2014.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

655
Problems
EXHIBIT 16.22
LKR Company
Statement of Earnings and Comprehensive Income
(Problem 18) (continued)
 
 
End of Year 
Start of Year
Balance Sheet 
 
31 December 
1 January
ASSETS
Cash   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$    65,000 
$    52,000
Accounts Receivable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
197,000 
184,000
 Allowance for Uncollectibles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(43,000) 
(41,000)
Advances to Suppliers of Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000 
5,000
Inventory at FIFO Cost   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
212,000 
192,000
Allowance to Reduce to LIFO Valuation   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(58,000) 
(50,000)
Prepaid Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
— 
18,000
Deferred Income Taxes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,800 
9,000
Investment in Securities Available for Sale . . . . . . . . . . . . 
80,000 
68,000
Investment in Affiliate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
13,700 
13,000
Land   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
39,000 
28,000
Buildings and Equipment (Cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
858,000 
790,000
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (504,000) 
 (460,000)
Total Assets   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   873,500
$   808,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Accounts Payable for Inventory   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   141,000 
$   136,000
Advances from Customers   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000 
14,000
Warranty Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
28,000 
28,000
Interest Payable   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000 
10,000
Income Taxes Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
19,000 
—
Deferred Income Taxes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34,400 
32,000
Mortgage Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
118,000 
120,000
Minority Interest in Subsidiary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,100 
1,000
Common Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
257,000 
250,000
Retained Earnings   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
236,000 
200,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income . . . . . . . . . . . . 
     24,000
     17,000
 Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity   . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   873,500
$   808,000
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Asset Sale: Initial Cost of B&E Sold During Year Was: 
$40,000
No Purchases or Sales of Shares of Affiliates and Subsidiaries During 
Year; LKR Owns 40% of Affiliate and 90% of Subsidiary.
Cost of Securities Available for Sale Sold During Year Was: 
$4,000
Fair Value on Dates of Sale of Securities Available for Sale Sold During 
the Year Was: 
$5,000
Income Tax Rate was 40%; All Deferred Tax Assets Result from Warranties 
and Uncollectible Accounts Causing Temporary Differences
All Deferred Tax Liabilities Result from Depreciation Causing Temporary Differences
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income Relates only to Investments in 
Securities Available for Sale
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

656
Chapter 16 
Statement of Cash Flows: Another Look
p. What were the total expenditures for income taxes during the year?
q. Did LKR use a LIFO or a FIFO cost-flow assumption for the year?
r. By what amount would LKR’s pretax income for the year have changed if LKR had 
used the other cost-flow assumption? Give the amount and whether larger or smaller.
s. By the end of the year, what was LKR’s total unrealized holding gain on inventory?
t. Refer to the total unrealized holding gain in the preceding question. In which of the 
following is that gain more likely reflected in the statements for the current year?
 
A. Other Comprehensive Income
 
B. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 
C. Net Income
 
D. Retained Earnings
 
E. None of the above
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

SECTION 1: REVIEW AND SYNTHESIS
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
T
he FASB and the IASB use a conceptual framework to guide their standard-setting deci-
sions. The FASB and the IASB have separately developed most of their conceptual frame-
works, which are similar. The conceptual framework is not a rigorous set of principles from which 
standard setters logically deduce appropriate financial reporting standards. Rather, the conceptual 
framework guides standard-setting decisions in order to enhance the quality and consistency of 
those decisions. Figure 17.1 summarizes the components of the conceptual framework.
The FASB and IASB are working to develop a common conceptual framework, and have 
issued converged conceptual guidance on the objectives of general purpose financial reporting and 
qualitative characteristics of decision useful information. We discuss the direction of the FASB-
IASB conceptual framework efforts in the following sections. We designate in parentheses the 
chapters that discuss these topics more fully.
FINANCIAL REPORTING OBJECTIVES (CHAPTER 1)
Financial reporting objectives speak to the purpose of financial reports and the primary users and 
uses of those reports. The FASB and IASB have completed the portion of their conceptual frame-
work project that specifies the objectives of financial reporting.1 The resulting conceptual guid-
ance lists the following financial reporting objectives:
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Synthesis and 
Extensions
C h a p t e r 
17
 1 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 8, “Chapter 1: The Objective of General Purpose Finan-
cial Reporting, and Chapter 3: Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information,” 2010; International 
Accounting Standards Board, The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting 2010, 2010.
1. Review the conceptual framework 
underlying the authoritative guidance 
for financial reporting and potential 
changes in that framework.
2. Synthesize the financial reporting stan-
dards and concepts discussed in previ-
ous chapters.
3. Summarize certain differences in finan-
cial reporting between U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS.
4. Extend your understanding of the 
reporting and disclosure of income 
statement information, including the 
nature and reporting of transactions, 
accounting errors and adjustments, 
earnings per share, and segment 
reporting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

658
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
1. Provide information useful for making decisions about providing resources to an entity, 
including buying, selling, or holding debt and equity instruments and providing or settling 
loans and other forms of credit.
2. Provide information to help current and potential investors and creditors assess the 
amount, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
3. Provide information about the economic resources of an entity and the claims on those 
resources, as well as changes in those resources and related claims.
4. Provide information about an entity’s operating performance during a period.
5. Provide information about how an entity obtains and uses cash (its cash flows).
6. Provide information about how management has discharged its responsibilities to make 
efficient and effective use of the entity’s resources.
These objectives identify investors and creditors, both current and potential, as the principal 
users of financial reports. They also identify the provision of information to make investment 
and credit decisions as the principal purpose of financial reporting. This portion of the con-
ceptual framework specifies that financial reports are not intended to show the value of the 
reporting entity, but rather to provide information to help financial statement users estimate 
that value. The IASB and FASB acknowledge that individual financial statement users may 
have different and possibly conflicting information needs and desires, and that general pur-
pose financial reporting may not be able to meet these potentially specialized needs. Finally, 
the IASB and FASB acknowledge that financial reports are based on estimates, judgments, and 
models and specify the conceptual framework as establishing the concepts that underlie those 
estimates, judgments and models.
QUALITATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF FINANCIAL 
REPORTING INFORMATION (CHAPTER 1)
The qualitative characteristics describe the attributes that determine the usefulness of finan-
cial reporting information. The FASB’s Concepts Statement 8, Chapter 3, and the IASB’s 
Conceptual Framework 2010 set forth the following fundamental and enhancing qualitative 
characteristics:
1. Relevance, described as a fundamental qualitative characteristic, refers to information that 
can make a difference in a resource allocation decision. Information is relevant when it 
helps users to form predictions about the outcomes of future events and to confirm or cor-
rect prior information or expectations. Receiving information in a timely manner (referred 
to as timeliness, included as an enhancing qualitative characteristic), so that it can influence 
decisions, increases the relevance of financial information.
2. Faithful representation, described as a fundamental qualitative characteristic, refers to the 
faithfulness with which accounting information represents what it purports to represent. 
Faithful representation encompasses completeness, neutrality, and freedom from error. 
Completeness means that all the necessary information is present. Neutrality refers to an 
absence of bias in the selection or presentation of financial information. Freedom from 
error is not used to mean entirely accurate in all respects; rather, the freedom from error 
refers to the process that generates the financial information.
3. Comparability, described as an enhancing qualitative characteristic, refers to financial 
reporting that treats similar items the same way and different items differently. Consistency
refers to financial reporting that applies the same accounting method to the same items, 
Financial
Reporting
Objectives
Qualitative
Characteristics and
Constraints of
Financial Reporting
Information
Definition,
Recognition, and
Measurement of
Elements of
Financial Statements
Components of the Conceptual Framework
FIGURE 17.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

659
Conceptual Framework
either across firms or over time. The conceptual framework describes consistency as help-
ing to achieve comparability.
4. Verifiability, described as an enhancing qualitative characteristic, means that different 
knowledgeable and independent observers would reach consensus that a specific depiction 
is a faithful representation.
5. Understandability, described as an enhancing qualitative characteristic, means that infor-
mation is classified, characterized and presented clearly and concisely.
The conceptual framework also discusses materiality, which refers to whether the effect of 
relevant information is large enough to influence a decision, and cost constraints, which refer 
to the idea that in developing authoritative guidance, standard setters weigh the benefits of 
financial reporting information to users of financial reports against the costs of providing that 
information.
The conceptual framework distinguishes between the fundamental qualitative characteris-
tics and the enhancing qualitative characteristics in the following ways. First, both relevance 
and representational faithfulness are necessary conditions for useful financial information. Sec-
ond, the enhancing qualitative characteristics, whether considered individually or as a group, 
cannot make information useful if that information is not relevant and not representationally 
faithful. Third, it may be necessary to diminish an enhancing characteristic in order to increase 
a fundamental characteristic, for example, reducing comparability to increase relevance.
DEFINITION, RECOGNITION, AND MEASUREMENT OF ELEMENTS 
OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CHAPTERS 4 AND 5)
The elements of financial statements are the building blocks for the balance sheet and income 
statement. The principal elements are as follows:
Balance Sheet
1. Asset
2. Liability
3. Equity
Income Statement
1. Revenue
2. Expense
3. Gains and losses
In addition to discussing these financial statement elements, this section also discusses two 
related concepts: (1) income and (2) accrual accounting.
Asset The FASB’s conceptual framework defines an asset as a probable future economic ben-
efit that is obtained or controlled by an entity as a result of a past transaction or event. The 
IASB’s conceptual framework defines an asset as a resource controlled by an entity as a result 
of a past event and from which a firm expects future economic benefits. Like the definition of 
an asset, the criteria for asset recognition are similar under the two frameworks:
1. The firm owns or controls the right to use the asset.
2. The right to use the item arises as a result of a past transaction or event.
3. The future benefit has a relevant measurement attribute that a firm can quantify with suf-
ficient reliability.
The two conceptual frameworks also discuss measurement attributes for assets. Measurement 
attributes include, for example, acquisition cost, current replacement cost, and net realizable 
value.
The definition of an asset and the recognition criteria focus on a “past transaction” and 
“measurable future benefits”:
■ 
The existence of a past transaction demonstrates that the firm has undertaken a past eco-
nomic sacrifice to acquire the asset.
■ 
The existence of measurable future benefits enables assessments of the amount of future 
benefits the firm will receive from the asset.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

660
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
This definition of an asset excludes certain transactions. For example, it excludes the expected 
benefits that arise from rights under executory contracts (mere exchanges of promises) because 
the conceptual framework does not view the signing of a contract, in isolation, as evidence of 
a past transaction. As another example, the asset definition excludes expected benefits aris-
ing from transactions where the receipt of future benefits depends on the outcome of a future 
event.
As part of their joint conceptual framework project, the FASB and the IASB are reconsid-
ering both the definition of an asset and the criteria for asset recognition. Their proposed defi-
nition emphasizes the present existence of an economic resource and de-emphasizes the notions 
of a past exchange and future benefits. Resources would satisfy the definition of an asset if 
(1) the entity can separate the resources from the entity (by sale, or exchange, or license, or 
other disposal), or (2) the resources arise from contractual or other legal rights, suggesting that 
negotiations between independent parties in establishing the rights permit estimation of value, 
even if the entity cannot exchange the item.
Asset recognition criteria also focus on which entity should recognize an asset. The issue is 
particularly pertinent as it applies to asset derecognition. Derecognition refers to the removal 
of an asset from a firm’s balance sheet. Standard setters have changed the criteria for asset 
derecognition several times over the last 30 years.
Asset recognition criteria also affect the treatment of expenditures that create future ben-
efits, but the firm cannot measure those future benefits with sufficient reliability. Examples 
include expenditures for creating a brand name and for researching new technologies. U.S. 
GAAP and IFRS differ in the extent to which they require firms to recognize a portion of these 
expenditures as assets versus treating the expenditures fully as expenses. A related issue is the 
inconsistent treatment of expenditures incurred internally versus amounts spent to acquire 
brand names, technologies, and other intangibles in external market transactions.
Liability The FASB’s conceptual framework defines a liability as a probable future sacri-
fice of economic resources arising from present obligations of a particular entity to transfer 
assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result of past transactions or events. 
The IASB’s framework defines a liability as a present obligation of an entity arising from past 
events, the settlement of which is expected to result in an outflow of resources embodying eco-
nomic benefits. The criteria for recognition of a liability are as follows:
1. The obligation represents a present obligation, not a potential future commitment or 
intent.
2. The obligation exists as a result of a past transaction or exchange, called the obligating 
event.
3. The obligation requires the probable future sacrifice of an economic resource that the firm 
has little or no discretion to avoid.
4. The obligation has a relevant measurement attribute that the firm can quantify with suf-
ficient reliability.
Firms report many financial liabilities as the present value of the amount payable, except that 
firms can ignore discounting for liabilities due within one year. Nonfinancial liabilities, those 
settled by providing goods and services instead of cash, typically appear at either the amount 
of cash received (for example, advances from customers) or the expected cost of providing 
goods and services (for example, warranty liability).
Obligations under executory contracts do not usually appear as liabilities because they 
do not represent a present obligation. Authoritative guidance2 that exists as this book goes to 
press distinguishes between operating leases, accounted for as executory contracts, and leases 
accounted for as capital, or finance, leases. Firms also do not recognize certain obligations that 
are uncertain as to amount or timing or both as liabilities, unless those items meet a probability 
threshold and have a reliable measurement attribute. U.S. GAAP refers to these unrecognized 
obligations, such as the possible obligation under an unsettled lawsuit, as unrecognized contin-
gencies, and IFRS uses the term contingent liability.
As previously discussed for assets, the FASB and the IASB are reconsidering the definition 
of a liability. Their proposed definition focuses on a present obligation and de-emphasizes a 
past obligating event and a probable future sacrifice of resources. For example, the proposed 
 2 As discussed in Chapter 10.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

661
Conceptual Framework
definition might result in the recognition of certain executory contracts as liabilities, and the 
recognition of more obligations with uncertain amount or timing as liabilities.
The FASB and the IASB are reconsidering the role of uncertainty, or probability, in the 
definition, recognition, and measurement of liabilities. Existing recognition criteria include a 
probable future sacrifice of resources; one issue involves the minimum probability level to war-
rant recognition of an uncertain obligation as a liability. U.S. GAAP does not specify a mini-
mum probability level for recognition of a liability, although the rule of thumb in practice is 
approximately 80%. IFRS specifies that probable means more likely than not, implying greater 
than 50%.
Sometimes the FASB and the IASB view probability of payment as relating to measure-
ment of a liability, not to its definition and recognition. One of the characteristics of a fair 
value measurement is that the measurement does not embody a minimum probability for rec-
ognition. For example, an entity that guarantees the debt of another entity has incurred an 
unconditional obligation to stand ready to repay the other entity’s debt. The probability of hav-
ing to make a payment does not affect the existence of that unconditional obligation. Under 
current guidance, the unconditional obligation is a liability, measured at fair value incorporat-
ing both the probability of payment and the possible amounts of payment. Also under current 
guidance, the conditional obligation, which depends on whether the guaranteed firm is able to 
repay the debt, does not appear as a liability until it becomes probable, typically, when it is 
probable that the guaranteed firm will not be able to repay the debt. While a guarantee—an 
unconditional obligation—is initially measured at fair value, the conditional obligation is mea-
sured at the most likely amount.
Equity Equity, or shareholders’ equity for a corporation, is the residual interest of owners in 
the assets of an entity, after subtracting liabilities. Equity is a measure of assets exchanged by 
owners in return for an ownership interest and net assets generated by earnings activities in excess 
of net assets distributed to owners as dividends. Repurchases by a firm of its ownership interests 
reduce equity. Firms may issue equity interests with different rights, such as one class of common 
stock with 10 votes per share and another class of common stock with one vote per share.
Hybrid securities have characteristics of both debt and equity. Examples include convertible 
bonds and some preferred stock issues subject to redemption.3
Revenue The FASB’s conceptual framework defines revenues as inflows or other enhance-
ments of assets of an entity or settlements of its liabilities from delivering or producing goods, 
rendering services, or other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central 
operations. The IASB’s conceptual framework defines income as increases in economic bene-
fits during an accounting period in the form of inflows or enhancements of assets or decreases 
in liabilities that result in increases in equity, other than those relating to contributions from 
equity investors. Under current authoritative guidance, firms recognize revenue (U.S. GAAP) 
or income (IFRS) when they satisfy two conditions:
1. Completion of the earnings process. The firm has done all, or nearly all, it has promised to 
do for the customer.
2. Receipt of assets from the customer. The firm has received either cash or some other asset 
that the firm can convert into cash, for example, by collecting an account receivable.
Firms measure revenue as the amount of cash they expect to collect from customers. If firms 
expect to receive cash more than one year after the time of recognizing revenue, they measure 
revenues at the present value of the amount of cash they expect to receive.
Arrangements with multiple deliverables create difficulties in the timing and measurement 
of revenues. For example, if a firm sells a product bundled with an obligation to provide addi-
tional services over time, should the firm recognize the selling price for the bundled product 
and services at the time of delivery of the product? Or, should the firm recognize revenue from 
the sale of the product at the time of delivery and revenue from the services as the firm renders 
the services? How should the firm measure the portion of the selling price related to the prod-
uct and the portion related to the services? The joint IASB-FASB revenue recognition project, 
in progress as this textbook goes to press, will address these and other revenue recognition and 
measurement issues.
 3 Chapter 15 discusses the accounting for such securities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

662
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Expenses The FASB’s conceptual framework defines expenses as outflows or other using up 
of assets or incurrences of liabilities from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or 
carrying out other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or central operations. 
The IASB’s conceptual framework defines expenses as decreases in economic benefits during 
an accounting period in the form of outflows or depletions of assets or incurrences of liabilities 
that result in decreases in equity, other than those relating to distributions to equity investors. 
Firms recognize expenses under the following conditions:
1. The consumption of an asset (or incurrence of a liability) results from a transaction that 
leads to the recognition of revenue. That is, firms attempt to match expenses with associ-
ated revenues.
2. The consumption of an asset (or incurrence of a liability) results from the passage of time 
and does not lead to the creation of another asset.
Firms measure expenses at the same amount as the asset consumed or the liability incurred.
Gains and Losses Gains (losses) are increases (decreases) in net assets from peripheral or 
incidental transactions of an entity and from other transactions and events affecting the entity 
except those that result from revenues (expenses) or investments by (distributions to) owners. 
Firms usually report gains and losses from sales of assets or settlements of liabilities at a net 
amount; the net amount equals the difference between the net asset received and the carrying 
value of the asset sold or between the net asset given and the carrying value of the liability 
settled. Gains and losses may also arise from the remeasurement of assets and liabilities. Firms 
recognize gains and losses when those items enter the measurement of net income or other 
comprehensive income. Firms realize gains and losses when they sell or exchange assets or settle 
liabilities in arms-length transactions.
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME, NET INCOME, AND 
OTHER COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
Comprehensive income equals the net amount of revenues, expenses, gains, and losses during 
an accounting period; it equals the change in net assets of the firm during a period except from 
transactions with the firm’s owners. Authoritative guidance classifies revenues and expenses 
arising from a firm’s core business as components of net income. In addition to revenues and 
expenses, net income also includes gains and losses from sales or exchanges of assets or settle-
ments of liabilities related incidentally or peripherally to the firm’s core business. Authoritative 
guidance classifies gains and losses from the remeasurement of certain assets and liabilities as 
either net income or other comprehensive income. The IASB’s and FASB’s conceptual frame-
works do not contain a conceptual model for classifying items in net income versus in other 
comprehensive income. Firms reclassify gains and losses initially classified in other compre-
hensive income into net income when a specified subsequent event occurs. At the end of every 
accounting period, firms close amounts in other comprehensive income for that period to 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income, a shareholders’ equity account that acts for other 
comprehensive income the way retained earnings acts for net income. Comprehensive income 
for a period equals net income plus other comprehensive income.
Accrual Accounting Accrual accounting measures the effects of transactions and events 
in the periods when they occur. In contrast, cash-basis accounting recognizes only cash receipts 
and disbursements. Under accrual accounting, firms recognize revenues when an arrange-
ment satisfies the revenue recognition criteria previously listed, which increases net assets, 
but not necessarily cash, at the time of revenue recognition. Firms recognize expenses when 
an arrangement satisfies one of the two expense recognition criteria previously listed, decreas-
ing net assets, but not necessarily cash, at the time of expense recognition. Accrual account-
ing often uses the amount of cash received or paid in some period to measure the amount of 
revenues and expenses recognized during the current period, but the timing of revenue and 
expense recognition does not necessarily coincide with the timing of cash receipts and disburse-
ments. Accrual accounting underlies the measurements of revenues and expenses on the income 
statement.
Accrual accounting also affects balance sheet carrying amounts. Firms report economic 
resources with measurable future benefits as assets, even if the resources are not cash. Firms 
report obligations arising from economic benefits received in the past as liabilities, even though 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

663
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
the firm has not yet paid cash. Shareholders’ equity reflects changes in the residual interest of 
owners from transactions involving capital stock and from earnings activities independent of 
when cash flows in or out of a firm.
Accrual accounting separates the timing of recognition in the income statement and the 
balance sheet from the timing of cash flows. Therefore, the need arises for a financial statement 
that reports the effects of operating, investing, and financing activities on cash flows.4
Entity The definitions of financial statement elements, including assets, liabilities, revenues, 
and expenses, refer to a reporting entity. The concept of a reporting entity pertains to a group 
of entities pursuing a common business purpose, typically, under the control of one of the enti-
ties in the group. For example, a single entity may operate through subsidiaries, joint ventures, 
trusts, partnerships, and other corporations. It may control some or all of these other entities. 
The concept of control includes both the power, or capacity, to direct the strategic, operating, 
investing, and financing activities of another entity, and the ability to benefit from increases in 
the value of the other entity and to incur losses from decreases in value.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS often refer to ownership of a majority of the voting stock of 
another entity as indicating control, unless evidence indicates that the majority owner can-
not exercise control. IFRS has a more expansive definition of control than does U.S. GAAP, 
including conditions under which one entity controls another with a less-than-majority voting 
interest. Firms sometimes operate through entities that lack economically meaningful owner-
ship interests, like a trust, or entities where control arises through arrangements such as con-
tractual rights without ownership of voting stock. Identifying the reporting entity in these cases 
is more difficult.
SYNTHESIS OF FINANCIAL REPORTING 
STANDARDS AND CONCEPTS
Authoritative guidance in accounting exists for particular assets, liabilities, shareholders’ equity, 
revenues, expenses, gains, and losses.5 This section summarizes the required accounting. We 
indicate in parentheses the chapter that discusses the particular financial reporting guidance 
more fully.
Ideally, financial reporting standards should flow from and be consistent with the finan-
cial reporting objectives, qualitative characteristics of accounting information, and elements 
of financial statements that comprise the FASB’s and the IASB’s conceptual frameworks. 
Although these conceptual frameworks guide the development of financial reporting standards, 
they are not intended as a rigorous set of principles from which standard-setting bodies can 
(and must) logically deduce acceptable accounting methods. In some cases, standards conflict 
with the conceptual frameworks. Standards take precedence over the conceptual frameworks.
REVENUE RECOGNITION (CHAPTER 8)
Under guidance that exists as this book goes to press, firms recognize revenue when they have 
(1) completed an earnings process or performed most or all of their obligations to custom-
ers, usually the delivery of a product or service, and (2) received cash or a receivable capable 
of sufficiently reliable measurement. In some cases firms apply the revenue recognition crite-
ria to each component of an arrangement with multiple deliverables. Firms that sell products 
under long-term contracts, such as construction companies, often recognize revenue using 
the  percentage-of-completion method. U.S. GAAP allows the use of the competed contract 
method when firms cannot reasonably estimate revenues and costs, whereas IFRS requires a 
variant of the cost-recovery method under these circumstances (the firm recognizes revenues in 
a period equal to costs incurred that period, until all costs have been recovered). As this book 
goes to press, the FASB and IASB are in the process of creating converged and improved guid-
ance for revenue recognition.
 4 This is the purpose of the statement of cash flows, discussed in Chapters 6 and 16.
 5 As discussed in Chapters 8 to 15.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

664
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE (CHAPTER 8)
Firms report accounts receivable they expect to collect within one year at the amount of cash 
the firms expect to receive. This amount may differ from the amount owed by customers (that 
is, the gross receivable) because of estimated uncollectible accounts. Firms with significant 
uncollectible accounts receivable must estimate the amount of uncollectible accounts each 
accounting period and recognize bad debt expense each accounting period. Firms typically 
use a contra account, Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts, to reflect the amount of accounts 
receivable they do not expect to collect. The entry to recognize estimated uncollectible amounts 
involves a debit to Bad Debt Expense and a credit to Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts. 
The write-off of a particular customer’s account that becomes uncollectible involves a debit to 
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts and a credit to Accounts Receivable, Gross. Common 
terminology refers to this accounting as the allowance method.6
INVENTORIES (CHAPTER 9)
Firms initially record inventories at acquisition cost. Acquisition cost for a merchandising firm 
includes the costs incurred to purchase and transport the inventory prior to sale. Acquisition 
cost for a manufacturing firm includes the direct material, direct labor, and manufacturing 
overhead cost to produce the inventory.
If the market values of inventory items decline below acquisition cost prior to sale, firms 
must reduce the inventory carrying value using the lower of cost or market method. With a few 
narrow exceptions (for example, precious metals), neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS permits firms 
to remeasure inventories upward when market value exceeds acquisition cost. If the market 
values of inventories increase during a period, IFRS permits firms to recognize the unrealized 
gain to the extent that the firm had previously recognized an unrealized loss on those inventory 
items. U.S. GAAP does not permit recognition of such reversals of previously recognized unre-
alized losses.
Firms measure the cost of goods sold and the amount of ending inventories for a period 
either using specific identification or making a cost-flow assumption. U.S. GAAP permits firms 
to use a first-in, first-out (FIFO), weighted-average, and last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost-flow 
assumption. IFRS does not permit the use of LIFO.
PROPERTY, PLANT, AND EQUIPMENT (CHAPTER 10)
Firms initially record property, plant, and equipment, sometimes referred to as fixed assets, at 
acquisition cost. Acquisition cost equals the cash paid or the fair value of other consideration 
given in exchange for the asset. Acquisition cost includes all costs necessary to prepare the asset 
for its intended use. Firms capitalize into the asset’s carrying amount subsequent expenditures 
that extend the service life or increase the benefits of a fixed asset beyond those initially antici-
pated. Buildings and equipment have a finite life, so firms must depreciate their acquisition cost 
less estimated salvage value over the expected service life. Firms may use a straight-line method 
or an accelerated depreciation method. If new information indicates that the expected ser-
vice life or estimated salvage value differs significantly from that initially anticipated, the firm 
revises its depreciation prospectively.
IFRS permits firms to remeasure property, plant, and equipment upward for increases in 
fair value under certain conditions. U.S. GAAP does not permit such upward remeasurements. 
Firms must test property, plant, and equipment for possible asset impairment when conditions 
indicate that a significant decrease in fair value has occurred.
INTANGIBLES OTHER THAN GOODWILL (CHAPTER 10)
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to treat some or all expenditures made to internally 
develop brand names, customer lists, new technologies, and other intangibles as expenses 
in the period of the expenditure. U.S. GAAP treats all such expenditures as expenses of the 
period (except for certain software development costs). IFRS treats research costs as immediate 
 6 Firms also use the allowance method to account for estimated sales discounts, returns, and allowances (Chapter 
8), as well as for warranties (Chapter 9).
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

665
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
expenses but treats qualifying development costs as assets. Development costs are expenditures 
made after a research project reaches the stage of technical feasibility.
In contrast to costs incurred internally to develop intangibles, U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
require firms to recognize as assets the identifiable intangibles that the firm acquires in external 
market transactions. The exchange between an independent buyer and seller provides evidence 
of the existence of expected future benefits, and the exchange price provides evidence of the 
fair value of those benefits. Identifiable intangibles include patents, trademarks, customer lists, 
and other economic resources ready for use, as well as in-process research and development. 
Identifiable intangible assets have either finite (definite) lives or indefinite lives. Indefinite does 
not mean infinite, only not knowable. Firms do not amortize assets with indefinite lives. Firms 
must amortize intangible assets with finite lives. Firms must also test both definite-lived and 
indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment.
GOODWILL (CHAPTERS 10 AND 14)
Goodwill arises when a firm acquires another entity in an external market transaction and pays 
more for that entity than the fair value of the identifiable assets net of identifiable liabilities. 
Goodwill is the excess of the amount paid for the acquired entity over the fair value of identifi-
able net assets. Goodwill has an indefinite life and, therefore, is not amortized. Firms must test 
goodwill at least annually for impairment.
NOTES AND BONDS (CHAPTER 11)
U.S. GAAP and IFRS account for notes and nonconvertible bonds payable similarly. Firms 
initially record long-term notes and bonds at their issue price. The issue price equals the pres-
ent value of the future contractual cash flows discounted at the market interest rate for the 
bonds at the time of issue (the effective interest rate). If the effective interest rate equals the cou-
pon rate for the bonds, the firm will issue the bonds for face value. If the effective interest rate 
exceeds the coupon rate, the firm will issue the bonds for less than face value (a discount). If the 
coupon rate exceeds the effective interest rate, the firm will issue the bonds for more than face 
value (a premium).
Firms must amortize discounts and premiums over the life of the bonds. Amortization fol-
lows the effective interest method, in which interest expense each period equals the effective 
interest rate times the carrying value of the debt at the beginning of the period. The difference 
between interest expense and any cash payment affects the carrying value of the debt. The dif-
ference increases the carrying value of the debt for bonds originally issued at a discount and 
decreases the carrying value of the debt for bonds originally issued at a premium. Firms that 
repay debt prior to maturity record a gain or loss for the difference between the carrying value 
of the debt and the amount paid to repay the debt.
Firms must disclose the fair value of long-term notes and bonds in notes to the financial 
statements. Fair value is the amount the firm would pay to settle the debt on the date of the 
balance sheet. For debt that trades on active markets, fair value is the current market price of 
those traded debt securities. For other debt items, firms measure fair value using techniques 
and assumptions that market participants would use. For example, one approach would be to 
discount the contractual cash flows at the current market interest rate that reflects factors that 
market participants would consider, including the item’s credit risk.
Firms can adopt the fair value option for long-term notes and bonds. If so, the balance 
sheet carrying amounts for these items are the fair value amounts that they would disclose 
in the notes if they did not adopt the fair value option. The offsetting debit or credit for the 
remeasurement is to an unrealized loss or gain. Under the fair value option, this unrealized loss 
or gain is included in net income.
LEASES (CHAPTER 11)
Following guidance in effect as this book goes to press, firms account for leases using either the 
operating lease method or the capital (finance) lease method. The operating lease method treats 
leases as executory contracts: neither the leased asset nor the lease liability is recognized on 
the lessee’s balance sheet. The lessor (lessee) recognizes rent revenue (rent expense) as the les-
see uses the leased asset over time. The capital lease method treats leases equivalent to install-
ment purchases: the lessee borrows funds from the lessor to purchase the asset, and the lessor 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

666
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
recognizes profit at the time of sale. The lessee records the leased asset and the lease liability on 
the balance sheet at the present value of the contractual cash flows at the time of signing the 
lease. The lessee amortizes the leased asset, similar to recognizing depreciation on buildings and 
equipment. The lessee recognizes interest expense on the lease liability, similar to recognizing 
interest expense on long-term notes or bonds. The lessor records the signing of a capital lease 
the same as if the lessor sold the leased asset for a lease receivable. The lessor records the lease 
receivable at the present value of the contractual cash flows, removes the cost of the leased 
asset from its accounting records, and recognizes income for the difference. Over time, the les-
sor recognizes interest revenue in amounts paralleling interest expense recognized by the lessee.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide criteria for distinguishing operating leases from capital 
leases. These criteria attempt to identify the entity that enjoys the benefits and incurs the risks 
of the leased asset. When the lessor enjoys the benefits and bears the risk, the lease is an oper-
ating lease. When the lessee enjoys the benefits and bears the risk, the lease is a capital lease. 
U.S. GAAP provides four criteria, any one of which qualifies a lease as a capital lease. IFRS 
provides more general criteria. As this textbook goes to press, the FASB and IASB are in the 
process of creating converged and improved accounting guidance for leases.
RETIREMENT BENEFITS (CHAPTER 12)
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to recognize the cost of retirement benefits (primarily, pen-
sions and health care) as an expense while employees work, not when they receive payments or 
other benefits during retirement. Employers often contribute cash to a trust, an entity legally 
separate from the employer, to fund their retirement obligations. The trust invests the funds 
received to generate an investment return. Payments to employees come from both the employ-
er’s contributions and investment returns. The accounting records of the trust are separate from 
the accounting records of the employer, and the amounts on the two sets of books usually differ.
Firms do not consolidate the retirement trust. The employer must, however, report the net 
funded status of each defined benefit retirement plan (that is, the fair value of retirement trust 
assets minus the retirement trust obligation) as either an asset or a liability on its balance sheet. 
The offsetting credit (for an overfunded plan) or debit (for an underfunded plan) is to Other 
Comprehensive Income. Notes to the financial statements provide information about invest-
ments made by the retirement trust and how trust assets and liabilities changed during a period.
Although an employer must recognize changes in the funded status of a defined benefit 
retirement plan on its balance sheet each period, under U.S. GAAP, the employer does not rec-
ognize these changes immediately in net income. Changes in the net funded status of a defined 
benefit retirement plan because investment performance differs from expectations (or because 
of changes in actuarial assumptions, or in the retirement benefit formula) initially affect other 
comprehensive income and are then amortized into net income. Under IFRS, certain changes 
in the net funded status can appear in other comprehensive income but are not amortized into 
net income.
INCOME TAXES (CHAPTER 12)
Income before taxes for financial reporting usually differs from taxable income reported to 
tax authorities. The differences arise because of (1) permanent differences (items that affect 
income for financial reporting but never affect taxable income, or vice versa) or (2) temporary 
differences (items that affect income for financial reporting in a period different than for tax 
reporting). Firms must measure income tax expense based on income for financial reporting 
(excluding permanent differences). Income tax authorities impose taxes on taxable income. The 
difference between income tax expense and income tax payable represents the tax effects of 
temporary differences:
Income Tax Expense −Income Tax 
Payable
= Changes in Deferred Tax Assets 
and Deferred Tax Liabilities
Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities can change because of temporary differences 
and because of changes in income tax rates affecting future tax benefits and obligations. The 
net deferred tax asset reported on a firm’s balance sheet will also change with changes in the 
valuation allowance for deferred tax assets.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

667
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
MARKETABLE SECURITIES (CHAPTER 13)
Firms sometimes acquire bonds or capital stock of other entities for their expected returns 
(through interest, dividends, and price appreciation) without any intent to exert influence 
or control over the other entity. U.S. GAAP and IFRS presume that the acquisition of any 
amount of bonds, and the acquisition of less than 20% of the voting stock of another entity, 
implies an inability to exert significant influence or control. Firms account for such securities as 
passive investments. Firms classify such securities into three categories:
1. Debt securities held to maturity (IFRS uses the term held-to-maturity investments).
2. Trading securities (IFRS uses the term financial assets at fair value through profit or loss).
3. Securities available for sale (IFRS uses the term available-for-sale financial assets).
Marketable securities with an expected holding period of less than one year appear in current 
assets on the balance sheet (Marketable Securities), and those with an expected holding period 
longer than one year appear in noncurrent assets (Marketable Securities or Investments in 
Securities).
U.S. GAAP and IFRS prescribe the following accounting for marketable securities:7
1. Debt securities held to maturity: amortized acquisition cost, subject to impairment.
2. Trading securities: fair value, with unrealized gains and losses recognized in net income.
3. Securities available for sale: fair value, with unrealized gains and losses recognized in other 
comprehensive income as fair values change and realized gains and losses, measured as 
disposal proceeds less amortized acquisition cost, recognized in net income at the time of 
sale. Amortized acquisition cost means acquisition cost for non-debt securities. Securities 
available for sale are also subject to impairment testing.
Firms can apply the fair value option to marketable securities, in which case firms account for 
debt securities held to maturity and securities available for sale as if they were trading securities. 
Firms remeasure these securities to fair value each period and recognize unrealized gains and 
losses in net income.
DERIVATIVE INSTRUMENTS (CHAPTER 13)
Firms often acquire derivative instruments to hedge interest rate, exchange rate, commodity 
price, and other risks. U.S. GAAP and IFRS classify derivatives into three categories:
1. Fair value hedges of a recognized asset or liability or of an unrecognized firm commitment.
2. Cash flow hedges of an existing asset or liability or of a forecasted transaction.
3. Nonhedging derivative.
Firms must designate each derivative as a hedging instrument, or else accounting views the 
derivative as a nonhedging instrument. Furthermore, firms must designate each hedging instru-
ment as either a fair value hedge or a cash flow hedge. The following summarizes the account-
ing for each of these three categories of derivatives:
1. Fair value hedges: remeasure both the hedged item and the derivative to fair value each 
period and recognize any unrealized gains and losses in net income.
2. Cash flow hedges: remeasure the derivative to fair value each period and include the unre-
alized gain or loss in other comprehensive income to the extent that the derivative instru-
ment is effective in neutralizing risk. When the firm settles the hedged item, transfer the 
previously unrealized gain or loss from other comprehensive income to net income.
3. Nonhedging derivatives: remeasure the derivative to fair value each period and include the 
unrealized gain or loss in net income.
Firms can apply the fair value option to derivatives. Under the fair value option, the principal 
change in accounting for derivatives relates to cash flow hedges. Changes in the fair value of 
cash flow hedges affect net income as they occur instead of initially affecting other comprehen-
sive income.
 7 As described in the Appendix to Chapter 13, IFRS 9, with an effective date in 2015, would change the IFRS 
requirements for marketable securities.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

668
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
INTERCORPORATE INVESTMENTS IN COMMON STOCK (CHAPTER 14)
Firms sometimes invest in the common stock of other entities in order to exert significant influ-
ence or control over the other entity. U.S. GAAP and IFRS assume that firms owning between 
20% and 50% of the voting stock of another entity can exert significant influence, and firms 
owning more than 50% can exert control, unless other information indicates the contrary. In 
addition, IFRS specifies conditions under which one entity controls another with a less-than-
majority ownership interest.
A firm applies the equity method to account for an intercorporate investment if that 
firm can exert significant influence over the investee. The investor recognizes its share of the 
net income or net loss of the investee, after eliminating any intercompany income items, and 
increases (in the case of net income) or decreases (in the case of net loss) its investment account 
in an equal amount. The investor decreases the investment account for dividends received. If 
the acquisition cost of the investment exceeds the investor’s interest in the net assets of the 
investee at the time of the acquisition, the investor must decide if the excess relates to assets 
of the investee with a limited life. If so, the investor must amortize a portion of the acquisition 
cost of the investment to reflect the decline in expected benefits.
A firm that controls another entity prepares consolidated financial statements with that 
entity. The consolidated financial statements reflect the results of the legally separate entities 
as if they were a single entity. Thus, consolidated financial statements eliminate intercompany 
balance sheet and income statement accounts and intercompany profit or loss on transactions 
between the entities. If the parent company does not own 100% of the other entity, the remain-
ing shareholders hold a noncontrolling (or minority) interest. Consolidated balance sheets 
consolidate all of the assets and liabilities of the controlled entity and then show the claim of 
noncontrolling shareholders against consolidated net assets as part of shareholders’ equity. 
Likewise, consolidated income statements consolidate all of the revenues and expenses of the 
controlled entity and then show the portions of the consolidated net income to which the non-
controlling shareholders and the controlling shareholders have a claim.
EMPLOYEE STOCK OPTIONS (CHAPTER 15)
Firms compute a fair-value-based measure of employee stock options on the date of the grant 
using an option-pricing model that incorporates information about the current market price, 
the exercise price, the expected time between grant and exercise, the expected volatility of the 
stock, the expected dividends, and the risk-free interest rate. Total compensation cost is the 
number of options the firm expects to vest times the value per option. Firms amortize this total 
cost over the service period, which is the expected period of benefit. This period is usually the 
period between the grant date and the vesting date. Firms do not typically remeasure stock 
options after the initial grant date.
ISSUE OF SECURITIES WITH WARRANTS ATTACHED 
OR CONVERSION FEATURES (CHAPTER 15)
Firms sometimes issue bonds with stock warrants attached. They allocate the amount received 
between the bonds and the warrants based on their respective fair values. When firms issue con-
ventional convertible bonds, in which the conversion option is settled by issuing shares, U.S. 
GAAP requires firms to allocate the full issue price to the bonds and none to the conversion 
feature. IFRS, however, requires firms to allocate the issue price between the bonds and the 
conversion feature. The allocation involves estimating the issue price of bonds with terms simi-
lar to those issued but without the conversion feature. The firm allocates this amount to the 
bonds and the remainder of the issue price to the conversion option.
TREASURY SHARES (CHAPTER 15)
Firms recognize no gain or loss from purchasing their own shares or reissuing previously pur-
chased shares. Differences between the purchase price and reissue price are not earnings trans-
actions but affect contributed capital accounts. Firms account for the purchase of treasury 
shares using the cost method, or the par value method, or the constructive retirement method. 
These methods differ in terms of the shareholders’ equity accounts affected, but all result in an 
equal reduction in total shareholders’ equity when firms purchase their own shares.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

669
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL REPORTING STANDARDS
Exhibit 17.1 summarizes certain differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS. This exhibit also 
appears on the inside front cover of the book. The FASB and the IASB have agreed to plans for 
improving and converging some of U.S. GAAP and IFRS to a single set of high-quality stan-
dards. The Web sites of the FASB and IASB contain information on the current status of vari-
ous convergence activities. As previously described in this book, some of the differences shown 
in Exhibit 17.1 would be eliminated by completion of joint convergence projects.
 PROBLEM  17.1 FOR SELF-STUDY 
Review of Chapters 1–16. A set of financial statements for Kaplan Corporation follows, 
including a consolidated income statement for 2013 (Exhibit 17.2), a comparative 
consolidated balance sheet on December 31, 2012 and 2013 (Exhibit 17.3), and a 
consolidated statement of cash flows for 2013 (Exhibit 17.4). A series of eight notes 
provides additional information on certain items in the financial statements.
 
Respond to each of the questions beginning after the eight notes, using information 
from the financial statements and notes for Kaplan Corporation. We suggest that you 
study the statements and notes carefully before attempting to respond to the questions.
 
Note 1: Kaplan Corporation applies the following accounting policies:
■ Basis of consolidation. Kaplan Corporation consolidates its financial statements with 
those of Heimann Corporation, an 80%-owned subsidiary acquired on January 2, 
2012.
■ Marketable securities. Kaplan Corporation classifies its marketable securities as avail-
able for sale. These securities appear at fair value.
■ Accounts receivable. Kaplan Corporation uses the allowance method for uncollectible 
accounts.
■ Inventories. Kaplan Corporation uses a last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost-flow assumption 
for inventories and cost of goods sold.
■ Investments. Kaplan Corporation reports investments of less than 20% of the out-
standing common stock of other companies at fair value and applies the equity 
method for investments of 20% to 50% of the outstanding common stock of uncon-
solidated affiliates.
■ Buildings and equipment. Kaplan Corporation uses the straight-line method of depre-
ciation for financial reporting and uses accelerated depreciation for tax reporting.
■ Patent. The corporation amortizes patents straight line over a period of 10 years.
■ Interest on long-term debt. The calculation of interest expense on bonds payable uses 
the effective interest method.
■ Deferred income taxes. The corporation provides deferred income taxes for temporary 
differences between book income and taxable income.
 
Note 2: Marketable securities appear at fair values that are less than their acquisition 
cost by $50,000 on December 31, 2012, and by $70,000 on December 31, 2013.
 
Note 3: Accounts receivable appear net of an allowance for uncollectibles of $200,000 
on December 31, 2012, and $250,000 on December 31, 2013. Selling and administrative 
expenses include bad debt expense of $120,000.
 
Note 4: Inventories comprise the following:
  
 
December 31, 2013 
December 31, 2012
Raw Materials  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  380,000 
$  330,000
Work-in-Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
530,000 
460,000
Finished Goods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 2,200,000 
 1,800,000
Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,110,000 
$2,590,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

670
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Examples of Differences Between U.S. GAAP and IFRS
Chapter
Reporting Topic
U.S. GAAP
IFRS
8
Revenue recognition
Must have delivered a product or service in 
return for net assets capable of sufficiently 
reliable measurement. Over 200 documents 
provide industry-specific and transaction-
specific guidance.
One general standard and a few documents with 
industry-specific guidance. For long-term contracts, 
use percentage-of-completion method if amounts 
are estimable. Otherwise, use cost-recovery method. 
Completed contract method not permitted.
9
Inventories and cost of 
goods sold: lower of cost 
or market
Measurement of market value uses a 
combination of replacement cost and net 
realizable values.
Measurement of market value uses net realizable value.
9
Inventories: cost flow
Specific identification, FIFO, weighted-
average, and LIFO cost-flow assumptions 
permitted.
Specific identification, FIFO, and weighted-average 
cost-flow assumptions permitted. LIFO not permitted.
10
Property, plant, and 
equipment: revaluations 
above acquisition cost
Not permitted.
Permitted under certain conditions.
10
Research and development 
cost
Recognize as an expense in the period 
incurred, except for certain software 
development costs.
Recognize research costs as an expense in the period 
incurred. Capitalize certain development costs and 
amortize them over the expected period of benefit.
10
Property, plant, and 
equipment: impairment 
loss
If carrying value exceeds undiscounted cash 
flows value, recognize an impairment loss 
equal to the excess of carrying value over 
fair value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount is 
larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the value 
in use. Can subsequently reverse the impairment loss 
but not above acquisition cost.
10
Intangible assets with 
finite lives: impairment 
loss
If undiscounted cash flows exceed carrying 
value, recognize an impairment loss equal 
to the excess of carrying value over fair 
value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount 
is the larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the 
value in use. Can subsequently reverse the impairment 
loss but not above acquisition cost.
10
Intangible assets, 
other than goodwill, 
with indefinite lives: 
impairment loss
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess 
of carrying value over fair value.
Recognize an impairment loss for the excess of carrying 
value over recoverable amount. Recoverable amount 
is the larger of the fair value less cost to sell and the 
value in use. Test these assets annually for impairment 
losses and recoveries of impairment losses.
10
Goodwill: impairment loss
Step 1: Compare the carrying value to the 
fair value of a reporting unit. If the carrying 
value exceeds the fair value, proceed to 
Step 2.
Step 2: Allocate the fair value of the 
reporting unit to assets and liabilities 
based on their fair values and any excess to 
goodwill. Recognize an impairment loss on 
the goodwill if the carrying value exceeds 
the allocated fair value.
Step 3: Test goodwill annually for 
impairment loss or whenever a goodwill 
impairment loss is probable. Firms may also 
apply a qualitative impairment test.
Step 1: Compare the carrying value to the recoverable 
amount for a cash-generating unit.
Step 2: Recognize an impairment loss for any excess 
of carrying value over recoverable amount of the cash-
generating unit. First write down goodwill and then 
allocate any remaining loss to other assets based on 
their relative recoverable amounts.
Step 3: Test goodwill annually for impairment losses.
12
Contingent obligations 
(U.S. GAAP) and 
provisions (IFRS)
Recognize as liabilities if payment is 
probable (probability usually exceeds 80%). 
Measure at the most likely amount or at 
the low end of range if no one estimate is 
better than any other.
Recognize as liabilities if payment is more likely than 
not (probability exceeds 50%). Measure at the best 
estimate of the amount to settle the obligation.
11
Leases
A lease is a capital lease if it satisfies 
one of four conditions; otherwise, it is an 
operating lease.
Judgment required based on several indicators to 
identify the entity that enjoys the benefits and bears 
the risks of leasing.
15
Convertible bonds
Unless the conversion option can be settled 
in cash, allocate issue price entirely to 
bonds and none to conversion option.
Allocate issue price between the bonds and the 
conversion option.
EXHIBIT 17.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

671
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
The current cost of inventories exceeded the amounts computed on a LIFO basis by 
$420,000 on December 31, 2012, and $730,000 on December 31, 2013.
 
Note 5: Burton Corporation had net income of $400,000 and paid dividends of 
$75,000 in 2013.
 
Note 6: On January 2, 2012, Kaplan Corporation acquired 100% of the outstanding 
common shares of Heimann Corporation by issuing 20,000 shares of Kaplan 
Corporation common stock. The fair value of Kaplan Corporation’s shares on January 2, 
2012, was $40 per share. The fair values of the recorded assets and liabilities of Heimann 
Corporation equal their carrying values. Kaplan Corporation attributes any difference 
between the acquisition price and the fair value of the recorded net assets to a patent that 
Heimann Corporation developed internally. Kaplan Corporation amortizes the patent 
over a period of 10 years from the date of acquisition.
 
Note 7: Current liabilities include a one-year, 5% note payable due on January 1, 2014.
 
Note 8: Bonds payable are as follows:
  
 
December 31, 2013 
December 31, 2012
4%, $2,000,000 Bonds Due December 31, 2018, 
 with Interest Payable Semiannually . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,829,390 
$1,800,920
10%, $3,000,000 Bonds Due December 31, 2022, 
 with Interest Payable Semiannually . . . . . . . . . . .  
3,379,790 
3,407,720
8%, $1,000,000 Bonds Due December 31, 2028, 
 with Interest Payable Semiannually . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,000,000
 1,000,000
Total  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,209,180
$6,208,640
Required
a. Kaplan Corporation sold marketable securities originally costing $180,000 during 
2013. Ascertain the price at which it sold these securities.
b. Refer to part a. Compute the cost of marketable securities purchased during 2013.
(continued)
Kaplan Corporation
Consolidated Income Statement For 2013
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 17.1 for Self-Study)
REVENUES AND GAINS
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,000
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
300
Dividend Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     30
 
Total Revenues and Gains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$12,350
EXPENSES AND LOSSES
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,200
Selling and Administrative  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,709
Loss on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Interest (Notes 7 and 8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    561
 
Total Expenses and Losses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$10,550
Net Income Before Income Taxes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,800
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    540
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,260
EXHIBIT 17.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

672
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Kaplan Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheets
December 31, 2012 and 2013
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 17.1 for Self-Study)
December 31, 
2013
December 31, 
2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,919
$ 1,470
Marketable Securities (Note 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
550
450
Accounts Receivable (Net; Note 3)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,850
2,300
Inventories (Note 4). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,110
2,590
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    970
    800
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$10,399
$ 7,610
Investments (Note 5)
Investment in Maher Corporation (10%) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   185
$   200
Investment in Johnson Corporation (30%)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
410
310
Investment in Burton Corporation (40%)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    930
    800
 
Total Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,525
$ 1,310
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   500
$   400
Buildings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
940
800
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  3,800
  3,300
 
Total Acquisition Cost  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 5,240
$ 4,500
Less Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (930)
 (1,200)
 
Net Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,310
$ 3,300
Patent (Note 6)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$    80
$    90
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,314
$12,310
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Note Payable (Note 7). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,000
$    —
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,425
1,070
Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
900
1,100
Interest Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
0
Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    375
    250
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,800
$ 2,420
Long-Term Liabilities
Bonds Payable (Note 8). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 6,209
$   209
Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    940
    820
 
Total Long-Term Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 7,149
$ 7,029
Shareholders’ Equity
Common Shares ($10 par value)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   600
$   500
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,205
800
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income:
Unrealized Loss on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(70)
(50)
Unrealized Loss on Investments in Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(40)
(25)
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,690
  1,666
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,385
$ 2,891
Less Treasury Shares (at cost) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (20)
    (30)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,365
$ 2,861
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,314
$12,310
EXHIBIT 17.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

673
Synthesis of Financial Reporting Standards and Concepts
c. What was the amount of specific customers’ accounts that Kaplan Corporation wrote 
off as uncollectible during 2013?
d. Compute the amount of cash collected from customers during the year.
e. Compute the cost of units completed and transferred to the finished goods inventory 
during 2013.
(continued)
Kaplan Corporation
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for 2013
(all amounts in thousands of US$)
(Problem 17.1 for Self-Study)
OPERATIONS
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,260
Additions:
 
Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
560
 
Deferred Taxes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
 
Loss on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
 
Excess of Interest Expense over Coupon Payments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
 
Amortization of Patent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
 
Increase in Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
355
 
Increase in Interest Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
 
Increase in Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
Subtractions:
 
Gain on Sale of Marketable Securities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(30)
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates in Excess of Dividends Received  . . . . . . . . .
(180)
 
Amortization of Premium on Bonds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(28)
 
Increase in Accounts Receivable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(550)
 
Increase in Inventories  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(520)
 
Increase in Prepayments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(170)
 
Decrease in Salaries Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (200)
Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   960
INVESTING
Sale of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   210
Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
150
Investment in Johnson Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(50)
Purchase of Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(300)
Acquisition of:
 
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(100)
 
Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(300)
 
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (1,400)
Cash Flow from Investing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1,790)
FINANCING
 
Increase in Notes Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,000
 
Common Stock Issued  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
500
 
Treasury Stock Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
 
Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (236)
Cash Flow from Financing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,279
Net Change in Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 1,449
Cash, January 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  1,470
Cash, December 31  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,919
EXHIBIT 17.4
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

674
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
f. Direct labor and overhead costs incurred in manufacturing during 2013 totaled 
$4,500,000. Compute the cost of raw materials purchased during 2013.
g. Assume that the amounts disclosed in Note 4 for the current cost of inventories rep-
resent the amounts that would result from using a first-in, first-out (FIFO) cost-flow 
assumption. Compute the cost of goods sold if the firm had used FIFO rather than 
LIFO.
h. Prepare an analysis that explains the causes of the changes in each of the three inter-
corporate investment accounts.
i. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in each of the following accounts during 
2013: Land; Building; Equipment; and Accumulated Depreciation.
j. Give the journal entry that Kaplan Corporation made on January 2, 2012, when it 
acquired Heimann Corporation.
k. Compute the carrying value of the net assets of Heimann Corporation on January 2, 
2012.
l. Kaplan Corporation initially priced the 4% bonds payable to yield 6% compounded 
semiannually. The firm initially priced the 10% bonds to yield 8% compounded semi-
annually. Show that $1,800,920 and $3,407,720 (see Note 8) are the correct carrying 
values for these two bond issues on December 31, 2012.
m. Calculate the amount of interest expense and any change in the carrying value of the 
bond liability for 2013 on each of the three long-term bond issues (see Note 8).
n. Compute the amount of income taxes actually paid during 2013.
o. On July 1, 2013, Kaplan Corporation issued 10,000 shares of its common stock for 
$50 cash per share. Prepare an analysis explaining the change during 2013 in each of 
the following accounts: Common Shares; Additional Paid-in Capital; Retained Earn-
ings; and Treasury Shares.
SECTION 2: EXTENSIONS
MORE ON THE MEASUREMENT 
AND REPORTING OF INCOME
The primary purpose of the income statement is not to show the amount of net income (or 
loss) for the period. The reader of the financial statements can generally ascertain net income 
(or loss) by subtracting the beginning balance of the Retained Earnings account from its end-
ing balance and adjusting for dividends. Income statements help users of financial reports 
understand the nature and amounts of a firm’s revenues, gains, expenses, and losses. This infor-
mation permits the reader to compare a company’s performance with other companies (cross-
sectional analysis) or with the company itself over time (time-series analysis) and to make more 
informed projections about the future.8
Previous chapters concentrated on measuring the results of income transactions. This sec-
tion focuses on reporting, or disclosing, income transactions in the financial statements and 
notes. The principal topics we describe are:
1.  How does the nature of an earnings item affect users’ perceptions of that item? How do 
firms report information in the income statement to enable users to understand the nature 
of earnings items?
 8 Chapter 7 describes cross-sectional analysis and time-series analysis.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

675
More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income
2.  How do errors, changes in accounting principles, and changes in accounting estimates 
affect the reporting of income? How and when are these items reported in the income 
statement?
3.  Firms commonly report earnings attributed to shares of common stock (earnings-per-
share). What is earnings-per-share and how is it calculated?
4.  Some firms operate in single product lines and single geographic regions. Other, more 
diversified or more complex firms operate in multiple product lines or businesses or in 
multiple geographic regions. Does accounting require a diverse/complex firm to report 
separate financial information for its distinct segments? How does accounting define seg-
ments? What information must a firm report about its segments?
NATURE AND REPORTING OF INCOME TRANSACTIONS
To motivate an understanding of the issues involved in understanding the nature and reporting 
of income transactions, consider the data for Bernard Company in Exhibit 17.5. To simplify the 
illustration, we assume that revenues result in immediate cash receipts, expenses require imme-
diate cash expenditures, and we ignore taxes. Thus, income flows equal cash flows.
Suppose that an analyst wished to value Bernard Company using the present value of the 
cash flows of its individual activities, some recurring and some not. Assume the discount rate 
appropriate for finding the present value of Bernard’s cash flows is 10% per year. Valuation 
classes discuss the issues related to choosing the discount rate, and the Appendix to this book 
introduces the techniques of present value analysis.
Bernard Company engages in six activities, numbered 1 through 6, shown in Exhibit 17.5.
Activity 1. The first activity generates $100 per year, with the cash flow at the end of each 
year, indefinitely. The present value of this activity is $1,000 (= $100/0.10). (See the discussion 
of the present value of a perpetuity in the Appendix.) 
Activity 2. The second activity generates $30 at the end of the first year, and a cash flow that 
grows by 6% per year thereafter. The present value of this activity is $750 [= $30/(0.10 − 0.06)]. 
(See the discussion of the valuation of a growing perpetuity in the Appendix.)
Activity 3. The third activity is cyclic, generating $115 per year at the end of each odd- 
numbered year. The present value of this activity is $602.38.
Activity 4. The fourth activity is nonrecurring, generating a single cash flow of $120 at the 
end of the first year, with present value of $109.09 (= $120/1.10) at the start of the first year.
Bernard Company
Measurement of a Firm’s Value from Cash Flow Data
Cash Flows Occur at the End of Each Period
Present Value of 
Activity Using 
Discount Rate 
of 10%
Period Number
Activities of the Firm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1. Recurring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$100
$100
$100
$100
$100
$100
$100
$100
. . .
$1,000.00
2.  Recurring and Growing at 
6% per Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
32
34
36
38
40
43
45
. . .
750.00
3. Cyclic  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
0
115
0
115
0
115
0
. . .
602.38
4. Nonrecurring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
. . .
109.09
5. Recurring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(40)
(40)
(40)
(40)
(40)
(40)
(40)
(40)
. . .
(400.00)
6. Nonrecurring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (70)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
. . .
   (63.64)
Net Income for Year 1  . . . . . . . . . . .
$255
Present Value of Entire Firm . . .
$1,997.83
EXHIBIT 17.5
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

676
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Activity 5. The fifth activity, an expenditure (outflow), uses $40 of cash each year, at the end 
of each year. The present value of this activity is −$400 (= −$40/0.10).
Activity 6. The sixth activity, a single expenditure (outflow), uses $70 cash at the end of the 
first year and has present value of −$63.64 (= −$70/1.10).
The value of the firm is the sum of the present values of its individual activities, $1,997.83 
in Exhibit 17.5. In this example, most of the value of the firm comes from the recurring activi-
ties. In deriving firm values, investors generally care about recurring activities more than non-
recurring ones. This is because recurring activities add value each year whereas nonrecurring 
activities, by definition, happen once or infrequently.
Exhibit 17.5 shows net income of $255 (recall that we assume income equals cash flows). 
How can analysts and investors deduce the value of the company from this one year’s income 
statement? The answer is they can’t. This firm is too complex for even a sophisticated user to 
derive the value from a single piece or column of data. To estimate a firm’s value, investors and 
analysts need information about the components of a firm’s net income and their recurring ver-
sus nonrecurring nature. Because recurring items are easier to predict, analysts are more confi-
dent estimating the value of firms with recurring activities than firms with nonrecurring activities.
OVERVIEW OF REPORTING OF INCOME TRANSACTIONS
The sections that follow discuss the reporting of various income items. We begin by providing 
an overview of this reporting.
1. Firms must initially report the results of most income transactions in the income state-
ment instead of bypassing the income statement and reporting the amounts in some other 
shareholders’ equity account. This reporting reflects the emphasis that analysts and inves-
tors place on the income statement when evaluating a firm’s operating performance. It also 
reflects the concern that statement users might overlook income transactions if they were 
reported elsewhere.
2. U.S. GAAP and IFRS recognize that some income transactions are central to a firm’s 
principal business activities and recur, while others are peripheral or nonrecurring. Firms 
must report items in their income statements in a way that informs users about the nature 
(recurring versus non-recurring) of income items.
3. Changes in the fair values of assets and liabilities affect the value of a firm as they occur. A 
firm recognizes some of these fair value changes in net income as they occur even though it 
has not yet sold the asset for cash or settled the liability. (Sales or settlements confirm the 
amount of the value change.) Firms must delay reporting fair value changes of other assets 
and liabilities in net income until confirming events occur. In the meantime, firms include 
such value changes in Other Comprehensive Income; this account is closed to Accumulated 
Other Comprehensive Income, a component of shareholders’ equity.
4. Firms sometimes discover errors in amounts previously reported, change their account-
ing principles, or change estimates made in applying their accounting principles. Firms 
must retrospectively restate previously reported amounts for material corrections of errors 
and some changes in accounting principles. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to 
adjust current and future amounts for changes in accounting estimates and some changes 
in accounting principles.
We examine the reporting of four types of earnings transactions, which succeeding sections dis-
cuss and illustrate more fully:
1. Recurring versus nonrecurring.
2. Central versus peripheral.
3. Unrealized versus realized gains and losses from changes in the fair values of assets and 
liabilities.
4. Adjustments for errors and changes in accounting principles and accounting estimates.
The accounting for these four items affects the user’s interpretation of reported net income and 
the forecasting of future net income. U.S. GAAP and IFRS aid this analysis process by requir-
ing firms to classify income transactions in particular ways in the financial statements.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

677
More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income
REPORTING RECURRING/NONRECURRING AND 
CENTRAL/PERIPHERAL ACTIVITIES
An analyst likely asks two questions when using a firm’s past profitability to project its likely 
future profitability:
1. Does the income item result from an activity in which a firm will likely continue its involve-
ment, or does the income item result from a transaction or event that is unlikely to recur?
2. Does the income item result from a firm’s primary operating activity (creating and sell-
ing a good or service to customers) or from an activity incidental or peripheral to the 
primary operating activity (for example, sales of equipment previously used by the firm in 
manufacturing)?
Figure 17.2 depicts these distinctions, with examples of each. A financial statement user who 
wants to evaluate a firm’s ongoing operating profitability will likely focus on income items in 
the upper left cell. A financial statement user who wants to project net income of prior periods 
into the future would likely focus on the two recurring income cells. Income items in the nonre-
curring cells should not affect long-term assessments of profitability. The following discussion 
considers the reporting of each type of income item.
MEASUREMENT OF INCOME 
U.S. GAAP and IFRS distinguish between revenues and expenses on the one hand and gains 
and losses on the other. Revenues and expenses result from the recurring, primary operating 
activities of a business (upper left cell in Figure 17.2). Income items in this first category are the 
ordinary, recurring operating activities of the firm. Gains and losses result from either periph-
eral activities (lower left cell) or nonrecurring activities (upper and lower right cells). A second 
distinction is the reporting of revenues and expenses at gross amounts, versus the reporting of 
gains and losses at net amounts. The following examples illustrate this distinction.
Example 1 Thames sells a communications system to a customer for €400,000 cash. The cost 
to Thames of the system is €300,000. Thames records this sale as follows:
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400,000
 
Sales Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
400,000
To record sale.
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300,000
 
Finished Goods Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
300,000
To record the cost of goods sold.
Creation and Sale of Firm's
Regular Products
Periodic Sales of Equipment
Previously Used in
Manufacturing
Income from Sales of Product
or Lines of Business That the
Firm Intends to Discontinue
Losses from Earthquakes
or Hurricanes
Recurring
Primary
Operating
Activity
Peripheral
to Primary
Operating
Activity
Nonrecurring
Nature of Income Items with Examples
FIGURE 17.2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

678
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
This transaction fits into the upper left cell of Figure 17.2 (primary/recurring). The income 
statement reports both sales revenue and cost of goods sold, providing information to the 
financial statement user regarding both the cost to Thames of the system and Thames’s ability 
to mark up this cost in setting selling prices. Retained earnings increase by €100,000 as a result 
of this transaction. Notice that the €100,000 amount does not itself appear in the income state-
ment. Rather, income increases by €100,000 as a result of sales of €400,000 offset with cost of 
goods sold of €300,000.
Example 2 Great Deal sells computers previously used for processing data in its stores. This 
sale relates only peripherally to Great Deal’s primary operating activity, which is to sell new, 
as opposed to used, consumer electronics. Assume that the computers originally cost $500,000 
and have $200,000 of accumulated depreciation at the time of sale. Thus, the computers have a 
net carrying value of $300,000. The sale of these computers for $400,000 cash results in the fol-
lowing journal entry on Great Deal’s books:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
400,000
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
200,000
 
Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
500,000
 
Gain on Sale of Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
100,000
Disposal of computers for $100,000 more than carrying value.
This transaction fits into the lower left cell of Figure 17.2 (peripheral/recurring). The 
income statement reports only the $100,000 gain on the sale, not the selling price of $400,000 
and the carrying value of $300,000. The income statement reports gains and losses at net, 
instead of gross, amounts because, presumably, financial statement users do not need informa-
tion about the individual components comprising peripheral or nonrecurring income items. The 
gain on the sale increases retained earnings by $100,000.
Note that both revenues and gains appear as credits in journal entries and increase Retained 
Earnings. Both expenses and losses appear as debits in journal entries and reduce Retained 
Earnings. To repeat, revenues and expenses report operating or central items as gross amounts; 
gains and losses report nonrecurring or peripheral items as net amounts.
CLASSIFICATION IN THE INCOME STATEMENT
Income statements contain some or all of the following sections or categories, depending on the 
nature of a firm’s earnings for the period:9
1. Income from continuing operations.
2. Income, gains, and losses from discontinued operations.
3. For financial statements prepared under U.S. GAAP, extraordinary gains and losses. IFRS 
does not use the term extraordinary but does require the separate disclosure of material 
income items, along with suggested circumstances and items that would qualify for sepa-
rate disclosure.10
Many income statements include only the first section. Exhibit 17.6 presents an income state-
ment for Gavan Company that includes all three sections.
Income from Continuing Operations Revenues, gains, expenses, and losses from 
the continuing areas of business activity of a firm appear in the first section of the income 
statement, Income from Continuing Operations. This section includes income derived from a 
firm’s primary business activities as well as from activities peripherally related to operations. 
The firm expects these sources of earnings to continue. Firms without the nonrecurring cat-
egories of earnings for a particular year (discussed next) need not use the title Income from 
 9 Accounting Principles Board, Opinion No. 30, “Reporting the Results of Operations,” 1973 (Codification Topic 
225); FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 130, “Reporting Comprehensive Income,” 1997 
(Codification Topic 225); IASB, International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” 
revised 2011.
10 IASB, International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” revised 2011, para. 87 pre-
cludes the presentation of any item of comprehensive income as extraordinary.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

679
More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income
Continuing Operations in their income statements. In these cases, the absence of nonrecurring 
types of income implies that all reported revenues, gains, expenses, and losses relate to continu-
ing operations. Firms often show a subtotal within the continuing operations section of the 
income statement, labeled operating income. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not define operating and 
non-operating, so firms have some flexibility as to the classification of particular revenues and 
expenses. Exhibit 17.6 includes revenues and expenses from the firm’s primary business activity 
of creating and selling goods or services as operating income. Interest revenue from marketable 
debt securities and investments in debt securities, interest expense on borrowings, and gains and 
losses from peripheral activities appear separately as non-operating income in the continuing 
operations section of the income statement in this example.
Firms almost always report asset impairment charges or restructuring charges in Income 
from Continuing Operations. Although these charges may not appear every year and there-
fore appear to be nonrecurring, the business activity to which they relate is a continuing opera-
tion of the firm. As a result, firms typically classify them as part of Income from Continuing 
Operations.
Income, Gains, and Losses from Discontinued Operations Sometimes a 
firm sells a major division or segment of its business during the year or contemplates its sale 
within a foreseeable time after the end of the accounting period. If so, the firm must disclose 
separately any income, gains, and losses related to that division or segment. The separate dis-
closure appears in the next section of the income statement, Income, Gains, and Losses from 
 Discontinued Operations. This section alerts the financial statement user that the firm does not 
Gavan Company
Income Statement
(all except per share amounts in millions of US$)
2013
2012
2011
INCOME FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 295
$ 265
$ 240
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(165)
(154)
(144)
Selling and Administrative Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (67)
     (58)
     (50)
Operating Income . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  63
$  53
$  46
Interest Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
5
4
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(22)
(19)
(15)
Gain on Sale of Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    3
    9
    4
Income from Continuing Operations Before Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  51
$  48
$  39
Income Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     (17)
     (16)
     (13)
Income from Continuing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  34
$  32
$  26
INCOME, GAINS, AND LOSSES FROM DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
Income (Loss) from Operations of Division Sold in 2013 
 
(Net of Income Taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   2
$     (4)
$  16
Gain on Sale of Division (Net of Income Taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   40
   —
   —
Income from Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  42
$     (4)
$  16
EXTRAORDINARY GAINS AND LOSSES
Loss from Hurricane (net of income taxes)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   —
$    (12)
   —
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  76
$  16
$  42
EARNINGS PER COMMON SHARE
Continuing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  3.09
$  3.04
$  2.60
Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.82
(0.38)
1.60
Extraordinary Items. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
         —
        (1.14)
         —
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  6.91
$  1.52
$  4.20
EXHIBIT 17.6
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

680
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
expect this source of earnings to continue. Firms report the income, gain, or loss net of income 
tax effects. This section follows the section presenting Income from Continuing Operations.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS are similar in their accounting for discontinued operations, although 
the definition of a discontinued operation differs. Under U.S. GAAP, a discontinued operation 
is a component of an entity, comprising operations and cash flows that clearly differ from the 
rest of the entity, both operationally and for financial reporting.11 Under U.S. GAAP, segments, 
divisions, subsidiaries, and groups of assets can qualify as a component of an entity. IFRS uses 
the idea of a disposal group, which it defines as a group of assets and directly associated liabili-
ties that a firm will dispose of as a group in a single transaction.12 The disposal group notion of 
IFRS encompasses a larger unit than the component notion of U.S. GAAP.
In the year that a firm decides to sell a unit that qualifies as a discontinued operation, it 
aggregates the assets and liabilities of that unit on the balance sheet into four groups:
1. Current assets of discontinued operations.
2. Noncurrent assets of discontinued operations.
3. Current liabilities of discontinued operations.
4. Noncurrent liabilities of discontinued operations.
The firm measures these assets and liabilities at the lower of their carrying values or their fair 
values. It reports any gain or loss that results because the carrying value exceeds fair value in 
the Discontinued Operations section of the income statement. The Discontinued Operations 
section also includes income or loss from operating the unit for that year. Financial statements 
for prior years included for comparative purposes classify those amounts also as a discontinued 
operation.
The firm continues to report income from operating that unit prior to disposal in the Dis-
continued Operations section of the income statement. When the firm sells or disposes of the 
unit, it includes any gain or loss on the sale in the Discontinued Operations section.
Example 3 Exterior Group, Inc., owns Jaxin SA. Exterior Group follows U.S. GAAP. Dur-
ing 2012 Exterior Group contemplated spinning off Jaxin to its shareholders as a dividend 
but took no formal action to do so. However, in preparation for the spin-off, Exterior Group 
recognized impairment losses on Jaxin’s assets totaling $1,002 million. The recognition of the 
impairment losses resulted in measuring Jaxin’s assets at fair value. The journal entry to recog-
nize the impairment losses in 2012 is as follows (amounts in millions and pretax):
 
Impairment Losses on Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,002
 
Various Specific Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,002
To recognize impairment losses on specific assets.
Exterior Group reported the impairment loss in Income from Continuing Operations in 
2012 because it has not yet considered Jaxin to be a discontinued operation.
Example 4 On January 31, 2013, Exterior Group’s board of directors voted to spin off Jaxin 
as a dividend to shareholders. The distribution was to occur on March 30, 2013. Because Jaxin 
qualified as a component of Exterior Group with separable operations and cash flows, Exterior 
Group treated Jaxin as a discontinued operation under U.S. GAAP. Exterior Group reclassified 
Jaxin’s assets and liabilities into the following four accounts:
1. Current Assets of Discontinued Operations: $7,647 million.
2. Noncurrent Assets of Discontinued Operations: $48,805 million.
3. Current Liabilities of Discontinued Operations: $9,866 million.
4. Noncurrent Liabilities of Discontinued Operations: $19,629 million.
5. Retained Earnings and Contributed Capital of Discontinued Operations: $26,957 million.
Exterior Group measured Jaxin’s assets at fair value, given the asset impairment charges recog-
nized during 2012.
11 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 144, “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of 
Long-lived Assets,” 2001 (Codification Topic 360).
12 IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 5, “Non-current Assets Held for Sale and Discontinued Oper-
ations,” 2004.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

681
More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income
Example 5 On March 30, 2013, Exterior Group spun off Jaxin to its shareholders as a divi-
dend. Recall that firms debit Retained Earnings for the fair value of the net assets distributed 
and recognize a gain or loss for any difference between the fair value and the carrying value of 
the net assets. Exterior Group did not recognize a gain or loss in connection with the spin-off, 
evidence that Jaxin’s carrying values of assets and liabilities reflected fair values. Based on the 
information reported by Exterior Group for this transaction, we can recreate the journal entry 
to record the spin-off as follows:
March 30, 2013
Current Liabilities of Discontinued Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
9,866
Noncurrent Liabilities of Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
19,629
Retained Earnings and Contributed Capital of Discontinued Operations. . . . . 
26,957
 
Current Assets of Discontinued Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
7,647
 
Noncurrent Assets of Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
48,805
To record spin-off of Jaxin to shareholders of Exterior Group.
Example 6 The income statement of Exterior Group for the year ended December 31, 2013, 
reports Jaxin’s income as part of discontinued operations for 2011, 2012, and 2013, even 
though the income statements originally issued for 2011 and 2012 included Jaxin’s income as 
part of continuing operations. Exhibit 17.7 summarizes the reporting.
Extraordinary Gains and Losses A separate section of an income statement prepared 
under U.S. GAAP presents Extraordinary Gains and Losses. For an item to be extraordinary, it 
must generally meet both of the following criteria:
1. Unusual in nature.
2. Infrequent in occurrence.
An example of an item likely to be extraordinary for most firms is a loss from an earthquake 
or confiscation of assets by a foreign government. Firms report extraordinary items net of their 
tax effects. IFRS guidance would require the separate disclosure of the item but would not per-
mit the use of the label extraordinary.
UNREALIZED GAINS AND LOSSES FROM CHANGES IN FAIR 
VALUES OF CERTAIN ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Standards issued by the FASB and IASB require or permit firms to report certain assets and 
liabilities at their fair values (or at the lower of fair value or historical cost) at the end of each 
period. Examples discussed in previous chapters include the following:
Exterior Group
Partial Income Statements
For the Years Ended December 31, 2013, 2012, and 2011
2013
2012
2011
AS ORIGINALLY REPORTED FOR 2012 AND 2011
Income from Continuing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
—
$12,022
$10,668
Income from Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    —
     —
   (233)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    —
$12,022
$10,435
AS REPORTED IN 2013 ANNUAL REPORT
Income from Continuing Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$9,161
$ 9,329
$ 8,170
Income from Discontinued Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   625
  2,693
  2,265
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$9,786
$12,022
$10,435
EXHIBIT 17.7
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

682
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
1. Measurement of inventories at lower of cost or market (Chapter 9).
2. Measurement of fixed assets and intangibles at fair value when recognizing an asset impair-
ment loss (Chapter 10).
3. Measurement of certain marketable equity securities at fair value (Chapter 13).
When a firm increases or decreases the carrying values of assets and liabilities to reflect fair 
values, the question arises as to how it should treat the offsetting credit (gain) or debit (loss). 
At the time of the remeasurement, the firm has not yet realized the gains or losses. That is, 
the firm has not yet sold the asset or settled the liability. In some cases U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
require firms to recognize the gains and losses in measuring net income in the period of the 
remeasurement, even though the firm has not yet realized the gain or loss in a cash transaction. 
For example, firms include losses from decreases in the carrying values of inventories, fixed 
assets, and intangibles in computing net income in the period of the remeasurement.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not require firms to include in net income all unrealized gains 
and losses from the remeasurement of assets and liabilities. Instead, U.S. GAAP and IFRS 
require firms to report certain unrealized gains and losses in other comprehensive income.13 
Other comprehensive income for a reporting period includes changes in the fair value of mar-
ketable securities available for sale and changes in the fair value of derivatives used as cash 
flow hedges.14 Other comprehensive income also includes gains and losses related to retirement 
plans not yet recognized in measuring retirement benefits expense.15 Accumulated Other Com-
prehensive Income, a shareholders’ equity account on the balance sheet, reports the cumulative 
amounts of other comprehensive income (or loss) as of the date of the balance sheet. Compre-
hensive income equals net income on the traditional income statement plus other comprehen-
sive income for the period.
Under U.S. GAAP and IFRS, firms can report other comprehensive income in one of two 
ways:
1. Include it with net income in a single statement of comprehensive income.
2. Include it in a separate statement of comprehensive income that immediately follows the 
income statement.
ADJUSTMENTS FOR ERRORS AND ACCOUNTING CHANGES
Firms occasionally obtain new information about amounts included in net income of prior 
periods or change either their accounting principles or estimates used in applying their account-
ing principles. Consider the following examples:
1. Great Deal discovered that it overstated its ending inventory for the current year. As a 
consequence, Great Deal understated cost of goods sold and overstated net income for the 
year. The amount of the under- and overstatement was $145.9 million.
2. Great Deal has used a LIFO cost-flow assumption for inventories and cost of goods sold 
for many years. It decides during the current year to change to a FIFO cost-flow assump-
tion. Net income of prior years would differ if Great Deal had used a FIFO, instead of a 
LIFO, cost-flow assumption.
3. Thames depreciates its manufacturing machinery over a 20-year life. The availability of 
more efficient machines prompts Thames to begin replacing its existing machinery with 
new machinery. Thames reduces the depreciable life of its existing machinery, which 
increases current and future depreciation charges relative to the recent past.
Each of these three examples requires the accountant to apply U.S. GAAP and IFRS guidance 
to determine whether to
1.  Retrospectively restate prior years’ net income (retrospective restatement), or
2.  Include an adjustment for the correction or accounting change in the current year’s net 
income, or
3.  Adjust net income of the current and future periods (prospective adjustment).
13 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 130, “Reporting Comprehensive Income,” 1997 (Codi-
fication Topic 220); IASB, International Accounting Standard 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements,” revised 
2003.
14 Discussed in Chapter 13.
15 Discussed in Chapter 12.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

683
More on the Measurement and Reporting of Income
Advocates of retrospective restatement view past net income numbers as useful to the 
extent they permit predictions of future net income. Retrospective restatement results in re-
computing net income for prior years on the same basis as net income of the current and future 
years, thereby enhancing earnings predictions.
Advocates of including adjustments for these items in the income statement of the cur-
rent year argue that all income items should initially appear in the income statement of some 
period. In this way, the cumulative series of income statements includes all income items. 
Financial statement users are less likely to overlook the items if they appear in the income 
statement than if they appear as an adjustment of prior years’ net income. Adequate disclo-
sure of the nature of each item in the income statement will permit financial statement users to 
assess its importance when evaluating the firm’s profitability.
Advocates of adjusting earnings prospectively argue that restating previously reported 
amounts reduces the credibility of the financing reporting process. They further argue that 
adjustments such as those in the three examples are a normal, recurring part of the accounting 
process. Prospective adjustment avoids the implication that the firm has computed prior years’ 
earnings incorrectly.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS distinguish the accounting for (1) corrections of errors, (2) adjust-
ments for changes in accounting principles, and (3) adjustments for changes in accounting 
estimates.16
Reporting Corrections of Errors Errors result from such actions as miscounting 
inventories and misapplying accounting principles. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to 
account for corrections of errors, if material, by retrospectively restating net income of prior 
periods and adjusting the beginning balance in Retained Earnings for the current period. In 
the earlier example where Great Deal miscounted its inventories, the cumulative effect of the 
inventory error at the end of 2012 was an overstatement of retained earnings of $145.9 million. 
Ignoring the effects of income taxes, Great Deal makes the following entry at the beginning of 
2013 to correct the error (amounts are in millions of U.S. dollars):
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
145.9
 
Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
145.9
Reporting Changes in Accounting Principles Great Deal’s change from a LIFO to 
a FIFO cost-flow assumption is a change in accounting principle. If it is practical to recalculate 
income for prior periods under the new accounting principle, U.S. GAAP and IFRS require 
firms to retrospectively apply the new accounting principle to recalculate prior years’ net 
income. Assume that inventory at the end of last year for Great Deal was $450 million under 
LIFO and $525 million under FIFO. The entry to record the balance sheet effect of the change 
in accounting principle, ignoring income taxes, is as follows (in millions of US$):
 
Merchandise Inventory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
75
 
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
75
To retrospectively apply the FIFO accounting principle.
Great Deal would also recalculate net income for each prior year reported in its financial 
statements using a FIFO cost-flow assumption.
Reporting Changes in Accounting Estimates Accrual accounting requires fre-
quent, ongoing changes in estimates. As time passes and conditions change, new information 
becomes available that causes management to change the estimates required to apply account-
ing principles. Examples of such changes in estimates include the amount of uncollectible 
accounts and the useful lives of depreciable assets. The previous example of a change in the 
service life for Thames’s machinery is a change in accounting estimate. Earlier chapters point 
16 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 154, “Accounting Changes and Error Corrections,” 
2005 (Codification Topic 250); IASB, International Accounting Standard 8, “Accounting Policies, Changes in 
Accounting Estimates, and Errors,” revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

684
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
out that firms do not recalculate revenues and expenses of previous periods to incorporate new 
information involving estimates. Instead, firms report the effect of the change in estimate pro-
spectively, in current and future periods’ earnings; that is, firms adjust current and future depre-
ciation charges—but not past ones—to take into account the carrying value at the time the new 
information arrives as well as the new information itself.
Changes in estimates do not always relate to recurring accounting measurements, such as 
depreciable lives. Some changes in estimates concern unusual or nonrecurring events. Consider, 
for example, a litigation situation in which a court this period finds a firm responsible for an act 
that occurred several years previously and caused injury. The damage award differs from the 
amount that the firm previously recognized with a debit to a loss and a credit to a liability. The 
court’s decision provides new information regarding measurements made in previous periods. 
Firms report the income effect of these items in the income statement of the current period, 
appropriately disclosed, not in retained earnings as a direct adjustment.
 PROBLEM  17.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Journal entries for net income and retained earnings transactions. Prepare journal entries 
for each of the following transactions of Able Corporation for 2012. Ignore income taxes.
a. January 15: As a result of a computer software error the preceding December, the 
firm failed to record depreciation on office facilities totaling $35,000.
b. March 20: An earthquake in California causes an uninsured loss of $70,000 to a 
warehouse.
c. December 31: The firm acquired its office building six years before December 31, 
2012. The building cost $400,000, had zero estimated salvage value, and had a 40-year 
life. The firm uses the straight-line depreciation method. Able Corporation now esti-
mates that the building will have a total useful life of 30 years instead of 40 years. 
Record depreciation expense on the building for 2012 and any required adjustment to 
depreciation of previous years.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
Publicly held firms that apply U.S. GAAP or IFRS must show earnings per share (EPS) data 
in the body of the income statement.17 Earnings per share is a common measure of profitabil-
ity.18 Earnings per share result from dividing net income (minus any preferred stock dividends) 
by the weighted-average number of outstanding common shares during the accounting period. 
The weighted-average number of shares outstanding is calculated by multiplying the number 
of shares outstanding by the length of time (as a fraction of the year) those shares remain 
outstanding.
Example 7 Great Deal’s statement of shareholders’ equity (Exhibit 1.4) shows that Great 
Deal had 419 million shares of common stock outstanding on February 27, 2013. Suppose that 
on August 31, 2013, Great Deal issues 100 million additional common shares. Further, suppose 
that on January 31, 2014, Great Deal repurchased 75 million shares of common stock. Great 
Deal engaged in no other common share transactions during the fiscal year ending February 
27, 2014.
Great Deal’s weighted-average number of shares outstanding to be used to calculate 
 earnings-per-share for fiscal 2013 is 462.75 million shares, calculated as follows:
17 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 128, “Earnings per Share,” 1997 (Codification Topic 
250); IASB, International Accounting Standard 33, “Earnings per Share,” revised 2003.
18 Firms reporting multiple categories of income items must disclose earnings per share for each reported category. 
For example, firms reporting discontinued operations must report earnings per share from continuing opera-
tions and earnings per share from discontinued operations.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

685
Earnings per Share
Calendar Period
Fraction of Year
×
Number of Shares 
Outstanding 
(in millions)
=
Weighted 
Calculation
March 1, 2013–
August 31, 2013
1/2 (= 6 months/12 months)
×
419
=
209.50
September 1, 2013–
January 31, 2014
5/12 (= 5 months/12 months) × 519 (= 419 + 100) =
216.25
February 1, 2014–
February 27, 2014
1/12 (= 1 month/12 months)
×
444 (= 519 − 75)
=
 37.00
Weighted-average number 
of shares outstanding 
during fiscal 2013
462.75
Exhibit 1.2 shows Great Deal’s earnings per share for recent fiscal years. For fiscal 2012 (the 
year ending February 27, 2013), earnings per share, based on 416.8 million weighted-average 
shares outstanding, is $3.16 (= $1,317/416.8). Exhibit 1.6 shows that in fiscal 2013, Thames 
reported a loss per share of €1.03 (= €201.8/195.054).
Some firms may issue instruments that holders can exchange for shares of common stock 
(such as a convertible bond) or exercise to buy shares of common stock (such as employee 
stock options). These firms report two earnings-per-share amounts: basic earnings per share 
(the amount that results from the calculations above) and diluted earnings per share. When 
holders convert their securities or exercise their options, the firm will issue additional shares of 
common stock. The additional shares increase the denominator of the earnings-per-share cal-
culation, leading to a decline in the earnings-per-share amount. This phenomenon is called dilu-
tion. If a firm has securities that, if exchanged for common stock, would cause basic earnings 
per share to dilute by 3% or more, accounting requires the firm to present both basic earnings 
per share and diluted earnings per share.19
Great Deal and Thames report both basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per 
share. In fiscal 2012, Great Deal reported $3.10 diluted earnings per share on diluted shares 
of 427.5 million (compared to basic shares of 416.8 million). Thames reported a loss of €1.03 
per share on diluted shares of 195.488 million (compared to basic shares of 195.054 million). 
Thames’s basic and diluted loss per share are the same in 2013 (a loss of €1.03 per share) 
because the difference in basic and diluted shares is small.
Interpreting Earnings per Share Accountants and financial analysts criticize earn-
ings per share as a measure of profitability because it does not consider the amount of assets 
required to generate that level of earnings. Two firms with the same earnings and earnings per 
share will differ in profitability if one of the firms requires more assets to generate those earn-
ings than does the other firm.
In comparing firms, earnings-per-share amounts have limited use. For example, if two firms 
have identical earnings and common shareholders’ equity, they have the same return on equity 
(ROE). Yet, one firm may have a lower earnings per share simply because it has a larger num-
ber of shares outstanding.
Price-Earnings Ratio Financial analysts often compare earnings-per-share amounts with 
the market price of the stock. They usually express this comparison as a price-earnings ratio, 
equal to the market price per share divided by earnings per share. For example, suppose the 
price of one share of common stock of Great Deal is $32.00 on February 27, 2013. On this 
date, Great Deal’s price-earnings ratio, often called the P/E ratio, is 10.1 (= $32.00/$3.16) to 1. 
The analyst often expresses the relation by saying, “The stock sells at 10.1 times earnings.”
Tables of stock prices and financial periodicals often present price-earnings ratios. The ana-
lyst must interpret these published P/E ratios cautiously. In cases in which a firm’s net income 
includes unusual, nonrecurring gains and losses, the reader must ascertain whether the pub-
lished ratio uses income only from recurring operations or final net income that includes the 
unusual items. To serve their intended purpose, P/E ratios should use normal, ongoing earnings 
data in the denominator.
19 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, No. 128, “Earnings per Share,” 1997 (Codification Topic 
260). IASB, International Accounting Standard 33, “Earnings per Share,” revised 2003.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

686
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
SEGMENT DISCLOSURE
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to report certain information about each of their 
operating segments.20 These disclosures permit analysis of profitability at a less aggregated 
level. We first consider the required segment disclosures, and then illustrate their use in the 
analysis of the profitability of Great Deal, Inc., and Thames Limited.
Required Segment Information Authoritative guidance requires firms to disclose 
information about their operating segments. The definition of segments takes a management 
approach. Specifically, U.S. GAAP and IFRS define an operating segment as a unit within a 
firm for which management both
■ 
Prepares separate financial information.
■ 
Regularly evaluates this financial information for the purposes of allocating resources and 
assessing performance.
By defining segments in the same way that management operates a business, accounting tries 
to provide financial statement users with the same sort of information that management uses 
to evaluate the business. This means that a firm that chooses to organize, manage, and eval-
uate its business by products and services would define its operating segments along product 
and service lines. Most firms report operating segments by products and services. Firms might 
also report information by geographical markets (if information is available without undue 
cost) and by customers who represent more than 10% of revenues (called major customers). 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS provide criteria for determining how many segments a firm should 
report. Firms must report segment information for any operating segments that constitute 10% 
or more of revenues, assets, or profit and loss. Firms must also report enough segment informa-
tion to account for at least 75% of the entity’s total revenues.
For each operating segment, firms must report information about revenues, assets, and 
measures of the segment’s operating results,21 as well as components of operating profit or 
loss, including depreciation, interest revenue, and interest expense. Firms also generally report 
information about long-lived assets and capital expenditures. IFRS, but not U.S. GAAP, also 
requires disclosure of segment liabilities, if management uses this information as part of the 
normal reporting structure to manage and evaluate the business.
Firms must reconcile data for their operating segments with total revenues, operating 
income, and assets at a firm-wide level. Segment revenues usually sum to firm-wide revenues. 
Segment operating income will not equal firm-wide operating income because firms do not allo-
cate all corporate-level expenses (for example, compensation of top management and interest 
expense) to operating segments. Segment assets will not equal firm-wide assets because firms do 
not allocate corporate-level assets (for example, corporate headquarters) to operating segments.
SEGMENT DISCLOSURES
In this section, we analyze the segment disclosures of Great Deal, Inc., and Thames Limited. 
Exhibit 17.8 presents segment information for Great Deal, Inc., for fiscal years 2010–2012. 
Exhibit 17.9 presents the segment information reported by Thames Limited for fiscal 2012.
Great Deal defines its operating segments in broad geographic terms: domestic and inter-
national. The Domestic segment consists of all stores and online operations within the United 
States. The International segment consists of all stores and online operations outside of the 
United States. Domestic revenues constitute the majority of Great Deal’s revenues over the 
past three years. Domestic revenues as a percentage of total revenues have been declining: from 
83% (= $33,328/$40,023) in fiscal 2010, to 78% (= $35,070/$45,015) in fiscal 2011, to 75% 
(= $37,314/$49,694) in fiscal 2012. This trend, together with the overall growth in revenues over 
the same period, suggests that Great Deal has been successful in pursuing a growth strategy 
aimed at non-U.S. markets for its products and services.
20 FASB, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards, No. 131, “Disclosures About Segments of an Enterprise 
and Related Information,” 1997 (Codification Topic 280); IASB, International Financial Reporting Standard 8, 
“Operating Segments.”
21 U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not precisely define operating results at either a firm-wide level or segment level. Most 
firms measure operating income before interest revenue, interest expense, and income tax expense.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

687
Earnings per Share
Great Deal, Inc. 
Segment Information 
(amounts in millions)
For the Year Ended February 27/28
2013
2012
2011
REVENUES
Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$37,314
$35,070
$33,328
International  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 12,380
  9,945
  6,695
Total Revenue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$49,694
$45,015
$40,023
PERCENTAGE OF REVENUES, BY PRODUCT AND SERVICE
Domestic:
 
Consumer Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39%
39%
41%
 
Home Office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34%
31%
28%
 
Entertainment Software  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16%
19%
20%
 
Appliances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4%
5%
5%
 
Services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6%
6%
6%
 
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       <1%
      <1%
      <1%
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
     100%
     100%
     100%
International:
 
Consumer Electronics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20%
26%
39%
 
Home Office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53%
45%
30%
 
Entertainment Software  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7%
9%
13%
 
Appliances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8%
10%
13%
 
Services. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12%
10%
5%
 
Other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    <1%
    <1%
    <1%
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   100%
   100%
   100%
OPERATING INCOME
Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,071
1,758
1,999
International  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    164
    112
    162
Total operating income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,235
$ 1,870
$ 2,161
Other income (expense):
 
Investment income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
35
129
 
Investment impairment and other  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
(111)
—
 
Interest expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    (94)
    (94)
    (62)
Earnings before operations before income taxes and 
 
equity in income (loss) of affiliates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,195
$ 1,700
$ 2,228
ASSETS
Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$10,431
$ 9,059
$ 8,194
International  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  7,871
  6,767
  4,564
Total Assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$18,302
$15,826
$12,758
DEPRECIATION
Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   585
$   550
$   500
International  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    253
    180
     80
Total Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   838
$   730
$   580
CAPITAL EXPENDITURES
Domestic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   385
$   971
$   673
International  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    230
    332
    124
Total Depreciation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   615
$ 1,303
$   797
EXHIBIT 17.8
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

688
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Great Deal also provides a breakdown of the revenues, by products and service, within each 
of its operating segments. For both segments, consumer electronics and home office products 
constitute the majority of revenues in all years. Finally, Great Deal reports information about 
the amount of operating income, assets, capital expenditures and depreciation, by operat-
ing segment. These data indicate that most of Great Deal’s operating profits derive from its 
domestic sales of products and services. In addition, the majority of Great Deal’s assets, capital 
expenditures and depreciation also relate to its domestic segment.
In contrast to Great Deal, Thames defines its operating segments in terms of products and 
services. Thames groups these products and services by the product markets served. Those 
product markets are Aerospace, Defense, Security, and Other. The largest of these segments in 
terms of revenues is the Defense segment, which generated €5,932.7 million in 2012, or about 
46% (= €5,932.7/€12,881.5) of total consolidated revenues that year. The Defense segment also 
generated the most operating income in 2012. In fact, it was the only segment that generated 
operating profit (as opposed to an operating loss) in 2012.
The fourth column of Exhibit 17.9 shows the amounts associated with Thames’s Other 
operating segment. This segment includes several items:
■ 
The operating activities of segments that do not meet the 10% criterion for separate disclo-
sure of revenues, assets, profit or loss.
■ 
Costs that are not allocated to other operating segments (for example, group research and 
development expenditures).
■ 
The elimination of intersegment transactions among the three other operating segments 
(Aerospace, Defense, and Security) during the year.
The segment disclosures for both Great Deal and Thames reconcile to the amounts reported in 
their financial statements.22 For example, the sum of Great Deal’s Domestic revenues ($37,314) 
and International revenues ($12,380) is $49,694—the amount of consolidated total revenues 
reported in the first line of its income statement, shown in Exhibit 1.2. The sum of Thames’s 
segment revenues, €12,881.5 (= €4,164.4 + €5,932.7 + €3,303.4 − €519.0), also equals the 
amount of total revenues reported in the first line of its income statement, shown in Exhibit 1.6.
ANALYSIS OF SEGMENT DISCLOSURES
We can apply the financial analysis tools described in Chapter 7 to better understand the per-
formance of a firm’s operating segments. In particular, we can compute return on assets (ROA), 
profit margin, and total assets turnover for each segment using the segment disclosures. For 
these calculations, we use the operating income reported for each segment. Exhibit 17.10 pre-
sents ROA, profit margin, and total assets turnover ratios for Great Deal’s operating segments 
for fiscal 2011 and 2012.
Thames Limited
Segment Information
(amounts in millions of euros)
Aerospace
Defense
Security
Other, Including 
Non-allocated 
Amounts
Thames 
Limited
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4,164.4
5,932.7
3,303.4
(519.0)
12,881.5
Income from Operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(309.6)
544.4
(11.1)
(171.9)
51.8
Noncurrent Operating Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,607.6
1,405.8
1,844.7
392.4
5,250.5
Current Operating Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,026.5
3,372.0
2,474.2
31.1
8,903.8
Current Operating Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(3,297.4)
(4,595.6)
(2,526.6)
(451.8)
(10,871.4)
Net Current Operating Assets (Liabilities)  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(270.9)
(1,223.6)
(52.4)
(420.7)
(1,967.6)
Capital Expenditure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
182.4
83.0
80.5
73.0
418.9
Depreciation and Amortization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
157.3
88.7
131.9
42.9
420.8
EXHIBIT 17.9
22 Included in Chapter 1.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

689
 Solutions to Self-Study Problems
Great Deal, Inc.
Segment Profitability Analysis
(amounts in US$)
2012
2011
Domestic
International
Domestic
International
Profit margin
5.6%
(= $2,071/$37,314)
1.3%
(= $164/$12,380)
5.0%
(= $1,758/$35,070)
1.1%
(= $112/$9,945)
Total assets turnover
3.83
(= $37,314/
0.5*[$10,431 + $9,059])
1.69
($12,380/
0.5*[$7,871 + $6,767])
4.07
(= $35,070/
0.5*[9,059 + $8,194])
1.76
(= $9,945/
0.5*[6,767 + 4,564])
Return on assets (ROA)
21.3%
(= $2,071/
0.5*[$10,431 + $9,059])
2.2%
(= $164/
0.5*[$7,871 + $6,767])
20.4%
(= $1,758/
0.5*[9,059 + $8,194])
2.0%
(= $112/
0.5*[6,767 + 4,564])
EXHIBIT 17.10
© Cengage Learning 2014
The information in Exhibit 17.10 suggests several inferences about the profitability of Great 
Deal’s operating segments. First, the Domestic segment is substantially more profitable than 
the International segment, as indicated by a Domestic segment ROA of 21.3% in fiscal 2012 
compared to an International segment ROA of 2.2%. The decomposition of the ROA calcula-
tions shows that the higher ROA for Domestic operations derives from both a higher profit 
margin (5.6% versus 1.3%) and a higher asset turnover ratio (3.83 versus 1.69). This informa-
tion suggests that if Great Deal continues to grow internationally, it will experience a decline in 
its overall ROA. The decline in ROA is due to the inclusion of an increasingly higher fraction 
of International profitability (which has a lower ROA) in the mix of profits generated by Great 
Deal. At the same time, the increase in the ROA of the International segment between 2011 
and 2012, from 2.0% to 2.2%, is an encouraging signal.
SOLUTIONS TO SELF-STUDY PROBLEMS
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 17.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Kaplan Corporation; review of Chapters 1–16)
a. 
Cost of Marketable Securities Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$180,000
Gain on Sale (from Income Statement)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  30,000
Selling Price  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$210,000
The statement of cash flows shows the $210,000 cash proceeds from the sale as an investing 
activity. The accountant must subtract the gain on sale of marketable securities from net 
income in the operations section to avoid overstating the amount of cash inflow from the 
transaction.
b. 
Marketable Securities at Fair Value on December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 450,000
Plus Cost of Marketable Securities Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
Less Cost of Marketable Securities Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(180,000)
Less Increase in Unrealized Loss (OCI). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   (20,000)
Marketable Securities at Fair Value on December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 550,000
The cost of marketable securities purchased during 2013 was $300,000. The statement 
of cash flows reports these purchases as an investing activity. The recognition of an 
unrealized loss of $20,000 from fair value declines of marketable securities classified as 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

690
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
available-for-sale securities did not reduce net income or use cash. Thus, the accountant 
need not adjust net income when computing cash flow from operations.
c. 
Allowance for Uncollectibles, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$200,000
Plus Bad Debt Expense During 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
120,000
Less Specific Customers’ Accounts Written Off as Uncollectible During 2013  . . . . . . . . . .  
         ?
Allowance for Uncollectibles, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$250,000
 
Specific customers’ accounts written off as uncollectible during 2013 totaled $70,000.
d. 
Gross Accounts Receivable, December 31, 2012a  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 2,500,000
Plus Sales During the Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
12,000,000
Less Gross Accounts Receivable, December 31, 2013b. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (3,100,000)
Cash Sales Plus Accounts Collected or Written Off . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$11,400,000
Less Write-Offs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
       (70,000)
Cash Collected During the Year. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$11,330,000
a$2,300,000 + $200,000.
b$2,850,000 + $250,000.
 
Kaplan Corporation generated $11,330,000 cash from credit customers during 2013. Net 
income includes $11,880,000 from credit sales (= sales revenue of $12,000,000 − bad debt 
expense of $120,000). The accountant subtracts the $550,000 difference (= $11,880,000 − 
$11,330,000) from net income when computing cash flow from operations. This $550,000 
amount equals the increase in accounts receivable (net) during 2013 (= $2,850,000 
− $2,300,000).
e. 
Finished Goods Inventory, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 1,800,000
Plus Cost of Units Completed During the Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
Less Cost of Units Sold During the Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (7,200,000)
Finished Goods Inventory, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 2,200,000
 
The cost of units completed was $7,600,000.
f. 
Work-in-Process Inventory, December 31, 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   460,000
Plus Cost of Raw Materials Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
Plus Direct Labor and Manufacturing Overhead Costs Incurred . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4,500,000
Less Cost of Units Completed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (7,600,000)
Work-in-Process Inventory, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   530,000
 
The cost of raw materials used during 2013 was $3,170,000.
 
Raw Materials Inventory, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$          330,000
Plus Cost of Raw Materials Purchased  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
?
Less Cost of Raw Materials Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
    (3,170,000)
Raw Materials Inventory, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$   380,000
 
The cost of raw materials purchased was $3,220,000.
g. 
 
 
LIFO 
Difference 
FIFO
Inventory, December 31, 2012 . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 2,590,000 
$ 420,000 
$ 3,010,000
Purchases Plus Costs Incurred  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  7,720,000 
      — 
  7,720,000
Goods Available for Use or Sale  . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$10,310,000 
$ 420,000 
$10,730,000
Less Inventory, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . .  
  3,110,000 
  730,000 
  3,840,000
Cost of Goods Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 7,200,000 
$(310,000) 
$ 6,890,000
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

691
 Solutions to Self-Study Problems  
 
Cost of goods sold under FIFO would have been $6,890,000. Note that cost of goods sold 
under LIFO of $7,200,000 is less than the cost of purchases plus costs incurred of $7,720,000. 
The accountant subtracts the difference of $520,000 (= $7,720,000 − $7,200,000), which 
equals the increase in inventories during 2013 (= $3,110,000 − $2,590,000), when convert-
ing net income to cash flow from operations. To compute cash flow from operations, the 
accountant also adds to net income the increase in accounts payable of $355,000 because 
Kaplan Corporation did not make cash expenditures for the full amount of the increase in 
inventories.
h. 
Investment in Maher Corporation (Fair Value Method)
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$200,000
Plus Additional Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Less Sale of Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Less Increase in Unrealized Loss on Investments in Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  15,000
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$185,000
Investment in Johnson Corporation (Equity Method)
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$310,000
Plus Additional Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
50,000
Plus Equity in Earnings (Total Equity in Earnings of $300,000 from Income
 Statement Minus Equity in Earnings of Burton Corporation of $160,000) . . . . . . . . . . .  
140,000
Less Sale of Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Less Dividends Received (Plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (90,000)
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$410,000
Investment in Burton Corporation (Equity Method)
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$800,000
Plus Additional Investments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Plus Equity in Earnings (0.40 × $400,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
160,000
Less Sale of Investments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
Less Dividends Received (0.40 × $75,000)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  (30,000)
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$930,000
 
Kaplan Corporation recognized a total of $300,000 (= $140,000 + $160,000) equity in 
earnings, yet received dividends of $120,000 (= $90,000 + $30,000). The statement of cash 
flows shows a subtraction from net income of $180,000 (= $300,000 − $120,000) for the 
excess of revenues over dividends from investments when computing cash flow from opera-
tions. The statement of cash flows reports the additional investment in Johnson Corpora-
tion as an investing activity.
i. 
Land 
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  400,000
Plus Acquisitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
100,000
Less Disposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
         0
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  500,000
Building
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  800,000
Plus Acquisitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
300,000
Less Retirements (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (160,000)
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  940,000
Equipment
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,300,000
Plus Acquisitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1,400,000
Less Disposals (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (900,000)
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,800,000
Accumulated Depreciation
Balance, December 31, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,200,000
Plus Depreciation for 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
560,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

692
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Less Accumulated Depreciation on Building Retired (plug)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
(160,000)
Less Accumulated Depreciation on Equipment Sold (see below) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (670,000)
Balance, December 31, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  930,000
Selling Price of Equipment Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  150,000
Loss on Sale of Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     80,000
Carrying Value of Equipment Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  230,000
Cost of Equipment Sold (from above)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  900,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation on Equipment Sold (plug). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
   (670,000)
Carrying Value of Equipment Sold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  230,000
 
The statement of cash flows shows the acquisitions of land, building, and equipment as 
investing activities. The cash proceeds from the sale of equipment of $150,000 appear as an 
investing activity. The statement of cash flows shows an addback to net income of $80,000 
for the loss on sale of equipment. Depreciation expense for 2013 of $560,000 appears as an 
addback to net income because this expense does not use cash.
j. 
Investment in Heimann Corporation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
800,000 
 
Common Stock (20,000 × $10)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
200,000
 
Additional Paid-In Capital (20,000 × $30)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 
600,000
k. 
Cost of Investment in Heimann Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 800,000
Patent, $80,000 + (2 × $10,000 amortization per year) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 (100,000)
Carrying Value of Net Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 700,000
l. 
4% Bond Issue
$40,000 × 9.954. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$  398,160
$2,000,000 × 0.70138 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 1,402,760
 
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$1,800,920
10% Bond Issue
$150,000 × 13.59033  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$2,038,550
$3,000,000 × 0.45639 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
 1,369,170
 
Total. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$3,407,720
Liability, 
Beginning of 
the Period
Market 
Interest Rate
Interest 
Expense
Amount 
Payable
Addition to (or 
Reduction in) 
Liability
Liability, End 
of the Period
m.
4% Bond Issue
January 1, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,800,920
0.03
$ 54,028
$ 40,000
$ 14,028
$1,814,948
July 1, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,814,948
0.03
  54,448
  40,000
  14,448
 1,829,396
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$108,476
$ 80,000
$ 28,476
10% Bond Issue
January 1, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,407,720
0.04
$136,309
$150,000
$  (13,691)
$3,394,029
July 1, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 3,394,029
0.04
 135,761
 150,000
  (14,239)
 3,379,790
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$272,070
$300,000
$ (27,930)
8% Bond Issue
January 1, 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,000,000
0.04
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
$           0
$1,000,000
July 1, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 1,000,000
0.04
  40,000
  40,000
        0
 1,000,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 80,000
$ 80,000
$           0
 
Interest expense on the 4% bonds of $108,476 exceeds the amount payable of $80,000. The 
statement of cash flows shows an addback to net income for the difference, the amortiza-
tion of discount on these bonds. Interest expense on the 10% bonds of $272,070 is less than 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

693
 Solutions to Self-Study Problems  
the amount payable of $300,000. The statement of cash flows shows a subtraction from 
net income for the difference, the amortization of premium on these bonds. The statement 
of cash flows also shows an addition to net income for the increase in interest payable of 
$100,000, indicating that cash expenditures for interest were less than the amounts accrued 
as payable for 2013.
n. 
Income Taxes Payable, December 31, 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 250,000
Plus Current Income Tax Expense for 2013 (see below). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
420,000
Less Cash Payment During 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
                ?
Income Taxes Payable, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 375,000
Total Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 540,000
Less Increase in Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
     (120,000)
Current Income Tax Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 420,000
 
Cash payments for income taxes totaled $295,000 during 2013. The statement of cash flows 
should show an addback to net income of $120,000 for the portion of income tax expense 
that does not require a current expenditure (that is, the increase in the Deferred Tax Liabil-
ity account). The statement of cash flows also shows an addition to net income for the 
increase in income taxes payable of $125,000, indicating that cash expenditures for income 
taxes were less than the amount accrued as payable for 2013.
Common Shares
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Number of 
Shares
Amount
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Shares
o.
Balance, December 31, 2012. . . .
50,000
$500,000
$  800,000
$1,666,000
$ 30,000
Common Stock Issued  . . . . . . . .
10,000
100,000
400,000
—
—
Treasury Stock Sold . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
5,000
—
(10,000)
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
—
—
—
1,260,000
—
Dividends (plug)a  . . . . . . . . . . .
    —
      —
        —
  (236,000)
       —
Balance, December 31, 2013. . . .
60,000
$600,000
$1,205,000
$2,690,000
$ 20,000
aOr, see statement of cash flows.
 
The $500,000 proceeds from issuing common stock appear as a financing activity on 
the statement of cash flows. The $15,000 cash proceeds from reissuing treasury stock 
(= $10,000 + $5,000) also appears as a financing activity. Note that the excess of the 
$15,000 reissue price over the $10,000 cost of the treasury stock increases additional paid-
in capital, not net income.
SUGGESTED SOLUTION TO PROBLEM 17.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Able Corporation; journal entries for net income and retained earnings transactions.)
a. 
January 15
Retained Earnings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
35,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−35,000
−35,000
RE
To correct error in prior year’s depreciation, increasing accumulated deprecia-
tion and reducing retained earnings.
b. 
March 20
Loss from Earthquake  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
70,000
 
Building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
70,000
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

694
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−70,000
−70,000
IncSt → RE
To record loss from earthquake in an income statement account.
 
The firm would likely classify the loss as an extraordinary item if it reported using U.S. 
GAAP but not use the term extraordinary if it reported under IFRS.
c. 
December 31
Depreciation Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14,000
 
Accumulated Depreciation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
14,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−14,000
−14,000
IncSt → RE
To record a change in depreciable life of a building from 40 years to 30 years. 
Original depreciation: $400,000/40 = $10,000 per year. Carrying value on 
January 1, 2012, is $350,000 [= $400,000 − ($10,000 × 5)]. Depreciation 
for 2012 is $14,000 (= $350,000/25).
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Relevance
Faithful representation
Comparability
Consistency
Verifiability
Understandability
Materiality
Cost constraints
Income from continuing operations
Income, gains, and losses from 
discontinued operations
Extraordinary gains and losses
Corrections of errors
Change in accounting principle
Change in estimates
Earnings per share (EPS)
Weighted-average number of outstanding 
common shares
Basic earnings per share
Diluted earnings per share
Operating segments
EXERCISES AND PROBLEMS
EXERCISES
 1. Identifying accounting principles. Indicate the accounting principle or method described in 
each of the following statements.
a. This inventory cost-flow assumption results in reporting the largest net income during 
periods of rising acquisition costs and non-decreasing inventory levels.
b. This method of accounting for uncollectible accounts recognizes the implied income 
reduction in the period of sale.
c. This method of accounting for long-term investments in the common stock of other 
corporations usually requires an adjustment to net income to calculate cash flow from 
operations under the indirect method in the statement of cash flows.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

695
Exercises and Problems
d. This method of accounting for long-term leases by the lessee gives rise to a noncurrent 
liability.
e. This inventory cost-flow assumption results in approximately the same balance sheet 
amount as the FIFO cost-flow assumption.
f. This method of recognizing interest expense on bonds provides a uniform annual rate 
of interest expense over the life of the bond.
g. The accounting for this type of hedging instrument designated as a hedge results in a 
change in other comprehensive income each period.
h. This method of accounting for intercorporate investments in securities can result in a 
decrease in the investor’s total shareholders’ equity without affecting the Retained Earn-
ings account.
i. This method of recognizing income from a long-term contract generally results in the 
least amount of fluctuation in earnings over several periods.
j. When a firm identifies specific customers’ accounts as uncollectible and writes them off, 
this method of accounting results in no change in working capital.
k. The accounting for this type of hedging instrument designated as a hedge affects net 
income each period but not other comprehensive income.
l. This method of accounting for long-term leases of equipment by the lessor shows on 
the income statement an amount for depreciation expense.
m. This inventory cost-flow assumption results in inventory balance sheet amounts closest 
to current replacement cost.
n. This method of accounting for long-term investments in common stock results in recog-
nizing revenue for dividends received or receivable.
o. This method of depreciation generally results in the largest amounts for depreciable 
assets on the balance sheet during the first several years of an asset’s life.
p. This inventory cost-flow assumption results in reporting the smallest net income during 
periods of falling acquisition costs.
q. This method of accounting for long-term leases of equipment by the lessee results in 
showing an amount for rent expense on the income statement.
r. This inventory cost-flow assumption results in inventory balance sheet amounts that 
may differ significantly from current replacement cost.
s. This method of accounting for long-term leases of equipment by the lessor results in 
showing revenue at the time of signing a lease.
t. This inventory cost-flow assumption can result in substantial changes in the relation 
between cost of goods sold and sales if inventory quantities decrease during a period.
 2. Identifying accounting principles. Indicate the accounting principle or procedure apparently 
used to record each of the following independent transactions. Also, describe the transac-
tion or event recorded in each case.
a. 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Dividend Revenue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
 X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
+
IncSt → RE
b. 
Unrealized Loss on Marketable Securities Available for Sale. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
OCI → AOCI
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

696
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
c. 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Investment in Affiliated Company. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
−
Dividend declared and received from affiliated company.
d. 
Bad Debt Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
IncSt → RE
e. 
Rent Expense for Lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
IncSt → RE
f. 
Investment in Affiliated Company. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Equity in Earnings of Affiliated Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
+
IncSt → RE
g. 
Allowance for Uncollectibles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Accounts Receivable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
−
h. 
Loss from Price Decline of Inventories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Merchandise Inventories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
IncSt → RE
i. 
Liability Under Long-Term Lease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
−
IncSt → RE
j. 
Treasury Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
−
−
ContriCap
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

697
Exercises and Problems
k. 
Interest Rate Swap Contract. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X
 
Gain on Remeasurement of Swap Contract (Income Statement) . . . . . 
 
X
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
+
+
IncSt → RE
 3. Calculating earnings per share. Campbell Incorporated reported the following information 
in their consolidated income statement for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2013:
2013
2012
Net income (in thousands) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,456,091
$1,200,472
Weighted average number of shares outstanding (in thousands). . . . . . . 
 
Basic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
702,987
687,910
 
Diluted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
713,456
699,012
a.  What was Campbell’s basic earnings per share in 2012 and 2013?
b.  What was Campbell’s diluted earnings per share in 2012 and 2013?
c.  Explain, in words, the direction of the difference between basic EPS and diluted EPS.
 4.  Calculating earnings per share. The following information pertains to Hatchet Limited for 
the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2013:
2013
2012
Net Income (in millions)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
?
Weighted Average Shares Outstanding (in millions)
 
Basic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
103.4
?
 
Diluted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
?
112.7
Earnings Per Share
 
Basic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4.13
$3.02
 
Diluted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$4.01
$3.16
 
Calculate the missing amounts in the above table:
a.  Net income, 2012.
b.  Weighted average number of shares outstanding, basic, 2012.
c.  Net income, 2013.
d.  Weighted average number of shares outstanding, diluted, 2013.
 5. Calculating weighted-average shares outstanding. Kennett Corporation reported having 
214.6 million shares outstanding at the end of its most recent fiscal year, ended December 
31, 2012. On April 1, 2013, Kennett issued 36.2 million shares of common stock, at a 
price of $18 per share. On September 1, 2013, Kennett employees exercised stock options, 
requiring Kennett to issue an additional 27.4 million shares of common stock. Kennett 
had no other common share transactions during fiscal 2013.
a.  How many shares of common stock did Kennett have outstanding at December 31, 
2013?
b.  What was Kennett’s weighted-average number of shares for the year ended December 
31, 2013?
 6. Calculating weighted-average shares outstanding. Boslan Group reported having 89.1 mil-
lion shares outstanding at the end of its most recent fiscal year, ended December 31, 2012. 
On March 1, 2013, Boslan issued 25.1 million shares of common stock, at a price of $32 
per share. On August 1, 2013, Boslan repurchased 22.2 million shares of common stock. 
On November 1, Boslan repurchased another 2.9 million shares of common stock. Boslan 
had no other common share transactions during fiscal 2013.
a.  How many common shares did Boslan have outstanding at December 31, 2013?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

698
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
b.  What was Boslan’s weighted-average number of shares outstanding for the year ended 
December 31, 2013?
 7. Interpreting changes in earnings per share. Company A and Company B both start 2012 
with $1 million of shareholders’ equity and 100,000 shares of common stock outstanding. 
During 2012, both companies earn net income of $100,000, a return of 10% on common 
shareholders’ equity at the beginning of 2012. Company A declares and pays $100,000 of 
dividends to common shareholders at the end of 2012, whereas Company B retains all its 
earnings and declares no dividends. During 2013, both companies earn net income equal 
to 10% of shareholders’ equity at the beginning of 2013.
a. Compute earnings per share for Company A and for Company B for 2012 and for 2013.
b. Compute the rate of growth in earnings per share for Company A and Company B, 
comparing earnings per share in 2013 with earnings per share in 2012.
c. Using the rate of growth in earnings per share as the criterion, which company’s man-
agement appears to be doing a better job for its shareholders? Comment on this result.
d. Using the change in return on equity (discussed in Chapter 7) as the criterion, which 
company’s management appears to be doing a better job for its shareholders? For this 
purpose, use the beginning balance of shareholders’ equity to calculate return on equity. 
Comment on this result.
 8. Treatment of accounting errors, changes in accounting principles, and changes in account-
ing estimates. GenDyn computes net income for 2012 of $1,500 and for 2013 of $1,800, 
its first two years of operations. Before issuing its financial statements for 2013, GenDyn 
discovers that an item requires an income-reducing adjustment of $400 after taxes. Indi-
cate the amount of net income for 2012 and 2013 assuming (1) the item is an error in 
the computation of depreciation expense for 2012 (2013 depreciation expense is correct 
as computed), (2) the item is the change in net income for 2012 as a result of adopting a 
change in accounting principle (the expense in 2013 reflects the new accounting principle), 
and (3) the item is the change in estimated uncollectible accounts for 2012 as a result of 
worsened credit losses experienced in 2013; the firm included the adjustment amount in 
bad debt expense for 2013.
 9. Journal entries to correct errors and adjust for changes in estimates. Prepare journal entries 
to record each of the following items for Union Cable Company for 2012. Union Cable 
Company uses a calendar year reporting period. Ignore income tax effects.
a. Discovers on January 15, 2012, that it neglected to amortize a patent during 2011 in the 
amount of $12,000.
b. Discovers on January 20, 2012, that it recorded the sale of a machine on December 30, 
2011, for $6,000 with the following journal entry:
 
Cash  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
6,000
Loss on Sale of Machine  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000
 
Machine (Acquisition Cost)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
Assets
=
Liabilities
+
Shareholders’ 
Equity
(Class.)
 +6,000
−4,000
IncSt → RE
−10,000
The machine had accumulated depreciation of $7,000 on the date of the sale.
c. Changes the depreciable life of a building as of December 31, 2012, from a total useful 
life of 30 years to a total of 42 years. The building has an acquisition cost of $2,400,000 
and is 11 years old as of December 31, 2012. The firm has not recorded depreciation for 
2012. It uses the straight-line method and zero estimated salvage value.
d. The firm has used 2% of sales as its estimate of uncollectible accounts for several years. 
Its actual losses have averaged only 1.50% of sales. Consequently, the Allowance for 
Estimated Uncollectibles account has a credit balance of $25,000 at the end of 2012 
before making the provision for 2012. An aging of customers’ accounts suggests that 
the firm needs $35,000 in the allowance account at the end of 2012 to cover estimated 
uncollectibles. Sales for 2012 are $1,000,000.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

699
Exercises and Problems
PROBLEMS
10. Comprehensive review problem. Exhibits 17.11 and 17.12 present a partial set of financial 
statements of Chicago Corporation for 2013, including a consolidated statement of income 
and retained earnings for 2013 and consolidated comparative balance sheets at December 
31, 2012 and 2013. Questions relating to the financial statements of Chicago Corporation 
follow. You should study the financial statements before responding to these questions and 
problems. Additional information is as follows:
(1) The only transaction affecting common or preferred shares during 2013 was the sale of 
treasury stock.
(2) The bonds payable have a maturity (face) value of $4 million.
Required
a. Compute the amount of specific customers’ accounts that Chicago Corporation wrote 
off as uncollectible during 2013, assuming that it made no recoveries during 2013 on 
accounts written off in years prior to 2013.
b. Chicago Corporation uses the LIFO cost-flow assumption in computing its cost of 
goods sold and its beginning and ending merchandise inventory amounts. If it had used 
a FIFO cost-flow assumption, the beginning inventory would have been $1,800,000 
Chicago Corporation
Consolidated Statement of Income and 
Retained Earnings for 2013
(Problem 10)
REVENUES
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$13,920,000
Gain on Sale of Machinery and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
200,000
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates:
 
Chicago Finance Corporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,800,000
 
Rosenwald Company  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125,000
 
Hutchinson Company . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    75,000
  2,000,000
 
Total Revenues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$16,120,000
EXPENSES
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 5,000,000
Employee Payroll Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,000,000
Depreciation of Plant and Equipment and Amortization 
 
of Leased Property Rights. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000,000
Amortization of Patent  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125,000
Bad Debt Expense . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
120,000
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
455,000
General Corporate Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
420,000
Income Taxes—Current  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,430,000
Income Taxes—Deferred. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
    170,000
 
Total Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$11,720,000
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4,400,000
Less: Dividends on Preferred Shares . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(120,000)
 
Dividends on Common Shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 (2,080,000)
Increase in Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 2,200,000
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,800,000
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 5,000,000
Basic Earnings per Common Share (Based on 1,600,000 
 
Average Shares Outstanding). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$      2.68
Diluted Earnings per Share (Assuming Conversion of 
 
Preferred Stock)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$      2.20
EXHIBIT 17.11
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

700
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
Chicago Corporation
Consolidated Balance Sheets
December 31
(Problem 10)
December 31:
2013
2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   100,000
$   200,000
Certificate of Deposit. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
225,000
—
Accounts Receivable (Net of Estimated Uncollectibles 
 
of $100,000 in 2012 and $160,000 in 2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600,000
500,000
Merchandise Inventory. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,800,000
1,500,000
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    200,000
    200,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,925,000
$ 2,400,000
Investments
Chicago Finance Corporation (40% Owned) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 4,000,000
$ 2,200,000
Rosenwald Company (50% Owned). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,025,000
900,000
Hutchinson Company (25% Owned) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    175,000
    100,000
 
Total Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,200,000
$ 3,200,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   500,000
$   400,000
Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4,000,000
4,000,000
Machinery and Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
8,000,000
7,300,000
Property Rights Acquired Under Lease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,500,000
  1,500,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$14,000,000
$13,200,000
Less Accumulated Depreciation and Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    (4,000,000)
    (3,800,000)
 
Total Property, Plant, and Equipment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$10,000,000
$ 9,400,000
Intangibles (at Net Carrying Value)
Patent. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   750,000
$   875,000
Goodwill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,125,000
  1,125,000
 
Total Intangibles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,875,000
$ 2,000,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$20,000,000
$17,000,000
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   550,000
$   400,000
Advances from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
640,000
660,000
Salaries Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
300,000
240,000
Income Taxes Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
430,000
300,000
Rent Received in Advance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
50,000
—
Other Current Liabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    460,000
    200,000
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,430,000
$ 1,800,000
Long-Term Debt
Bonds Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 3,648,000
$ 3,600,000
Equipment Mortgage Indebtedness  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
332,000
1,300,000
Capitalized Lease Obligation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  1,020,000
  1,100,000
 
Total Long-Term Debt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 5,000,000
$ 6,000,000
Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 1,570,000
$ 1,400,000
Shareholders’ Equity
Convertible Preferred Stock. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$ 2,000,000
$ 2,000,000
Common Stock  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000,000
2,000,000
Additional Paid-In Capital  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3,000,000
2,400,000
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  5,000,000
  2,800,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$12,000,000
$ 9,200,000
Less Cost of Treasury Shares  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 (1,000,000)
 (1,400,000)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$11,000,000
$ 7,800,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$20,000,000
$17,000,000
EXHIBIT 17.12
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

701
Exercises and Problems
 
and the ending inventory would have been $1,700,000. Compute the actual gross profit 
(net sales less cost of goods sold) of Chicago Corporation for 2013 under LIFO and 
the corresponding amount of gross profit if it had used FIFO (ignore income tax 
effects).
c. Refer to part b. Did the quantity and acquisition cost of merchandise inventory 
increase or decrease between the beginning and the end of 2013? Explain.
d. Chicago Corporation accounts for its three intercorporate investments in unconsol-
idated affiliates using the equity method. The acquisition cost of these investments 
equaled both the carrying value and the fair value of the assets and liabilities of the 
investees at the time of acquisition. How much did each of these three companies 
declare in dividends during 2013? How can you tell?
e. Refer to part d. Give the journal entry (entries) made during 2013 to apply the equity 
method.
f. 
Chicago Corporation acquired its only building on January 1, 2012. It estimated the 
building to have a 40-year useful life and zero salvage value at that time. Calculate the 
amount of depreciation expense on this building for 2013, assuming that the firm uses 
the straight-line method.
g. Chicago Corporation sold machinery and equipment costing $1,000,000, with a car-
rying value of $200,000, for cash during 2013. Give the journal entry to record the 
disposition.
h. The bonds payable carry 6% annual coupons and require the payment of interest on 
December 31 of each year. Give the journal entry made on December 31, 2013, to rec-
ognize interest expense for 2013, assuming that Chicago Corporation uses the effective 
interest method.
i. 
Refer to part h. What was the effective or market interest rate on these bonds on the 
date Chicago Corporation issued them? Explain.
j. 
The $170,000 deferred portion of income tax expense for 2013 includes $150,000 relat-
ing to the use of different depreciation methods for financial and tax reporting. If 
the income tax rate was 30%, calculate the difference between the depreciation deduc-
tion reported on the tax return and the depreciation expense reported on the income 
statement.
k. Give the journal entry that explains the change in the treasury shares during 2013.
l. 
If the original acquisition cost of the patent is $1,250,000, and the firm amortizes that 
cost on a straight-line basis, how long before December 31, 2013, did the firm acquire 
the patent?
m. Chicago Corporation acquired the stock of Hutchinson Company on December 31, 
2012. If it held the same amount of stock during the year, but the amount represented 
only a 15% ownership of the Hutchinson Company, how would the financial state-
ments have differed? Disregard income tax effects, and assume the market price of the 
shares exceeds their acquisition cost of $100,000 by $25,000 on December 31, 2013.
n. During 2013, Chicago Corporation paid $170,000 to the lessor of property represented 
on the balance sheet by “Property Rights Acquired Under Lease.” Property rights 
acquired under lease have a 10-year life, and Chicago Corporation amortizes them on 
a straight-line basis. What was the total expense reported by Chicago Corporation dur-
ing 2013 from using the leased property?
o. How would the financial statements differ if Chicago Corporation accounted for inven-
tories on the lower-of-cost-or-market basis and if the market value of these inventories 
had been $1,600,000 at the end of 2013? Disregard income tax effects.
p. Refer to the earnings-per-share amounts in the income statement of Chicago Corpora-
tion. How many shares of common stock would the firm issue if holders of the out-
standing shares of preferred stock converted them into common stock?
q. Prepare a T-account work sheet for the preparation of a statement of cash flows for 
Chicago Corporation for 2013. The certificate of deposit is a cash equivalent.
11. Comprehensive review problem. Exhibit 17.13 presents a consolidated statement of income 
and retained earnings for 2013, and Exhibit 17.14 presents a consolidated balance sheet 
for Tuck Corporation as of December 31, 2012 and 2013. A statement of accounting poli-
cies and a set of notes to the financial statements follow these financial statements. After 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

702
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
studying these financial statements and notes, respond to each of the following questions 
and calculation requirements.
Required
a. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the Marketable Equity Securities 
account during 2013.
b. Calculate the proceeds from sales of marketable equity securities classified as current 
assets during 2013.
c. Calculate the amount of the bad debt expense for 2013.
d. Calculate the amount of cost of goods sold assuming Tuck Corporation used a FIFO 
cost-flow assumption.
e. Give the journal entry (entries) to account for the change in the Investment in Thayer 
Corporation account during 2013.
f. 
Calculate the amount of income or loss from the Investment in Thayer Corporation 
during 2013.
g. Give the journal entry (entries) to account for the change in the Investment in Davis 
Corporation account during 2013.
h. Refer to Note 5. Give the journal entry to record the sale of equipment during 2013.
i. 
Refer to Note 9. Demonstrate that the $106,036 is the correct amount of the leasehold 
asset at the beginning of the lease term.
j. 
Calculate the amount of cash received during 2013 for rental fees.
k. Calculate the actual cost incurred to service customers’ warranties during 2013.
l. 
Refer to Note 7. Calculate the amount of interest expense on the $1 million, 6% bonds 
for 2013.
Tuck Corporation
Consolidated Statement of Income and 
Retained Earnings for 2013
(Problem 11)
REVENUES AND GAINS
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$4,000,000
Gain on Sale of Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3,000
Rental Revenue. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
240,000
Dividend Revenue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,000
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   102,000
 
Total Revenues and Gains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$4,353,000
EXPENSES, LOSSES, AND DEDUCTIONS
Cost of Goods Sold (Including Depreciation and Amortization) . . . . . . . . .
$2,580,000
Selling and Administration Expenses (Including Depreciation 
 
and Amortization and Bad Debt Expense)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,102,205
Warranty Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46,800
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
165,995
Loss on Sale of Marketable Equity Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8,000
Income Tax Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   150,000
 
Total Expenses, Losses, and Deductions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 4,053,000
Consolidated Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  300,000
Less Dividends Declared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  (119,500)
Increase in Retained Earnings for 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  180,500
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2012. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   277,000
Retained Earnings, December 31, 2013. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  457,500
EXHIBIT 17.13
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

703
Exercises and Problems
Tuck Corporation
Consolidated Comparative Balance Sheets
(Problem 11)
December 
31, 2013
December 
31, 2012
ASSETS
Current Assets
Cash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  278,000
$  240,000
Marketable Securities (Note 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
141,000
125,000
Accounts Receivable—Net (Note 2). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,509,600
1,431,200
Inventories (Note 3). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,525,315
1,257,261
Prepayments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    32,000
    28,000
 
Total Current Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,485,915
$3,081,461
Investments (Note 4)
Investment in Thayer Corporation (15% owned). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   87,000
$   92,000
Investment in Hitchcock Corporation (30% owned)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
135,000
120,000
Investment in Davis Corporation (40% owned)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  298,000
  215,000
 
Total Investments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  520,000
$  427,000
Property, Plant, and Equipment (Note 5)
Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   82,000
$   82,000
Building  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
843,000
843,000
Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,848,418
497,818
Leasehold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  106,036
  106,036
 
Total Plant Assets at Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,879,454
$1,528,854
Less Accumulated Depreciation and Amortization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  (420,854)
  (383,854)
 
Total Plant Assets—Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,458,600
$1,145,000
Intangibles
Goodwill—Net  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$   36,000
$   36,000
 
Total Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,500,515
$4,689,461
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Current Liabilities
Note Payable (Note 6). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  200,000
$  100,000
Accounts Payable  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
723,700
666,100
Rental Fees Received in Advance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
58,000
46,000
Estimated Warranty Liability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
78,600
75,200
Interest Payable on Notes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2,000
1,500
Dividends Payable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
30,000
25,000
Income Taxes Payable—Current. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
160,000
140,000
Mortgage Payable—Current Portion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
37,383
37,383
Capitalized Lease Obligation—Current Portion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
    10,000
    10,000
 
Total Current Liabilities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,299,683
$1,101,183
Noncurrent Liabilities
Bonds Payable (Note 7). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$1,931,143
$1,104,650
Mortgage Payable (Note 8)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
243,560
262,564
Capitalized Lease Obligation (Note 9)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
46,229
52,064
Deferred Tax Liability. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   145,000
   130,000
 
Total Noncurrent Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,365,932
$1,549,278
 
Total Liabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$3,665,615
$2,650,461
Shareholders’ Equity
Convertible Preferred Stock, $100 par Value (Note 10) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$  200,000
$  700,000
Common Stock, $10 par Value (Note 11)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,650,000
1,000,000
Additional Paid-In Capital—Common . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
583,600
130,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income:
 
Unrealized Loss on Marketable Securities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(21,000)
(25,000)
 
Unrealized Loss on Investments in Securities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(21,000)
(16,000)
Retained Earnings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   457,500
   277,000
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,849,100
$2,066,000
Less Cost of Treasury Stock (Note 12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
   (14,200)
   (27,000)
 
Total Shareholders’ Equity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$2,834,900
$2,039,000
 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
$6,500,515
$4,689,461
EXHIBIT 17.14
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

704
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
m. Give the journal entry (entries) for the change in the Mortgage Payable accounts dur-
ing 2013. Be sure to consider the current portion.
n. Verify that the carrying value of the combined current and noncurrent portions of the 
Capitalized Lease Obligation on December 31, 2012, should be $62,064.
o. Prepare an analysis that explains the change in the carrying value of the combined cur-
rent and noncurrent portions of the Capitalized Lease Obligation during 2013.
p. Give the journal entry to record income tax expense for 2013.
q. Compute the amount of cash payments for income taxes during 2013.
r. 
The income tax rate is 30%. Assume that during 2013, Tuck Corporation recognized 
$12,000 of deferred tax expense related to differences in depreciation methods. Calcu-
late the difference between the amount of depreciation recognized for financial report-
ing purposes and the amount recognized for tax purposes.
s. Give the journal entry made on July 1, 2013, upon conversion of the preferred stock.
t. 
Give the journal entry (entries) to account for the change in the Treasury Stock account 
during 2013.
Statement of Accounting Policies
■ 
Basis of consolidation. Tuck Corporation consolidates its financial statements with those of 
Harvard Corporation, a 100%-owned subsidiary acquired on January 2, 2011.
■ 
Marketable securities. The firm classifies marketable securities as available for sale and 
measures them at fair value.
■ 
Accounts receivable. The firm accounts for customers’ uncollectible accounts using the 
allowance method.
■ 
Inventories. Tuck Corporation uses a last-in, first-out (LIFO) cost-flow assumption for 
inventories.
■ 
Investments. The firm classifies investments of less than 20% of the outstanding common 
stock of other companies as available for sale and measures them at fair value. It accounts 
for investments of 20% to 50% of the outstanding common stock of affiliates using the 
equity method.
■ 
Building, equipment, and leaseholds. Tuck Corporation calculates depreciation for financial 
reporting purposes using the straight-line method and an accelerated method for income 
tax reporting.
■ 
Interest expense on long-term debt. The firm measures interest expense on long-term debt 
using the effective interest method.
■ 
Deferred income taxes. Tuck Corporation provides for deferred income taxes arising from 
temporary differences between book and taxable income.
Notes to the Financial Statements
■ 
Note 1: The balance sheet presents marketable equity securities, all classified as available 
for sale, at fair value, which is less than acquisition cost by $25,000 on December 31, 2012, 
and $21,000 on December 31, 2013. Tuck Corporation sold marketable equity securities 
costing $35,000 during 2013. It received no dividends from marketable equity securities 
during 2013.
■ 
Note 2: The balance sheet presents accounts receivable net of an allowance for uncollect-
ibles of $128,800 on December 31, 2012, and $210,400 on December 31, 2013. Tuck Cor-
poration wrote off a total of $63,000 of accounts receivable as uncollectible during 2013.
■ 
Note 3: The valuation of inventories on a FIFO basis exceeded the amounts on a LIFO 
basis by $430,000 on December 31, 2012, and by $410,000 on December 31, 2013.
■ 
Note 4: Davis Corporation reported net income for 2013 of $217,500 and declared and 
paid dividends totaling $60,000 during the year. Tuck Corporation invested an additional 
$20,000 in Davis Corporation during 2013, but its ownership percentage remained at 40%.
■ 
Note 5: Tuck Corporation sold equipment with a cost of $23,000 and a carrying value of 
$4,000 during 2013. This was the only disposition of property, plant, or equipment during 
the year.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

705
Exercises and Problems
■ 
Note 6: Tuck Corporation paid at maturity a 90-day, 9% note with a face amount of 
$100,000 with interest on January 30, 2013. On December 1, 2013, Tuck Corporation bor-
rowed $200,000 from its local bank, promising to repay the principal plus interest at 12% 
in six months.
■ 
Note 7: Bonds Payable on the balance sheet comprise the following:
December 31, 
2013
December 31, 
2012
$1,000,000, 6%, 20-Year Semiannual Coupon Bonds, Due 
 
December 31, 2024, Priced at $1,125,510 to Yield 5%, 
 
Compounded Semiannually, at the Time of Issue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,099,823
$1,104,650
$1,000,000, 8%, 20-Year Semiannual Coupon Bonds, Due 
 
December 31, 2031, Priced at $828,409 to Yield 10%, 
 
Compounded Semiannually, at the Time of Issue  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   831,320
       —
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,931,143
$1,104,650
■ 
Note 8: Mortgage Payable represents a building mortgage requiring equal installment pay-
ments of $40,000 on December 31 of each year. The loan underlying the mortgage bears 
interest of 7%, compounded annually. The final installment payment is due on December 
31, 2013.
■ 
Note 9: The Capitalized Lease Obligation represents a 20-year, non-cancelable lease on cer-
tain equipment. The lease requires annual payments, in advance, of $10,000 on January 2 
of each year. Tuck Corporation will make the last lease payment on January 2, 2020. Tuck 
Corporation capitalizes the lease at its borrowing rate (at the inception of the lease) of 8%.
■ 
Note 10: Each share of preferred stock is convertible into five shares of common stock. On 
July 1, 2013, holders of 5,000 shares of preferred stock exercised their conversion options. 
Tuck Corporation recorded the conversion using carrying values.
■ 
Note 11: On October 1, 2013, Tuck Corporation issued 40,000 shares of common stock on 
the open market for $15 cash per share.
■ 
Note 12: Treasury Stock comprises the following:
 
December 31, 2012: 2,250 Shares at $12 per Share  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$27,000
December 31, 2013: 450 Shares at $12 per Share. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
$ 5,400
 
550 Shares at $16 per Share. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
  8,800
 
 
 
$14,200
 
During 2013, Tuck Corporation sold 1,800 shares of treasury stock and acquired 550 
shares.
12. Case introducing earnings-per-share calculations for a complex capital structure. The Lay-
ton Ball Corporation has a relatively complicated capital structure—that is, it raises funds 
using various financing devices. In addition to common shares, it has issued stock options, 
warrants, and convertible bonds. Exhibit 17.15 summarizes some pertinent information 
about these items. Net income for the year is $9,500, and the income tax rate used in com-
puting income tax expense is 40% of pretax income.
a. First, ignore all items of capital except for the common shares. Calculate earnings per 
common share.
b. In past years, Layton Ball has issued to employees options to purchase shares of stock. 
Exhibit 17.15 indicates that the price of the common stock throughout the current year 
has remained steady at $25 but that holders of the stock options could exercise them 
at any time for $15 for each share. That is, the option allows the holder to surrender it 
along with $15 cash and receive one share in return. Thus, the number of shares would 
increase, which would decrease the earnings-per-share figure. The company would, how-
ever, have more cash. Assume that the holders of options tender them, along with $15 
each, to purchase shares. Assume that the company uses the cash to purchase shares for 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

706
Chapter 17 
Synthesis and Extensions
its own treasury at a price of $25 each. Compute a new earnings-per-share figure. The 
firm does not count shares in its own treasury in the denominator of the earnings-per-
share calculation.
c. Exhibit 17.15 indicates that there were also warrants outstanding in the hands of the 
public. The warrant allows the holder to turn in that warrant, along with $30 cash, 
to purchase one share of stock. If holders exercised the warrants, the number of out-
standing shares would increase, which would reduce earnings per share. However, the 
company would have more cash, which it could use to purchase shares for the treasury, 
reducing the number of shares outstanding. Assume that all holders of warrants exer-
cise them. Assume that the company uses the cash to purchase outstanding shares for 
the treasury. Compute a new earnings-per-share figure. Ignore the information about 
options and the calculations in part b at this point. Note however that this is an unlikely 
hypothetical scenario because rational warrant holders would not exercise the warrants 
for $30 when they can purchase shares for $25 each.
d. The firm also has convertible bonds outstanding. Each convertible bond entitles the 
holder to exchange that bond for 10 shares. If holders convert the bonds, the number 
of shares would increase, which would tend to reduce earnings per share. On the other 
hand, the company would not have to pay interest and thus would have no interest 
expense on the bond because it would no longer be outstanding. This would tend to 
increase income and earnings per share. Assume that all holders of convertible bonds 
convert their bonds into shares. Compute a new net income figure (do not forget income 
tax effects on income of the interest saved) and a new earnings-per-share figure. Ignore 
the information about options and warrants and the calculations in parts b and c at this 
point.
e. Now consider all the previous calculations. Which combined set of assumptions from 
parts b, c, and d would lead to the lowest possible earnings per share? Compute a new 
earnings per share under the most restrictive set of assumptions about reductions in 
earnings per share.
f. Accountants report several earnings-per-share figures for companies with complicated 
capital structures and complicated events during the year. Financial publications, how-
ever, may publish only one figure. Which of the figures computed previously for earnings 
per share do you think financial publications should publish as the earnings-per-share 
figure? Why?
Layton Ball Corporation
Information on Capital Structure
for Earnings-per-Share Calculations
(Problem 12)
Assume the following data about the capital structure and earnings 
 
for the Layton Ball Corporation for the year:
Number of Common Shares Outstanding Throughout the Year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,500 shares
Market Price per Common Share Throughout the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   25
Options Outstanding During the Year:
 
Number of Shares Issuable on Exercise of Options. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1,000 shares
 
Exercise Price per Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   15
Warrants Outstanding During the Year:
 
Number of Shares Issuable on Exercise of Warrants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2,000 shares
 
Exercise Price per Share . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$   30
Convertible Bonds Outstanding:
 
Number (Issued 15 Years Ago). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100 bonds
 
Proceeds per Bond at Time of Issue (= Face Value)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$1,000
 
Coupon Rate (Per Year)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4%
EXHIBIT 17.15
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

F
irms engage in various transactions that involve receiving or disbursing cash over time. Con-
sider the following examples:
1. General Electric disburses cash to the trustee of its pension fund each year. These cash pay-
ments earn interest and other income over time, accumulating amounts in the pension fund 
sufficient to pay pensions to retired employees in the future. General Electric needs to know 
how much cash it must contribute to the pension fund each year in order to accumulate suf-
ficient amounts to pay retired employees.
2. eBay considers replacing its existing computer system with a technologically more advanced 
one, which will permit the firm to process more transactions and do so more quickly, as well 
as accumulate information on customer purchases. eBay estimates the expected additional 
cash flows it will receive in the future from the more sophisticated computer system and won-
ders if acquiring the computer is a worthwhile investment.
3. Walt Disney needs to obtain cash to build a new exhibit at Disney World. It plans to issue 
$50 million of 6% long-term bonds that pay $3 million (= 0.06 × $50 million) annually and 
require repayment of the $50 million in 20 years. Walt Disney desires to know the likely cash 
it will receive today from issuing these bonds on the market.
These and other business decisions require firms to compare and aggregate cash flows that occur 
at different points in time. Cash flows that occur at different times are not directly comparable 
because cash can, and usually does, earn interest. If a firm can invest cash to earn interest of 6% 
for the next year, then $1 today is equivalent to $1.06 one year from today. This Appendix explores 
concepts and tools for equating cash flows over time. The combination of cash flows and timing 
of valuations leads to four basic patterns of analysis:
1. Future value of a single amount.
2. Present value of a single amount.
3. Future value of a series of equal amounts.
4. Present value of a series of equal amounts.
The sections that follow explore each of these four patterns.
L E A R N I N G 
O B J E C T I V E S
Time Value of Cash Flows: 
Compound Interest Concepts 
and Applications
A p p e n d i x
1. Understand why cash flows that occur 
at different times have different values.
2. Understand the concepts of pres-
ent value and future value of single 
amounts of cash flows and a series 
of cash flows.
3. Apply the concepts of present value 
and future value of cash flows to 
 typical business transactions.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

708
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
COMPOUND INTEREST CONCEPTS
Contracts typically state interest cost as a percentage of the amount borrowed per unit of 
time. Examples are 12% per year and 1% per month, which differ from each other. When the 
statement of interest rate does not explicitly state a period, then conventional usage means an 
annual rate, so that “interest at the rate of 12%” means 12% per year.
The amount borrowed is the principal. Compound interest means that the amount of inter-
est earned during a period increases the principal, which becomes larger for the next interest-
earning period.
Computations Students, textbooks, and practitioners use four different approaches for cal-
culating the time value of cash flows:
1. Formulas.
2. Compound interest tables.
3. Financial calculators.
4. Spreadsheets.
Most practitioners use financial calculators and spreadsheets, primarily Microsoft Excel®. By a 
“financial calculator,” we mean one with built in functions for the compound interest formulas. 
In this book, we use primarily compound interest tables, of the sort following this Appendix 
and excerpted in various places in the Appendix. We occasionally refer to the underlying for-
mula. If you become adept at using the Tables to solve problems, you will find it easy to figure 
out which buttons to push on a financial calculator and which formulas to use in a spreadsheet. 
Having access to a calculator or spreadsheet does not relieve you of the responsibility to under-
stand the concepts and procedures for the computations, because if you don’t understand, you 
won’t know what buttons to press or which formulas to use or how to use them.
FUTURE VALUE OF A SINGLE AMOUNT
The following diagram depicts the future value of a single amount:
Number of Periods and Interest Rate
Present Value Given
Future Value Solved For
Example 1 (Future Value of a Single Amount) How much will $1,000 deposited today 
earning 8% grow to in 10 years? A critical assumption underlying calculations involving the 
time value of cash flows is that interest earned in one period earns interest the next period, 
a process called compound interest. Thus, in this example the initial $1,000 deposit grows to 
$1,080 (= $1,000 × 1.08) at the end of one year. The $1,080 then grows to $1,166.40 (= $1,080 
× 1.08) at the end of the second year, and so on. From here, we’ll round computations to the 
nearest dollar unless you need to see the cents in order to understand the computation.
Contrast compound interest with simple interest, where only the initial investment earns 
interest. Simple interest does not compound. At simple interest, the $1,000 grows to $1,160 
[= $1,000 × (1 + (0.08 × 2))] at the end of the second year. The formula for simple interest 
is Fn = P [1+ (r × n)]. From this point on unless we make an explicit contrary statement, we 
mean compound, not simple, interest.
Formula The future value of a single sum equals
Fn = P (1 + r)n,
where
 
Fn = Future value or accumulated amount
 
P = Present value or one-time investment today
 
r  = Interest rate per period
 
n  = Number of periods from today
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

709
Future Value of a Single Amount
Thus, the future value of $1,000 invested today at 8% per year for 10 years is Fn = P (1 + r)n
= $1,000 (1 + 0.08)10 = $2,159. Most calculators have a function for yx, which permits calcula-
tion of (1 + r)n. The result of the calculation, (1 + r)n, is often called the factor.
Compound Interest Tables Compound interest tables for the future value of $1 com-
pute factor values for (1 + r)n for various combinations of interest rates and numbers of peri-
ods. An excerpt of such a table appears in Exhibit A.1.
Exhibit A.1 shows that the factor for the future value of $1 for 10 periods at 8% is 2.15892. 
Multiplying this factor times the $1,000 initial investment yields a future value of $2,159 
(= $1,000 × 2.15892). Appendix Table 1 provides factors for the future value of $1 for various 
combinations of interest rates and number of periods.
In some settings, such as interest on bank accounts, interest compounds one or more times 
throughout the year. For example, the bank in Example 1 might compound interest quarterly. 
The stated interest rate (8% in Example 1) is usually an annual interest rate. The analyst must 
adjust the interest rate and number of periods to accommodate compounding at an interval 
shorter than one year. To solve problems that require computation of interest quoted at a nom-
inal rate r per period compounded m times per period for n periods, use the tables for rate r/m
and m × n periods. For example, 8% compounded quarterly for 10 years equals 2% per period 
(= 8%/4 compounding periods a year) for 40 periods (= 10 years × 4 compounding periods a 
year). Thus, the $1,000 investment compounded quarterly at 8% for 10 years is Fn = P (1 + r)n
= $1,000 (1 + 0.02)40 = $1,000 × 2.20804 = $2,208. The more frequent the compounding is, 
the larger the future value will be. Financial institutions often advertise the effective annual yield 
on savings accounts and certificates of deposit. The effective annual yield exceeds the stated 
interest rate, as Example 1 demonstrates. The formula for the effective annual yield is (1 + r/m)m 
– 1. The effective annual yield for quarterly compounding of an 8% annual rate is 8.24% [= (1 
+ 0.08/4)4 – 1].
Example 2 (Future Value of a Single Amount) Suppose you inherit $10,000 from your 
Aunt Bessie. You invest this amount in a certificate of deposit that pays 6% compounded quar-
terly for five years. How much will this certificate grow to at the end of five years? Appendix 
Table 1 indicates that the factor for the future value of $1 invested for 20 periods (= 4 quar-
terly compounding periods per year for 5 years) at 1.5% (= 6 % annual rate/4 compounding 
periods per year) is 1.34686. Thus, the future value of $10,000 for 20 periods at 1.5% is $13,469 
(= $10,000 × 1.34686).
 PROBLEM  A.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
Future value of single sums. Compute the future value of $5,000 at the following rates:
a. 6% for 10 years, with interest compounded annually.
b. 6% for 10 years, with interest compounded semiannually. 
 
Do not attempt to work the following without a financial calculator or spreadsheet. 
If you have access to Excel, but don’t know how to use it, ask a friend for help. If you 
(continued) 
Future Value of $1 at 6% and 8% per Period Fn = P (1 + r)n
(Excerpt from Appendix Table 1)
Rate = r
Number of Periods = n
6%
8%
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.06000
1.08000
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.12360
1.16640
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.19102
1.25971
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1.79085
2.15892
20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
3.20714
4.66096
EXHIBIT A.1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

710
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
 
must do this on your own, open Excel and press the F1 key. You will see a menu of 
links to tutorials and help, from which you can learn how to use Excel.
c. 8% for 33 years, with interest compounded annually.
d. 8% for 33 years, with interest compounded quarterly.
PRESENT VALUE OF A SINGLE AMOUNT
The preceding section discussed the computation of the future value of a single known amount 
today for n periods at a stated, known interest rate r. You know P, n, and r, and you find Fn. The 
process involves accumulating forward in time from P to Fn. This section discusses the computa-
tion of the present value of a single known future cash flow. That is, Fn is known, and you com-
pute P.
The following diagram depicts the present value of a single sum.
Number of Periods and Interest Rate
Present Value Solved For
Future Value Given
The process involves discounting the future amount to its present value. The discounting 
process removes the effect of compound interest from the future amount and leaves a present 
value amount that excludes the accumulation of interest over time. Common terminology refers 
to the interest rate as the discount rate when used in present value settings.
The formula for the present value of a single sum begins with the formula for the future 
value of a single sum but solves for P instead of Fn. Thus,
Fn = P (1 + r)n
Dividing both sides by (1 + r)n yields
Fn/(1 + r)n = P
or
P = Fn (1 + r)–n
The amount (1 + r)–n equals 1/(1 + r)n. Thus, the factors for the present value of a single 
sum equal one divided by the factors for the future value of a single sum. Exhibit A.2 shows 
an excerpt from a table for factors for the present value of a single sum. We use the same inter-
est rates and number of periods as in Exhibit A.1. Appendix Table 2 presents a table with the 
factors for the present value of $1 for various combinations of interest rates and numbers of 
periods.
Example 3 (Present Value of a Single Amount)  A firm issues a single-payment note 
in which it promises to pay $160,000 three years from today in exchange for used equipment. 
What is the present value of this note if the discount rate appropriate for this note is 6%?
Formula Applying the formula for the present value of a single sum yields a present value of 
$134,339 [= $160,000 × 1.06–3].
Compound Interest Table Exhibit A.2 indicates that the factor for the present value 
of $1 for three periods at 6% is 0.83962. The present value of the note is therefore $134,339 
(= $160,000 × 0.83962).
These calculations suggest that the value today of the used equipment is $134,339. The 
seller of the used equipment who thinks 6% is the appropriate rate should be indifferent 
between receiving $134,339 today or receiving $160,000 three years from today.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

711
Annuities
Example 4 (Present Value of a Single Amount) Joe Alumnus plans to endow a chaired 
professorship at his alma mater 10 years from today. The university expects to require a pay-
ment of $2,000,000 to endow a chair at that time. Joe Alumnus can purchase a single-payment 
bond1 on the market that has a maturity value in 10 years of $2,000,000. How much would 
Joe Alumnus have to pay for this bond today if the discount rate is 6% compounded annu-
ally? The present value of $2,000,000 discounted at 6% compounded annually for 10 periods is 
$1,116,780 (= 0.55839 × $2,000,000).
How much would he have to pay for this bond if the discount rate of 6% compounded 
semiannually? The present value of $2,000,000 discounted at 3% compounded semiannually for 
20 periods is $1,107,360 (= 0.55368 × $2,000,000). (See Appendix Table 2, 20-period row, 3% 
column.) Thus, with semiannual compounding, Joe Alumnus’ cost is $9,420 (= $1,116,780 – 
$1,107,360) smaller than the cash outlay to purchase a bond with annual compounding to fund 
the chair.
 PROBLEM  A.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
Present value of single sums. Compute the present value of $20,000 at the following rates:
a. 6% for 3 years, with interest compounded annually.
b. 6% for 3 years, with interest compounded monthly.
c. 10% for 10 years, with interest compounded semiannually. Do not attempt to work 
the following without a financial calculator or spreadsheet.
d. 8% for 13 years, with interest compounded quarterly.
ANNUITIES
Contractual arrangements in business frequently involve periodic cash payments of equal 
amounts paid at equally spaced intervals. For example, a firm might lease office space and 
agree to pay a fixed amount per month for the three-year lease period. A firm might issue a 
note that promises to pay a fixed amount every six months for a 10-year period. A firm might 
agree to contribute a fixed amount per month to an employee retirement plan. When cash pay-
ments occur in equally spaced intervals and are of equal amount each period, common ter-
minology refers to the stream of payments as an annuity. In some settings, the question asked 
involves the future value of the annuity, which the next section considers. In other settings the 
question asked involves the present value of the annuity, which a subsequent section discusses.
Present Value of $1 at 6% and 8% per Period P = (1 + r)–n
(Excerpt from Appendix Table 2)
Rate = r
Number of Periods = n
6%
8%
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.94340
0.92593
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.89000
0.85734
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.83962
0.79383
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.55839
0.46319
20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
0.31180
0.21455
EXHIBIT A.2
 1 A single-payment bond is also called a zero coupon bond, which Chapter 11 discusses.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

712
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
The contractual arrangement might require that cash payments occur at the end of each 
period, as is typical for debt service payments on bonds. Common terminology refers to such 
arrangements as an ordinary annuity, or annuity in arrears. Other contractual arrangements 
might require payments at the beginning of the period, as is common for rental agreements. 
Common terminology refers to such arrangements as an annuity due, or annuity in advance. 
Less commonly, the arrangements might stipulate that the first payment occurs sometime after 
the end of the first period, referred to as a deferred annuity. We consider each type of annuity 
in the sections that follow.
FUTURE VALUE OF AN ANNUITY
The following diagram depicts the future value of an ordinary annuity (annuity in arrears) for a 
$1 payment per period for three periods at a 6% interest rate.
$1.12360
 1.06000
 1.00000
$3.18360
$1
$1
$1
End of Period
0
1
2
3
The $1 paid at the end of the first period earns interest for two periods, so it grows to 
$1.12360 by the end of the third period. The $1 paid at the end of the second period grows to 
$1.06000 by the end of the third period. The $1 paid at the end of the third period is, of course, 
worth $1.0000 at the end of the third period. The three factors, 1.0000, 1.06000, and 1.12360, are 
the factors from Appendix Table 1 for the future value of a single sum for 0, 1, and 2 periods. The 
factor for the future value of an ordinary annuity (3.18360 in this case) equals the sum of the 
factors for the future value of a single sum for the number of periods and payments specified. 
The summing of the factors for individual years to obtain the factor for an annuity is appropri-
ate only because each payment is of equal amount and occurs at equally spaced intervals.
The formula for the future value of an ordinary annuity (FVA) is as follows:
FVA = (1 + r)n – 1
r
Applying this formula to the example above yields:
FVA = (1 + r)n – 1 = (1 + 0.06)3 – 1 = 1.19102 – 1 = 3.18360
r
0.06
0.06
Exhibit A.3 presents an excerpt from a table of factors for the future value of an ordinary 
annuity, such as Appendix Table 3.
Example 5 (Future Value of a Ordinary Annuity) You plan to invest $1,000 at the end 
of each of the next 10 years in a savings account. The savings account accumulates interest of 
8% compounded annually. What will be the balance in the savings account at the end of 10 
years?
The time line for this example is as follows:
–$1,000
–$1,000
–$1,000
–$1,000
. . .
–$1,000
. . .
End of Period
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
10
x
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

713
Future Value of an Annuity
The symbol x denotes the amount you desire to calculate.
We can solve annuity problems in the same ways we solve problems involving single 
sums: by formula, or by using compound interest tables, or by using a financial calculator or 
spreadsheet.
Formula Following is the formula for the future value of an ordinary annuity of $1 for 10 
periods at 8%:
FVA = (1 + r)n – 1 = (1 + 0.08)10 – 1 = 2.158925 – 1 = 14.48656
r
0.08
0.08
Thus,
Future Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Future
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity
x
=
 $1,000
×
14.48656
x
=
$14,487
Compound Interest Tables Exhibit A.3 indicates that the factor for the future value of 
an ordinary annuity of 10 payments at 8% is 14.48656, yielding the result as to that computed 
from the formula.
Example 6 (Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity; Solving for Periodic Payment) 
Refer to Example 4, where Joe Alumnus wants to fund a $2,000,000 chaired professorship 10 
years from today. Instead of investing a single amount today, he plans to contribute an equal 
amount at the end of each of the next 10 years in a savings account that pays 6% interest com-
pounded annually. How much must he invest each year to accumulate $2,000,000 at the end 
of 10 years? In contrast to Example 5, this example asks for the amount of the periodic pay-
ment instead of the future accumulated value. The problem still involves the future value of an 
annuity because the interest accumulating process works forward in time. The time line for this 
example is as follows:
–x
–x
–x
–x
. . .
–x
. . .
End of Period
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
10
$2,000,000
Factors for the Future Value of an Ordinary Annuity 
at 6% and 8% per Period
FVA = (1 + r)n − 1
r
(Excerpt from Appendix Table 3)
Rate = r
Number of Periods = n
6%
8%
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1.00000
 1.00000
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2.06000
 2.08000
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 3.18360
 3.24640
 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 5.63709
 5.86660
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13.18079
14.48656
20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36.78559
45.76196
EXHIBIT A.3
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

714
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
Exhibit A.3 indicates that the future value of $1 for 10 periods at 6% is 13.18079. Thus,
Future Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Future 
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity
$2,000,000
=
x
×
13.18079
x
=
$151,736
Note that solving this equation involves dividing the future value of $2,000,000 by the factor for 
the future value of this annuity.
In some cases the payments occur at the beginning of each period instead of at the end of 
each period. Such problems involve the future value of an annuity in advance. The following 
diagram depicts the future value of an annuity in advance for three periods at 6% per period:
$1.19102
 1.12360
 1.06000
$3.37462
$1
$1
$1
End of Period
0
1
2
3
The first payment accumulates interest for three periods, the second payment for two peri-
ods, and the third payment for one period. Most tables of factors for the future value of an 
annuity assume that payments occur at the end of each period. To convert a table of factors for 
the future value of an ordinary annuity (annuity in arrears) to an annuity in advance, take one 
more period and subtract 1.00000. For example, Appendix Table 3 indicates that the factor for 
the future value of an ordinary annuity for four periods at 6% is 4.37462. Subtracting 1.0000 
from this value yields the factor of 3.37462, which is the factor for the future value of an annu-
ity in advance for three periods at 6%. The subtraction of 1.0000 recognizes that no payment 
occurs at the end of the third period.
Example 7 (Future Value of an Annuity in Advance) Refer to Example 6. Assume that 
Joe Alumnus plans to invest an equal amount at the beginning of each of the next 10 years 
in order to accumulate $2,000,000 at the end of 10 years. How much must he contribute each 
year? Refer to Appendix Table 3. The factor for the future value of an ordinary annuity for 11 
periods at 6% is 14.97164. Subtracting 1.0000 from 14.97164 yields 13.97164, the factor for the 
future value of an annuity in advance for 10 years at 6%. Thus,
Future Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity 
in Advance
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Future
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity 
in Advance
$2,000,000
=
x
×
13.97164
x
= $143,147
The amount invested annually is less than when Joe made payments in at the end of each 
year because all payments earn an additional year of interest.
 PROBLEM  A.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
Future value of an annuity. Calculate the requested amount in each of the following 
scenarios. Today is January 1, 2013.
(continued)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

715
Present Value of an Annuity
a. Jill Wilson plans to invest $2,500 at the end of each of the next 20 years in her indi-
vidual retirement account. How much will she have accumulated on December 31, 
2032, if she earns 6% each year compounded annually?
b. Skip this part unless you have a financial calculator or spreadsheet. Refer to part a. 
How much will Jill have accumulated on December 31, 2032, if she invests the $2,500 
at the beginning of each of the 20 years instead of at the end of each year? Why can’t 
you use, without complication, the Appendix Tables to solve this problem?
c. Assume for this part that Jill wants to accumulate $100,000 on December 31, 2032. 
How much must she invest at the end of each of the next 20 years to accumulate the 
desired amount if the interest rate is 6% compounded annually?
d. Skip this part unless you have a financial calculator or spreadsheet. Repeat part c, but 
assume Jill will make the investments at the beginning of each of the next 20 years. 
Why can’t you use, without complication, the Appendix Tables to solve this problem?
PRESENT VALUE OF AN ANNUITY
The following diagram depicts the present value of an ordinary annuity at 6% for three periods.
$0.83962
 0.89000
 0.94340
$2.67302
$1
$1
$1
End of Period
0
1
2
3
The payment at the end of the first period when discounted back for one period at 6% 
yields a present value of $0.94340. The payment at the end of the second period discounted 
back two periods at 6% yields a present value of $0.89000. The payment at the end of the third 
period when discounted back three periods yields a present value of $0.83962. The factor for 
the present value of an ordinary annuity for three periods at 6% is the sum of the factors for 
the three individual years. You can see that any number in Appendix Table 4 is the sum of the 
numbers in the corresponding cell of Appendix Table 2 plus all the other numbers in that col-
umn up to the cell for the first row. Note that, unlike the relation between the factors for the 
future value of $1 and the present value of $1, the factor for the present value of an annuity is 
not simply the reciprocal of the factor for the future value of an annuity.
The formula for the present value of an ordinary annuity is as follows:
PVA = 1 – (1 + r)–n
r
Applying this formula to the preceding example for the present value of an ordinary annuity at 
6% for three periods yields the following:
PVA = 1 – (1 + r)–n
= 1 – (1.06)–3
= 1 – 0.83962 = 2.67301
r
0.06
0.06
This value differs from the one in the preceding diagram because of rounding.
Exhibit A.4 shows the factors for the present value of an ordinary annuity at 6% and 8% for 
various time periods from a table such as Appendix Table 4.
Example 8 (Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity) You want to receive $600 every six 
months, starting six months hence, for the next five years. How much must you invest today if 
the funds accumulate at the rate of 8% compounded semiannually?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

716
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
The time line is as follows:
$600
$600
$600
$600
. . .
$600
. . .
End of Period
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
10
x
The factor for the present value of an annuity at 4% (= 8% per year/2 semiannual periods 
per year) for 10 periods (= 2 periods per year × 5 years) is 8.11090. We can compute this factor 
as well.
PVA = 1 – (1 + r)–n
= 1 – (1.04)–10
= 1 – 0.67556 = 8.11090
r
0.04
0.04
Thus,
Present Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Present
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity
x
=   $600
×
8.11090
x
= $4,866.54
Example 9 (Present Value of Ordinary Annuity; Solving for Periodic Payment)2 A 
company borrows $125,000 from a bank. The interest rate on the loan is 12% compounded 
semiannually. The company agrees to repay the loan in equal semiannual installments over the 
next five years, with the first payment to be made six months from now. What is the required 
semiannual payment?
The time line for this example is as follows:
–x
–x
–x
–x
. . .
–x
. . .
End of Period
0
1
2
3
4
. . .
10
$125,000
Factors for the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity 
at 6% and 8% per Period
PVA = 1 − (1 + r)–n
r
(Excerpts from Appendix Table 4)
Rate = r
Number of Periods = n
6%
8%
 1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 0.94340
0.92593
 2  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1.83339
1.78326
 3  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 2.67301
2.57710
 5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 4.21236
3.99271
10  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 7.36009
6.71008
20  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11.46992
9.81815
EXHIBIT A.4
 2 This example also appears as Example 1 in Chapter 11, with amortization schedule in Exhibit 11.2.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

717
Present Value of an Annuity
This example solves for the periodic payment that when discounted at 6% (= 12% per 
year/2 semiannual periods per year) for 10 periods (= 2 periods per year × 5 years) results in a 
present value of $125,000. The factor for the present value of an annuity for 10 periods at 6% is 
7.36009. Thus,
Present Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Present
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity
$125,000
=
x
×
7.36009
x
=
$125,000
7.36009
x
=
$16,983
In Exhibit 11.2, we use a payment of $17,000 per period, with a last payment of $16,781 to 
compensate for the extra $17 paid in each of the preceding periods and the interest earned on 
those amounts.
Example 10 (Present Value of an Annuity in Advance) Some situations involve cash 
flows that occur at the beginning instead of the end of a period. Leasing arrangements, for 
example, usually require the lessee to pay the lessor at the beginning of the period. A firm signs 
a lease requiring it to make lease payments of $19,909 at the beginning of the next three years. 
The interest rate appropriate to this lease is 8%. What is the present value of the cash flows for 
this lease?
The time line is as follows:
–$19,909
–$19,909
–$19,909
End of Period
0
x
To convert a table of factors for the present value of an ordinary annuity to the factors for 
the present value of an annuity in advance, take one less period and add 1.0000 to the factor. 
Thus, we look up the factor for the present value of an annuity for two periods at 8%, which is 
1.78326 (see Exhibit A.4) and add 1.0000 to obtain the factor of 2.78326. The 1.00000 is for the 
first payment at time 0 and the 1.78326 is for the present value of the payments at the beginning 
of the second and third years. Thus,
Present Value
of an
Annuity in 
Advance
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Present
Value of an
Annuity in 
Advance
x
=
$19,909
×
2.78326
x
=
$55,412
Example 11 (Present Value of a Deferred Annuity) Deferred annuities often occur in 
retirement planning. In a deferred annuity, the periodic payments do not begin until after at 
least one period beyond today. For example, assume that you expect to receive an annuity of 
$50,000 per year beginning on your 66th birthday and continuing to your 85th birthday. You 
want to know the cost of funding such a deferred annuity on your 45th birthday. Assume an 
interest rate of 6%.
The time line for this example is as follows:
–x
. . .
–x
$50,000
$50,000
. . .
$50,000
$50,000
. . .
. . .
Birthday
45
46 . . . 64
65
66
67
. . .
84
85
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

718
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
We compute the present value of this annuity in two steps.
1. Compute the present value of the annuity as of the 65th birthday.
2. Compute the present value of the amount in step 1 as of the 45th birthday.
The present value of the annuity as of the 65th birthday involves 20 payments in arrears dis-
counted at 6%. The present value factor for 20 periods and 6% is 11.46992 (see Exhibit A.4). 
Following is the present value of an ordinary annuity of $50,000 per period for 20 periods at 6%:
Present Value
of an
Ordinary Annuity
=
Periodic 
Payment
×
Factor for
the Present
Value of an
Ordinary Annuity
x
=
 $50,000
×
11.46992
x
=
$573,496
The present value of this single amount on the 45th birthday involves discounting $573,496 
back 20 periods at 6%. The factor for the present value of a single sum for 20 periods at 6% is 
0.31180 (see Exhibit A.2 or Appendix Table 2). Thus, the present value of the annuity on the 
45th birthday is $178,816.05 (= $573,496 × 0.31180).
Another approach to solving this deferred annuity problem is to subtract the factor for the 
present value of an ordinary annuity for 20 periods (birthdays 46 to 65) from the factor for the 
present value of an annuity for 40 periods (birthdays 46 to 85) and multiply the net factor by 
the $50,000 payments. Thus,
Factor for the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity for 40 Periods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
15.04630
Factor for the Present Value of an Ordinary Annuity for 20 Periods. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  – 11.46992
Difference. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3.57638
Annual Annuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  × $ 50,000
Present Value of Annuity at Age 45. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    $178,819
The difference in present value amounts on the 45th birthday in the preceding calculations 
results from the rounding of present value factors.
 PROBLEM  A.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
Present value of an annuity. Calculate the requested amount in each of the following 
scenarios.
a. Joan Brown wants to purchase a serial bond that pays $10,000 at the end of each year 
for 20 years. If she desires a rate of return of 8%, what is the maximum amount she 
should be willing to pay for the bond?
b. Paul Rainey purchased an excavator for $150,000, which he plans to rent to construc-
tion companies for five years. He wants a rate of return of 12%. Assuming all cash 
flows occur at the beginning of the year, what is the required annual cash inflow?
c. Diversified Technologies plans to invest $20 million per year for the next three years 
to develop a new optical scanner. It expects that the new scanner will then generate 
$15 million annually in cash flows for five years, after which it will become obsolete. 
Assume that all cash flows occur at the end of each year. If Diversified Technologies 
requires a rate of return of 12% on its investments, should it develop the scanner?
PERPETUITIES
A perpetuity is a series of cash flows that will last forever. For example, an alumnus of a univer-
sity might wish to establish a scholarship fund that will permit the payment forever of scholar-
ships, which bear her name. The most common setting in which the analyst will likely encounter 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

719
Internal Rate of Return (Implicit Interest Rate)
a perpetuity involves the valuation of a firm. Analysts typically project expected cash flows for 
the next 5 or 10 years and then make some assumptions about the cash flows after the projec-
tion period. The analyst assumes that the firm will continue as a going concern; this means that 
the analyst assumes the firm will continue operating forever. The assumption made about the 
continuing cash flow usually involves the valuation of a perpetuity.
The formula for the present value of a perpetuity of $1 per period is 1/r, where r is the dis-
count rate per period. This formula assumes that the annual cash flow is the same in every year 
and occurs at the end of each year. If the cash flows occur at the beginning of each year, the 
formula is 1 + 1/r. The first term values the first cash flow today, and the 1/r values the remain-
ing cash flows to a present value.
Example 12 (Present Value of a Perpetuity) Western University wishes to establish a 
scholarship fund that will permit payment of a $5,000 scholarship to 10 students each year for-
ever. The university expects the scholarship fund to earn 4% per year. Compute the required 
amount to establish the scholarship fund today if the university pays the first scholarship at the 
end of the first year, one year from now, and subsequent awards at the end of every year for-
ever. The required amount of the scholarship fund is $1,250,000 (= $50,000/0.04).
Assume now that the university will pay the first scholarships today and subsequent schol-
arships at the beginning of each year forever. The required amount to establish the scholarship 
fund is $1,750,000 [= $50,000 + ($50,000/0.04)].
Example 13 (Present Value of a Growing Perpetuity) Refer to Example 12. Assume 
that the university wants to increase the amount of the scholarship each year to incorporate 
expected increases in tuition costs of 1% per year. In this case, the assumption of an equal 
amount in the formula for the present value of a perpetuity no longer holds. The formula for 
the present value of a growing perpetuity that begins at $1 is 1/(r – g), where r is the interest 
rate and g is the growth rate in cash flows. If the university expects to pay scholarships at the 
end of the first year and each year thereafter, then the amount needed to establish the schol-
arship fund is $1,683,333 [= ($50,000 × 1.01) × 1/(0.04 – 0.01)]. If the university expects to 
award the first scholarship today and subsequent scholarships at the beginning of each year 
thereafter, then the amount required to establish the scholarship fund today is $1,733,333 
(= $50,000 + $1,683,333).
The formula for the present value of a growing perpetuity does not work well when the 
interest rate and the growth rate are approximately the same. When they are nearly equal, the 
value of r – g in the denominator approaches zero, and the present value approaches infinity. 
The formula also does not work when the growth rate exceeds the discount rate. The value of 
r – g turns negative and results in a meaningless negative number. The analyst who encounters 
such a situation should reconsider whether a firm can generate growth at a higher rate than its 
discount rate forever. Perhaps the growth rate assumption is too large or the discount rate is too 
low or the growth will stop at some future time.
INTERNAL RATE OF RETURN 
(IMPLICIT INTEREST RATE)
The examples thus far have solved for a future value or a present value of a single payment or 
of a series of equally spaced equal-size payments, or the amount of the periodic cash flow of 
an annuity. In some cases, the unknown variable is the interest rate. The internal rate of return 
for a series of cash flows is the interest rate that discounts all cash flows to a net present value 
of zero. Common terminology also refers to the internal rate of return as the implicit interest 
rate and, in an investment setting, as the yield to maturity.
Example 14 (Internal Rate of Return) Refer to question c in Problem A.4 for Self-Study. 
Diversified Technologies expects to pay $20 million per year at the end of each of the next three 
years to develop an optical scanner and then to receive $15 million per year at the end of the 
next five years from sales of the scanner. We wish to know the interest rate that will discount 
these cash flows to a net present value of zero. Thus, we want to solve for r in the following:
0 =
–$20
+
–$20
+
–$20
+
$15
+
$15
+
$15
+
$15
+
$15
(1 + r)1
(1 + r)2
(1 + r)3
(1 + r)4
(1 + r)5
(1 + r)6
(1 + r)7
(1 + r)8
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

720
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
We could try various interest rates and, by trial and error, find the value of r that results 
in a zero net present value. This approach, however, is tedious. Microsoft’s Excel has a built-in 
function to compute the internal rate of return. Many financial calculators have a built-in func-
tion as well, but some of those require equal payments at equally spaced intervals, which this 
example does not have. The internal rate of return in this example is 5.79%.
Example 15 (Internal Rate of Return of a Deferred Annuity) Your 60th birthday 
is today. With interest rates currently high, you want to purchase a deferred annuity that will 
begin on your 66th birthday and extend to your 85th birthday. The deferred annuity will pay 
you $80,000 each year and costs you $422,900 today. Compute the internal rate of return on 
this deferred annuity.
The time line for this annuity is
$80,000 . . . $80,000 $80,000
. . .
Birthday
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
. . .
84
85
–$422,900
If you want to solve for the internal rate of return, use a spreadsheet. You should find that the 
internal rate of return is 10%.
 PROBLEM  A.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
Finding the internal rate of return. Compute the internal rate of return in each of the 
following cases. Do not attempt to work these unless you have a financial calculator or 
spreadsheet.
a. You invest $650,000 in a bond that pays you a single amount of $1,000,000 at the end 
of 10 years.
b. You invest $800,000 in a bond that pays you $75,000 at the end of every six months 
for 10 years.
c. You invest $100,000 on January 1, 2008 for an annual annuity of $25,000 paid at the 
end of 2011 to 2017.
SOLUTIONS TO PROBLEMS FOR SELF-STUDY
PROBLEM A.1 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Future value of single sums.)
a. $5,000 × (1.00 + 0.06)10 = $5,000 × 1.79085 = $8,954. See Appendix Table 1, 10-period 
row, 6% column.
b. $5,000 × (1.00 + 0.03)20 = $5,000 × 1.80611 = $9,031. See Appendix Table 1, 20-period 
row, 3% column.
c. $5,000 × (1.08)33 = $5,000 × 12.67605 = $63,380.
d. $5,000 × (1.00 + 0.08/4)(4 × 33) = $5,000 × (1.02)132 = $5,000 × 13.65283 = $68,264.
PROBLEM A.2 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Present value of single sums.)
a. $20,000 × (1.00 + 0.06)–3 = $20,000 × 0.83962 = $16,792.
b. $20,000 × (1.00 + 0.06/12)–(3 × 12) = $20,000 × (1 + 0.005)–360 = $20,000 × 0.83564 = 
$16,713.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

721
Key Terms and Concepts
c. $20,000 × (1.00 + 0.10/2)–(2 × 10) = $20,000 × (1 + 0.05)–20 = $20,000 × 0.37689 = $7,538.
d. $20,000 × (1.00 + 0.08/4)–(4 × 13) = $20,000 × (1 + 0.02)–52 = $20,000 × 0.35710 = $7,142.
PROBLEM A.3 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Future value of an annuity.)
a. $2,500 × (1 + 0.06)20 – 1 = $2,500 × 36.78559 = $91,964.
0.06
b. $2,500 × [
(1 + 0.06)21 – 1 −1] ; x = $2,500 × 38.99273 = $97,482.
0.06
 
The Appendix Tables do not have factors for 21 periods.
c. $100,000 = x [
(1 + 0.06)20 – 1 −1] ; x = $100,000/36.78559 = $2,718.
0.06
d. $100,000 = x [
(1 + 0.06)21 – 1 −1] ; x = $100,000/38.99273 = $2,565.
0.06
 
The Appendix Tables do not have factors for 21 periods.
PROBLEM A.4 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Present value of an annuity.)
a. $10,000 × 1 – (1 + 0.08)–20
= $10,000 × 9.81815 = $98,182.
0.08
b. $150,000 = x [
1 – (1 + 0.12)–4
+ 1] ; x = $150,000/4.03735 = $37,153.
0.12
c. Present Value of Development Cost: $20 × 1 – (1 + 0.12)–3
× $20 × 2.40183
0.12
= $48.036 million.
Present Value of Deferred Annuity Cost: $15 × 1 – (1 + 0.12)–5
×
1
0.12
(1.12)3
= $15 × 2.56581 = $38.487 million.
 
The net present value is a loss of $9,549 million, which equals $38.487 – $48.036. The firm 
should not invest in this project.
PROBLEM A.5 FOR SELF-STUDY
(Finding the internal rate of return.)
a. The internal rate of return is 4.4%.
b. The internal rate of return is 6.9%.
c. The internal rate of return is 8.5%.
KEY TERMS AND CONCEPTS
Principal
Compound interest
Future value
Simple interest
Factor
Effective annual yield
Present value
Discounting
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

722
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
Discount rate
Annuity
Ordinary annuity or annuity in arrears
Annuity due or annuity in advance
Deferred annuity
Future value of an ordinary annuity
Present value of an ordinary annuity
Perpetuity
Internal rate of return
Implicit interest (rate)
Yield to maturity
QUESTIONS, EXERCISES, AND PROBLEMS
QUESTIONS
 1. Review the terms and concepts listed above in Key Terms and Concepts.
 2. How does interest equate cash flows over time?
 3. Distinguish between simple and compound interest.
 4. Distinguish between the discounted present value of a stream of future payments and their 
net present value. If there is no distinction, then so state.
 5. Distinguish between an annuity due and an ordinary annuity.
 6. Describe the implicit interest rate for a series of cash flows and a procedure for finding it.
 7. Does the present value of a given amount to be paid in 10 years increase or decrease if 
the interest rate increases? Suppose that the amount is due in 5 years? 20 years? Does the 
present value of an annuity to be paid for 10 years increase or decrease if the discount rate 
decreases? Suppose that the annuity is for 5 years? 20 years?
 8. Rather than pay you $1,000 a month for the next 20 years, the person who injured you in 
an automobile accident is willing to pay a single amount now to settle your claim for inju-
ries. Would you rather use an interest rate of 6% or 12% in computing the present value of 
the lump-sum settlement? Comment or explain.
 9. The perpetuity with growth formula involves several assumptions. Which one seems least 
plausible?
EXERCISES
Exercises 10 through 15 involve calculations of present and future value for single payments and 
for annuities. To make the exercises more realistic, we do not give specific guidance with each indi-
vidual exercise.
10. Mr. Altgeldt has $5,000 to invest. He wants to know how much it will amount to if he 
invests it at the following rates:
a. 6% per year for 21 years.
b. 8% per year for 33 years.
11. Mme. Barefield wishes to have $150,000 at the end of 8 years. How much must she invest 
today to accomplish this purpose if the interest rate is
a. 6% per year?
b. 8% per year?
12. Mr. Case plans to set aside $4,000 each year, the first payment to be made on January 1, 
2013, and the last on January 1, 2018. How much will he have accumulated by January 1, 
2018, if the interest rate is
a. 6% per year?
b. 8% per year?
13. Ms. Namura wants to have ¥45 million on her 65th birthday. She asks you to tell her 
how much she must deposit on each birthday from her 58th to 65th, inclusive, in order to 
receive this amount. Assume the following interest rates:
a. 8% per year
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

723
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
b. 12% per year
14. If Mr. Enmetti invests €90,000 on June 1 of each year from 2008 to 2018 inclusive, how 
much will he have accumulated on June 1, 2019 (note that one year elapses after the last 
payment), if the interest rate is
a. 5% per year?
b. 10% per year?
15. Ms. Fleming has £145,000 with which she purchases an annuity on February 1, 2008. The 
annuity consists of six annual receipts, the first to be received on February 1, 2009. How 
much will she receive in each payment? Assume the following interest rates:
a. 8% per year.
b. 12% per year.
16. In the preceding Exercises 10 through 15, you computed a number. To do so, first you must 
decide on the appropriate factor from the Appendix Tables, and then you use that factor in 
the appropriate calculation. Notice that you could omit the last step. You could write an 
arithmetic expression showing the factor you want to use without actually copying down 
the number and doing the arithmetic. For example, the notation T(i, p, r) means Table i 
(1, 2, 3, or 4), row p (periods 1 to 20, 22, 24, . . . , 40, 45, 50, 100), and column r (interest 
rates from 1⁄2% up to 20%). Thus, T(3, 16, 12) would be the factor in Appendix Table 3 for 
16 periods and an interest rate of 12% per period, which is 42.75328. Using this notation, 
you can write an expression for any compound interest problem. A clerk or a computer can 
evaluate the expression.
 
 
You can check that you understand this notation by observing that the following are 
true statements:
T(1, 20, 8)
= 4.66096
T(2, 12, 5)
= 0.55684
T(3, 16, 12) = 42.75328
T(4, 10, 20) = 4.19247
 
In the following questions, write an expression for the answer using the notation intro-
duced here, but do not attempt to evaluate the expression.
a. Work the a parts of Exercises 10 through 15.
b. How might your instructor use this notation to write examination questions on com-
pound interest without having to supply you with tables?
17. Effective interest rate. State the rate per period and the number of periods in the following:
a. 12% per year, for 5 years, compounded annually.
b. 12% per year, for 5 years, compounded semiannually.
c. 12% per year, for 5 years, compounded quarterly.
d. 12% per year, for 5 years, compounded monthly.
Exercises 18 through 26 involve calculations of present and future value for single payments and 
for annuities. To make the exercises more realistic, we do not give specific guidance with each indi-
vidual exercise.
18. Compute the future value of the following:
a. $100 invested for 5 years at 4% compounded annually.
b. $500 invested for 15 periods at 2% compounded once per period.
c. $200 invested for 8 years at 3% compounded semiannually.
d. $2,500 invested for 14 years at 8% compounded quarterly.
e. $600 invested for 3 years at 12% compounded monthly.
19. Compute the present value of the following:
a. $100 due in 30 years at 4% compounded annually.
b. $250 due in 8 years at 8% compounded quarterly.
c. $1,000 due in 2 years at 12% compounded monthly.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

724
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
20. Compute the amount (future value) of an ordinary annuity (an annuity in arrears) of the 
following:
a. 13 rental payments of $100 at 1% per period.
b. 8 rental payments of $850 at 6% per period.
c. 28 rental payments of $400 at 4% per period.
21. Mr. Grady agrees to lease a certain property for 10 years, at the following annual rental, 
payable in advance:
Years 1 and 2—$1,000 per year
Years 3 to 6—$2,000 per year
Years 7 to 10—$2,500 per year
 
What single immediate sum will pay all of these rents, discounted at
a. 6% per year?
b. 8% per year?
c. 10% per year?
22. To establish a fund that will provide a scholarship of $3,000 per year indefinitely, with the 
first award to occur now, how much must a donor deposit if the fund earns
a. 6% per period?
b. 8% per period?
23. Consider the scholarship fund in the preceding question. Suppose that the first scholarship 
award occurs one year from now and the donor wants the scholarship to grow by 2% per 
year. How much should the donor deposit if the fund earns
a. 6% per period?
b. 8% per period?
 
Suppose that the first scholarship award occurs five years from now but is to grow at 2% 
per year after the fifth year, the time of the first $3,000 award. How much should the donor 
deposit if the fund earns
c. 6% per year?
d. 8% per year?
24. An old agreement obliges the state to help a rural county maintain a bridge by paying 
$60,000 now and every two years thereafter forever. The state wants to discharge its obli-
gation by paying a single sum to the county now for the payment due and all future pay-
ments. How much should the state pay the county if the discount rate is
a. 8% per year?
b. 12% per year?
25. Find the interest rate implicit in a loan of $100,000 that the borrower discharges with two 
annual installments of $55,307 each, paid at the end of each of the next two years.
26. A single-payment note promises to pay $140,493 in three years. The issuer exchanges the 
note for equipment having a fair value of $100,000. The exchange occurs three years before 
the maturity date on the note. What is the implicit interest rate for the single-payment note?
27. A single-payment note promises $67,280 at maturity. The issuer of the note exchanges it for 
land with a fair value of $50,000. The exchange occurs two years before the maturity date 
on the note.
a. What is the implicit interest rate for this single-payment note?
b. Using the implicit interest rate, construct an amortization schedule for the note. Show 
the carrying value of the note at the start of each year, the amount of interest expense 
for each year, the amount reducing or increasing the carrying value each year, and the 
carrying value at the end of the year.
28. Finding implicit interest rates; constructing amortization schedules. Berman Company pur-
chased a plot of land for possible future development. The land had fair value of $86,000. 
Berman Company gave a 3-year interest-bearing note. The note had face value of $100,000 
and provided for interest at a stated rate of 8%. The note requires payments of $8,000 at 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

725
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
the end of each of three years, the last payment coinciding with the maturity of the note’s 
face value of $100,000.
a. What is the interest rate implicit in the note, accurate to the nearest tenth of 1%?
b. Construct an amortization schedule for the note for each year. Show the carrying value 
of the note at the start of the year, interest for the year, payment for the year, amount 
reducing or increasing the carrying value of the note for each payment, and the carry-
ing value of the note at the end of each year. Use the interest rate found in part a. See 
Exhibit 11.2 for an example of an amortization schedule.
29. Find equivalent annual rate offered for purchase discounts. The terms of sale “2/10, net/30” 
mean that the buyer can take a discount of 2% from gross invoice price by paying the 
invoice within 10 days; otherwise, the buyer must pay the full amount within 30 days.
a. Write an expression for the implicit annual rate of interest being offered by viewing the 
entire discount as interest for funds received sooner rather than later. (Note that by not 
taking the discount, the buyer borrows 98% of the gross invoice price for 20 days.)
b. The tables at the back of the book do not permit the exact evaluation of the expression 
derived in part a. The rate of interest implied is 44.59% per year. Use the tables or a 
financial calculator or a spreadsheet to convince yourself that this astounding (to some) 
answer must be close to correct.
PROBLEMS
Problems 30 through 44 involve using future value and present value techniques, including perpetu-
ities, to solve a variety of realistic problems. We give no hints as to the specific calculation with the 
problems.
30. An oil-drilling company figures that it must spend $30,000 for an initial supply of drill 
bits and that it must spend $10,000 every month to replace the worn-out bits. What is the 
present value of the cost of the bits if the company plans to be in business indefinitely and 
discounts payments at 1% per month?
31. If you promise to leave $30,000 on deposit at the Dime Savings Bank for four years, the 
bank will give you a new large, flat-screen Sony TV today and your $30,000 back at the end 
of four years. How much are you paying today for the TV, in effect, if the bank pays other 
customers 4% interest compounded quarterly (= 1% paid four times per year)?
32. When Mr. Shafer died, his estate after taxes amounted to $300,000. His will provided that 
Mrs. Shafer would receive $24,000 per year starting immediately from the principal of the 
estate and that the balance of the principal would pass to the Shafers’ children upon Mrs. 
Shafer’s death. The state law governing this estate provided for a dower option. If Mrs. 
Shafer elects the dower option, she renounces the will and can have one-third of the estate 
in cash now. The remainder will then pass immediately to their children. Mrs. Shafer wants 
to maximize the present value of her bequest. Should she take the annuity or elect the 
dower option if she will receive five payments and discounts payments at
a. 8% per year?
b. 12% per year?
 
(Note this problem explicitly states that Mrs. Shafer will receive five payments. In reality, 
life expectancy is uncertain. The correct calculation combines a mortality table with the 
present value tables. Actuaries deal with such calculations.)
33. Mrs. Heileman occasionally drinks beer. (Guess which brand.) She consumes one case in 
20 weeks. She can buy beer in disposable cans for $25.20 per case or for $24.00 per case 
of returnable bottles if she pays a $3.00 refundable deposit at the time of purchase. If her 
discount rate is 1⁄2% per week, how much in present value dollars does she save by buying 
the returnables and thereby losing the use of the $3.00 deposit for 20 weeks?
34. When General Electric Company first introduced the Lucalox ceramic, screw-in light bulb, 
the bulb cost three and one-half times as much as an ordinary bulb but lasted five times as 
long. An ordinary bulb cost $1.00 and lasted about eight months. If a firm has a discount 
rate of 12% compounded three times a year, how much would it save in present value dol-
lars by using one Lucalox bulb?
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

726
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
35. Oberweis Dairy switched from delivery trucks with regular gasoline engines to ones with 
diesel engines. The diesel trucks cost $6,000 more than the ordinary gasoline trucks but 
costs $1,800 per year less to operate. Assume that Oberweis saves the operating costs at the 
end of each month. If Oberweis uses a discount rate of 1% per month, approximately how 
many months, at a minimum, must the diesel trucks remain in service for the switch to be 
sensible?
36. Calculating impairment. On January 1, 2013, assume that Levi Strauss opened a new tex-
tile plant to produce synthetic fabrics. The plant is on leased land; 20 years remain on the 
nonrenewable lease.
 
 
The cost of the plant was $20 million. Net cash flow to be derived from the project is 
estimated to be $3,000,000 per year. The company does not normally invest in such proj-
ects unless the anticipated yield is at least 12%.
 
 
On December 31, 2013, the company calculates that cash flows from the plant were 
$2,800,000 for 2013. On the same day, farm experts predict cotton production will be unusu-
ally low for the next two years. Levi Strauss estimates the resulting increase in demand for 
synthetic fabrics will boost cash flows to $3,500,000 for each of the next two years. Subse-
quent years’ estimates remain unchanged at $3,000,000 per year. Ignore tax considerations.
a. Calculate the present value of the future expected cash flows from the plant when it 
opened.
b. What is the present value of the plant on January 1, 2014, immediately after the 
re-estimation of future cash flows?
c. On January 2, 2014, the day following the cotton production news release, a competitor 
announces plans to build a synthetic fabrics plant to open in three years. Levi Strauss 
keeps its 2014 to 2016 estimates but reduces the estimated annual cash flows for subse-
quent years to $2,000,000. What is the value of Levi Strauss’s plant on January 1, 2014, 
after the new projections?
d. On January 2, 2014, an investor contacts Levi Strauss about purchasing a 20% share of 
the plant. If the investor expects to earn at least a 12% annual return on the investment, 
what is the maximum amount that the investor should pay? Assume that the investor 
and Levi Strauss both know all relevant information and use the same estimates of 
annual cash flows described in part c.
37. Finding implicit interest rates (truth-in-lending laws reduce the type of deception suggested by 
this problem). Friendly Loan Company advertises that it is willing to lend cash for five years 
at the low rate of 8% per year. A potential borrower discovers that a five-year, $10,000 loan 
requires that the borrower pay the 8% interest in advance, with interest deducted from the 
loan proceeds. The borrower will collect $6,000 [= $10,000 – (5 × 0.08 × $10,000)] in cash 
and must repay the “$10,000” loan in five annual installments of $2,000, one each at the 
end of the next 5 years.
 
 
Compute the effective interest rate implied by these loan terms.
38. Deriving net present value of cash flows for decision to dispose of asset. Suppose that yes-
terday Black & Decker Company purchased and installed a made-to-order machine tool 
for fabricating parts for small appliances. The machine cost $100,000. Today, Square D 
Company offers a machine tool that will do exactly the same work but costs only $50,000. 
Assume that the discount rate is 12%, that both machines will last for five years, that Black 
& Decker will depreciate both machines on a straight-line basis with no salvage value for 
tax purposes, that the income tax rate is and will continue to be 40%, and that Black & 
Decker earns sufficient income that it can use any loss from disposing of or depreciating 
the “old” machine to offset other taxable income.
 
 
How much, at a minimum, must the “old” machine fetch on resale at this time to make 
purchasing the new machine worthwhile?
39. Computation of present value of cash flows; untaxed acquisition, no change in tax basis of 
assets. The balance sheet of Lynch Company shows net assets (= total assets – total liabili-
ties) of $100,000 and shareholders’ equity of $100,000. The assets are all depreciable assets 
with remaining lives of 20 years. The income statement for the year shows revenues of 
$700,000, depreciation of $50,000 (= $1,000,000/20 years), no other expenses, income taxes 
of $260,000 (= 40% of pretax income of $650,000), and net income of $390,000.
 
 
Bages Company is considering purchasing all of the stock of Lynch Company. It is 
willing to pay an amount equal to the present value of the cash flows from operations for 
the next 20 years discounted at a rate of 10% per year.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

727
Questions, Exercises, and Problems
 
 
The transaction will be a tax-free exchange; that is, after the purchase, the tax basis 
of the assets of Lynch Company will remain unchanged so that depreciation charges will 
remain at $50,000 per year and income taxes will remain at $260,000 per year. Revenues 
will be $700,000 per year for the next 20 years.
a. Compute the annual cash flows produced by Lynch Company.
b. Compute the maximum amount Bages Company should be willing to pay.
40. Computation of the present value of cash flows; taxable acquisition, changing tax basis of 
assets. Refer to the data in the preceding problem. Assume now that the acquisition is tax-
able, so that the tax basis of the assets acquired changes after the purchase. If the purchase 
price is $V, then depreciation charges will be $V/20 per year for 20 years. Income taxes will 
be 40% of pretax income. What is the maximum Bages Company should be willing to pay 
for Lynch Company?
41. Valuation of intangibles with perpetuity formulas. When the American Basketball Asso-
ciation (ABA) merged with the National Basketball Association (NBA), the owners of 
the ABA St. Louis Spirits agreed to dissolve their team and not enter the NBA. In return, 
the owners received a promise in perpetuity from the NBA that the NBA would pay to the 
Spirits’ owners an amount each year equal to 40% of the TV revenues that the NBA paid 
to any one of its regular teams. At the time of the deal, the owners received $4 million per 
year. The NBA wanted to pay a single amount to the owners at the time of the deal and 
not have to pay more in the future. Of course, the owners prefer to collect more, rather 
than less, but here they want to know the reasonable minimum that will make them indif-
ferent to the single payment in lieu of receiving the annual payments in perpetuity. Ignore 
income tax effects.
a. Assume the owners expect the TV revenues to remain constant, so that they can expect 
$4 million per year in perpetuity and use an interest rate of 8% in their discounting 
calculations. What minimum price should these owners be willing to accept?
b. Refer to the specifications for the preceding question. If the owners use a smaller inter-
est rate for discounting, will the minimum price they are willing to accept increase, 
decrease, or remain unchanged?
c. The owners use an 8% discount rate, and they expect TV revenues to increase by 2% 
per year in perpetuity, with the next collection, due one year from today, being $4.08 
(= 1.02 × $4.00) million. What minimum price should the owners be willing to accept?
d. Refer to the specifications in c. If the owners use a smaller interest rate for discount-
ing, will the minimum price they are willing to accept increase, decrease, or remain 
unchanged?
e. Refer to the specifications in c. If the owners assume a smaller rate for growth in future 
receipts from the NBA, will the minimum price they are willing to accept increase, 
decrease, or remain unchanged?
42. (Adapted from a problem by S. Zeff.) Analysis of benefits of acquisition of long-term assets.
Lexie T. Colleton is the chief financial officer of Ragazze, and one of her duties is to give 
advice on investment projects. Today’s date is December 31, 2013. Colleton requires that, to 
be acceptable, new investments must provide a positive net present value after discounting 
cash flows at 12% per year.
 
 
A proposed investment is the purchase of an automatic gonculator, which involves 
an initial cash disbursement on December 31, 2013. The useful life of the machine is nine 
years, through 2022. Colleton expects to be able to sell the machine for cash of $30,000 on 
December 31, 2022. She expects commercial production to begin on December 31, 2013.
 
 
Ragazze will depreciate the machine on a straight-line basis. Ignore income taxes.
 
 
During 2014, the break-in year, Ragazze will perform test runs in order to put the 
machine in proper working order. Colleton expects that the total cash outlay for this pur-
pose will be $20,000, incurred at the end of 2014.
 
 
Colleton expects that the cash disbursements for regular maintenance will be $60,000 
at the end of each of 2015 through 2018 inclusive, and $100,000 at the end of each of 2019 
through 2021 inclusive.
 
 
Colleton expects the cash receipts (net of all other operating expenses) from the sale 
of products that the machine produces to be $130,000 at the end of each year from 2015 
through 2022, inclusive.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

728
Appendix 
Time Value of Cash Flows: Compound Interest Concepts and Applications
a. What is the maximum price that Ragazze can pay for the automatic gonculator on 
December 31, 2013, and still earn a positive net present value of cash flows?
b. Independent of your answer to part a, assume the purchase price is $250,000, which 
Ragazze will pay with an installment note requiring four equal annual installments 
starting December 31, 2014, and an implicit interest rate of 10% per year. What is the 
amount of each payment?
43. (Adapted from a problem by S. Zeff.) Choosing between investment alternatives. William 
Marsh, CEO of Gulf Coast Manufacturing, wishes to know which of two strategies he has 
chosen for acquiring an automobile has lower present value of cost.
 
 
Strategy L. Acquire a new Lexus at the beginning of 2013, keep it until the end of 
2018, then trade it in on a new car.
 
 
Strategy M. Acquire a new Mercedes-Benz at the beginning of 2013, trade it in at the 
end of 2015 on a second Mercedes-Benz, keep that for another three years, then trade it in 
on a new car at the end of 2018.
 
 
Data pertinent to these choices appear below. Assume that Marsh will receive the 
trade-in value in cash or as a credit toward the purchase price of a new car. Ignore income 
taxes and use a discount rate of 10% per year. Gulf Coast Manufacturing depreciates auto-
mobiles on a straight-line basis over 8 years for financial reporting, assuming zero salvage 
value at the end of eight years.
a. Which strategy has lower present value of costs?
b. What role, if any, do depreciation charges play in the analysis and why?
Lexus
Mercedes-Benz
Initial Cost at the Start of 2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$60,000
$45,000
Initial Cost at the Start of 2016  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 48,000
Trade-in Value
 
End of 2015  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 23,000
 
End of 20181 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 16,000
 24,500
Estimated Annual Cash Operating Costs
 
Except Major Servicing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  4,000
  4,500
Estimated Cash Cost of Major Servicing
 
End of 2016  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  6,500
 
End of 2014 and End of 2017. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  2,500
1At this time Lexus is 6 years old; second Mercedes-Benz is 3 years old.
44. Valuation involving perpetuity growth model assumptions. Fast Growth Start-Up Company 
(FGSUC) has a new successful Internet business. It expects to earn $100 million of after-
tax free cash flows this year. The company proposes to go public, and the company’s inter-
nal financial staff suggests to the board of directors that a valuation of $2.5 billion seems 
reasonable for the company. The investment banking firm’s analyst and the financial staff 
at the company agree that the growth rate in free cash flows will be 25% per year for several 
years before the growth rate drops back to one more closely resembling the growth rate in 
the economy as a whole, which all assume to be 4% per year. Assume that the after-tax 
discount rate suitable for such a new venture is 15% per year.
 
 
How many years of growth in after-tax free cash flow of 25% per year will FGSUC 
need to earn to justify a market valuation of $2.5 billion? Do not attempt to work this 
problem without using a spreadsheet program.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Compound Interest 
and Annuity Tables
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

730
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables
Future Value of $1
Fn = P (1 + r)n
r = interest rate; n = number of periods until valuation; P = $1
Periods
= n 
1
2% 
1% 
1
1
2% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
12% 
15% 
20% 
25%
TABLE 1
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

731
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables
Present Value of $1
P = Fn (1 + r)–n
r = discount rate; n = number of periods until payment; Fn = $1
Periods
= n 
 
1
2% 
1% 
1
1
2% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
12% 
15% 
20% 
25%
TABLE 2
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

732
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables
Future Value of an Annunity of $1 in Arrears
PF = (1 + r)n − 1
r
r = interest rate; n = number of payments
No. of
 Payments
= n 
1
2% 
1% 
1
1
2% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
12% 
15% 
20% 
25%
TABLE 3
Note: To convert from this table to values of an annuity in advance, determine the annuity in arrears above for one more period and subtract 1.00000.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

733
Compound Interest and Annuity Tables
Present Value of Annunity of $1 in Arrears
PF = 1 − (1 + r)−n
× $1.00
r
r = discount rate; n = number of payments
No. of
 Payments
= n 
1
2% 
1% 
1
1
2% 
2% 
3% 
4% 
5% 
6% 
7% 
8% 
10% 
12% 
15% 
20% 
25%
TABLE 4
n Periods = Payments
0 
$1 
$1 
$1 
$1 
$1  
  
Payments
in Arrears 
 
 
 
 
???
PA
PF
(
Value in 
Table 4 )
∑(
Individual Values 
from Table 2 )
(
Value in 
Table 3 )
Note: To convert from this table to values of an annuity in advance, determine the annuity in arrears above for one more period and subtract 1.00000.
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

G l o s s a r y
The definitions of many words and phrases in the glos-
sary use other glossary terms. In a given definition, we 
italicize terms that themselves (or variants thereof) appear 
elsewhere under their own listings. The cross-references 
generally take one of two forms:
1. absorption costing See full absorption costing.
2. ABC Activity-based costing.
Form (1) refers you to another term for discussion of this 
boldfaced term. Form (2) tells you that this bold-faced 
term is synonymous with the italicized term, which you 
can consult for discussion if necessary.
10-K; 10-Q The name of the annual (K) or quarterly (Q) 
report that the SEC requires of nearly all publicly 
held corporations.
2/10, n(et)/30 See terms of sale.
20-F Form required by the SEC for foreign companies 
issuing or trading their securities in the United States. 
This form reconciles specified accounting amounts 
resulting from using foreign accounting principles
to amounts resulting from using U.S. GAAP. Since 
November 2007, foreign company financial statements
prepared in accordance with IFRS no longer require 
reconciliation to U.S. GAAP.
A
AAA American Accounting Association.
abatement A complete or partial cancellation of a levy 
imposed by a government unit.
ABC Activity-based costing.
abnormal spoilage Actual spoilage exceeding that expected 
when operations are normally efficient. Usual practice 
treats this cost as an expense of the period rather than 
as a product cost. Contrast with normal spoilage.
aboriginal cost In public utility accounting, the acquisi-
tion cost of an asset incurred by the first entity devot-
ing that asset to public use; the cost basis for most 
public utility regulation. If regulators used a different 
cost basis, then public utilities could exchange assets 
among themselves at ever-increasing prices in order to 
raise the rate base and, then, prices based on them.
absorbed overhead Overhead costs allocated to individual 
products at some overhead rate; also called applied 
overhead.
absorption costing See full absorption costing.
Abstracts of the EITF See Emerging Issues Task Force.
accelerated cost recovery system (ACRS) A form of accel-
erated depreciation that Congress enacted in 1981 and 
amended in 1986, so that now most writers refer to 
it as MACRS, or Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System. The system provides percentages of the asset’s 
cost that a firm depreciates each year for tax purposes. 
The percentages derive, roughly, from 150%-declining-
balance depreciation methods. ACRS ignores salvage 
value. We do not generally use these amounts for 
financial accounting.
accelerated depreciation In calculating depreciation charges, 
any method in which the charges become progressively 
smaller each period. Examples are double declining-bal-
ance depreciation and sum-of-the-years’-digits deprecia-
tion methods.
acceptance A written promise to pay; equivalent to a 
promissory note.
account A device for representing the amount (balance) 
for any line (or a part of a line) in the balance sheet or 
income statement. Because income statement accounts 
explain the changes in the balance sheet account 
Retained Earnings, the definition does not require the 
last three words of the preceding sentence. An account
is any device for accumulating additions and subtrac-
tions relating to a single asset, liability, or owners’ 
equity item, including revenues and expenses.
account analysis method A method of separating fixed costs
from variable costs based on the analyst’s judgment of 
whether the cost is fixed or variable. Based on their 
names alone, the analyst might classify direct labor 
(material) costs as variable and depreciation on a fac-
tory building as fixed. In our experience, this method 
results in too many fixed costs and not enough variable 
costs—that is, analysts have insufficient information to 
judge management’s ability to reduce costs that appear 
to be fixed. Companies with strong unions, where lay-
offs can be costly, often have near-fixed labor costs. 
Analysts in Western Europe often treat labor costs as 
relatively fixed.
account form The form of balance sheet in which assets 
appear on the left and equities appear on the right. 
Contrast with report form. See T-account.
accountability center Responsibility center.
accountancy The British word for accounting. In the 
United States, it means the theory and practice of 
accounting.
accountant’s comments Canada: a written communica-
tion issued by a public accountant at the conclusion 
of a review engagement. It consists of a description 
of the work performed and a statement that, under 
the terms of the engagement, the accountant has not 
performed an audit and consequently expresses no 
opinion. (Compare auditor’s report; denial of opinion.)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

736
Glossary
154 (Codification Topic 250) does not classify them 
as prior-period adjustments. See accounting changes, 
and contrast with changes in accounting estimates as 
described there.
accounting event Any occurrence that is recorded in the 
accounting records.
accounting methods Accounting principles; procedures for 
carrying out accounting principles.
accounting period (convention) The time period between 
consecutive balance sheets; the time period for which 
the firm prepares financial statements that measure 
flows, such as the income statement and the statement 
of cash flows. See interim statements.
accounting policies Accounting principles adopted by a 
specific entity.
accounting principles The methods or procedures used in 
accounting for events reported in the financial state-
ments. We tend to use this term when the method or 
procedure has received official authoritative sanction 
from a pronouncement of a group such as the APB, 
EITF, FASB, or SEC for U.S. GAAP and the IASB 
for IFRS. Contrast with accounting conventions and 
conceptual framework.
Accounting Principles Board See APB.
accounting procedures See accounting principles. This 
term usually refers to the methods for implementing 
accounting principles.
accounting rate of return Income for a period divided 
by average investment during the period; based on 
income, rather than discounted cash flows, and hence 
a poor decision-making aid or tool. See ratio and 
Exhibit 7.12.
Accounting Research Bulletin (ARB) The name of the 
official pronouncements of the former Committee on 
Accounting Procedure (CAP) of the AICPA. The com-
mittee issued 51 bulletins between 1939 and 1959. ARB 
No. 43 restated and codified the parts of the first 42 
bulletins not dealing solely with definitions.
Accounting Research Study (ARS) One of a series of stud-
ies published by the Director of Accounting Research 
of the AICPA and “designed to provide professional 
accountants and others interested in the development 
of accounting with a discussion and documentation of 
accounting problems.” The AICPA published 15 such 
studies in the period 1961–1973.
Accounting Series Release (ASR) See SEC.
accounting standards Accounting principles.
Accounting Standards Executive Committee (AcSEC) 
The senior technical committee of the AICPA autho-
rized to speak for the AICPA in the areas of financial 
accounting and reporting as well as cost accounting.
accounting system The procedures for collecting and sum-
marizing financial data in a firm.
Accounting Terminology Bulletin (ATB) One of four 
releases of the Committee on Terminology of the 
AICPA issued in the period 1953–1957.
Accounting Trends and Techniques An annual AICPA 
publication that surveys the reporting practices of 600 
large corporations. It presents tabulations of specific 
practices, terminology, and disclosures along with 
illustrations taken from individual annual reports. We 
accountant’s opinion Auditor’s report.
accountant’s report Auditor’s report.
accounting A system conveying information about a 
specific entity. The information is in financial terms 
and will appear in accounting statements only if the 
accountant can measure it with reasonable precision. 
The AICPA defines accounting as a service activity 
whose “function is to provide quantitative informa-
tion, primarily financial in nature, about economic 
entities that is intended to be useful in making eco-
nomic decisions.”
accounting adjustments Prior-period adjustments, changes 
in accounting principles, and corrections of errors. See 
accounting changes. The FASB indicates that it will 
tend to call these items “accounting adjustments,” not 
“accounting changes,” when it requires the reporting 
of comprehensive income. See also adjusting entry for 
another use of this term.
accounting changes As defined by FASB Statement No. 
154 (Codification Topic 250), a change in (1) an 
accounting principle (such as a switch from FIFO to 
LIFO or from sum-of-the-years’-digits depreciation 
to straight-line depreciation), (2) an accounting esti-
mate (such as estimated useful lives or salvage value 
of depreciable assets and estimates of warranty costs 
or uncollectible accounts), or (3) the reporting entity. 
If practical, the firm should restate financial state-
ments retroactively for changes of type (1). The firm 
should treat changes of type (2) as affecting only the 
period of change and, if necessary, future periods. The 
firm should disclose reasons for changes of type (3) in 
statements reporting on operations of the period of the 
change, and it should show the effect of the change on 
all other periods, for comparative purposes. Correct-
ing an error in previously issued financial statements 
is not an accounting change. See all-inclusive (income) 
concept and accounting errors.
accounting conventions Methods or procedures used in 
accounting. Writers tend to use this term when the 
method or procedure has not yet received official 
authoritative sanction by a pronouncement of a group 
such as the APB, EITF, FASB, and SEC for U.S. 
GAAP and the IASB for IFRS. Contrast with account-
ing principles.
accounting cycle The sequence of accounting procedures 
starting with journal entries for various transactions 
and events and ending with the financial statements 
or, perhaps, the post-closing trial balance.
accounting deficiency Canada: a failure to adhere to gen-
erally accepted accounting principles or to disclose 
essential information in financial statements.
accounting entity See entity.
accounting equation Assets = Equities; Assets = Liabilities 
+ Owners’ equity.
accounting errors Arithmetic errors and misapplications of 
accounting principles in previously published financial 
statements. The firm corrects these items retrospec-
tively by adjusting balance sheet and income statements 
amounts beginning with the earliest period reported. 
In this regard, the firm treats them like prior-period 
adjustments, but technically FASB Statement No. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

737
Glossary
it, and then amortizing its cost over periods of use is a 
process of deferral and allocation, not of accrual.
accrued payable A payable usually resulting from the pas-
sage of time. For example, salaries and interest accrue 
as time passes. See accrued.
accrued receivable A receivable usually resulting from the 
passage of time. See accrued.
accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) See projected benefit 
obligation for definition and contrast.
accumulated deficit Negative balance in the Retained 
Earnings account.
accumulated depreciation A preferred title for the asset 
contra account that shows the sum of depreciation 
charges on an asset since the time the firm acquired 
it. Other account titles are allowance for depreciation 
(acceptable term) and reserve for depreciation (unac-
ceptable term).
accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) Balance 
sheet amount in owners’ equity showing the total of 
all other comprehensive income amounts from all prior 
periods.
accurate presentation The qualitative accounting objec-
tive suggesting that information reported in financial 
statements should correspond as precisely as possible 
with the economic effects underlying transactions and 
events. See fair presentation and full disclosure.
acid test ratio Quick ratio.
acquisition (historical) cost Of an asset, the net invoice 
price plus all expenditures to place and ready the asset 
for its intended use. The other expenditures might 
include legal fees, transportation charges, and instal-
lation costs.
acquisition method Accounting for a business combination 
by recognizing the acquired company’s identifiable 
assets and liabilities at their fair values, and recogniz-
ing the goodwill (if any) and non-controlling interest 
(if any) of the business combination.
ACRS Accelerated Cost Recovery System.
AcSEC Accounting standards Executive Committee of the 
AICPA.
activity accounting Responsibility accounting.
activity-based costing (ABC) Method of assigning indirect 
costs, including nonmanufacturing overhead costs, to 
products and services. ABC assumes that almost all 
overhead costs associate with activities within the firm 
and vary with respect to the drivers of those activities. 
Some practitioners suggest that ABC attempts to find 
the drivers for all indirect costs; these people note that 
in the long run, all costs are variable, so fixed indirect 
costs do not occur. This method first assigns costs to 
activities and then to products based on the products’ 
usage of the activities.
activity-based depreciation Production method (depreciation).
activity-based management (ABM) Analysis and man-
agement of activities required to make a product 
or to produce a service. ABM focuses attention to 
enhance activities that add value to the customer and 
to reduce activities that do not. Its goal is to sat-
isfy customer needs while making smaller demands 
on costly resources. Some refer to this as “activity 
management.”
use it, for example, to see how many firms use the 
direct method to report cash flow from operations.
accounts payable; trade payables A liability representing 
an amount owed to a creditor; usually arising from 
the purchase of merchandise or materials and supplies, 
not necessarily due or past due; normally, a current 
liability.
accounts payable turnover ratio Purchases divided by aver-
age accounts payable. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
accounts receivable Claims against a debtor; usually aris-
ing from sales or services rendered, not necessarily due 
or past due; normally, a current asset. With the word 
gross, the amount owed to the holder; with the word 
net, the amount the holder expects to collect, which 
equals the gross amount less the allowance for uncol-
lectible accounts.
accounts receivable turnover ratio Net sales on account 
divided by average accounts receivable. See ratio and 
Exhibit 7.12.
accretion Occurs when a carrying value grows over time, 
such as a bond originally issued at a discount; the cor-
rect technical term is “accretion,” not “amortization.” 
This term also refers to an increase in economic worth 
through physical change caused by natural growth, 
usually said of a natural resource such as timber. Con-
trast with appreciation. See amortization.
accrual Recognition of an expense (or revenue) and the 
related liability (or asset) resulting from an accounting 
event, frequently from the passage of time but not sig-
naled by an explicit cash transaction; for example, the 
recognition of interest expense or revenue (or wages, 
salaries, or rent) at the end of a period even though the 
firm makes no explicit cash transaction at that time. 
Cash flow follows accounting recognition; contrast 
with deferral.
accrual basis of accounting The method of recognizing 
revenues as a firm sells goods (or delivers them) and 
as it renders services, independent of the time when it 
receives cash. This system recognizes expenses in the 
period when it recognizes the related revenue, indepen-
dent of the time when it pays cash. SFAC No. 1 says, 
“Accrual accounting attempts to record the finan-
cial effects on an enterprise of transactions and other 
events and circumstances that have cash consequences 
for the enterprise in the periods in which those trans-
actions, events, and circumstances occur rather than 
only in the periods in which cash is received or paid 
by the enterprise.” Contrast with the cash basis of 
accounting. See accrual and deferral. We could more 
correctly call this “accrual/deferral” accounting.
accrue See accrued, and contrast with incur.
accrued Said of a revenue (expense) that the firm has 
earned (recognized) even though the related receiv-
able (payable) has a future due date. We prefer not 
to use this adjective as part of an account title. Thus, 
we prefer to use Interest Receivable (Payable) as the 
account title rather than Accrued Interest Receivable 
(Payable). See matching convention and accrual. Con-
trast with incur.
accrued depreciation An incorrect term for accumulated 
depreciation. Acquiring an asset with cash, capitalizing 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

738
Glossary
as for unrecorded deposits or outstanding checks, to 
reconcile the bank’s balance with the correct cash bal-
ance. See adjusted book balance of cash.
adjusted basis The basis used to compute gain or loss on 
the disposition of an asset for tax purposes. See also 
book value and carrying value.
adjusted book balance of cash The balance shown in the 
firm’s account for cash in bank plus or minus amounts, 
such as for notes collected by the bank or bank service 
charges, to reconcile the account balance with the cor-
rect cash balance. See adjusted bank balance of cash.
adjusted trial balance Trial balance taken after adjusting 
entries but before closing entries. Contrast with pre- 
and post-closing trial balances. See unadjusted trial 
balance and post-closing trial balance. See also work 
sheet.
adjusting entry An entry made at the end of an account-
ing period to record a transaction or other account-
ing event that the firm has not yet recorded or has 
improperly recorded during the accounting period; an 
entry to update the accounts. See work sheet.
adjustment An account change produced by an adjusting 
entry. Sometimes accountants use the term to refer to 
the process of restating financial statement amounts 
to constant dollars or for a change in accounting 
principles.
administrative costs (expenses) Costs (expenses) incurred 
for the firm as a whole, in contrast with specific func-
tions such as manufacturing or selling; includes items 
such as salaries of top executives, general office rent, 
legal fees, and auditing fees.
admission of partner Occurs when a new partner joins a 
partnership. Legally, the old partnership dissolves, 
and a new one comes into being. In practice, however, 
the firm may keep the old accounting records in use, 
and the accounting entries reflect the manner in which 
the new partner joined the firm. If the new partner 
merely purchases the interest of another partner, the 
accounting changes the name for one capital account. 
If the new partner contributes assets and liabilities to 
the partnership, then the firm must recognize them. 
See bonus method.
advances from (by) customers A preferred title for the lia-
bility account representing receipts of cash in advance 
of delivering the goods or rendering the service. After 
the firm delivers the goods or services, it will recog-
nize revenue. Some refer to this as deferred revenue or 
deferred income, terms likely to confuse the unwary 
because the item is not yet revenue nor income.
advances to affiliates Loans by a parent company to a 
subsidiary; frequently combined with investment in 
subsidiary as investments and advances to subsidiary 
and shown as a noncurrent asset on the parent’s bal-
ance sheet. The consolidation process eliminates these 
advances in consolidated financial statements.
advances to suppliers A preferred term for the asset 
account representing disbursements of cash in advance 
of receiving assets or services.
adverse opinion An auditor’s report stating that the finan-
cial statements are not fair or are not in accord with 
U.S. GAAP.
activity basis Costs are variable or fixed (incremental or 
unavoidable) with respect to some activity, such as 
production of units (or the undertaking of some new 
project). Usage calls this activity the “activity basis.”
activity center Unit of the organization that performs a 
set of tasks.
activity variance Sales volume variance.
actual cost (basis) Acquisition or historical cost. Also con-
trast with standard cost.
actual costing (system) Method of allocating costs to prod-
ucts using actual direct material costs, actual direct 
labor, and actual factory overhead, typically averaged 
over several units of output. Contrast with normal 
costing and standard costing.
actuarial An adjective describing computations or analy-
ses that involve both compound interest and probabili-
ties, such as the computation of the present value of 
a life-contingent annuity. Some writers use the word 
even for computations involving only one of the two.
ad valorem A method of levying a tax or duty on goods by 
using their estimated value as the tax base.
additional paid-in capital (APIC) An alternative accept-
able title for the capital contributed in excess of par (or 
stated) value account. Because APIC is shorter, many 
writers prefer it.
additional processing cost Costs incurred in processing 
joint products after the split-off point.
adequate disclosure An auditing standard that, to achieve 
fair presentation of financial statements, requires dis-
closure of material items. This auditing standard does 
not, however, require publicizing all information detri-
mental to a company. For example, the company may 
face a lawsuit, and disclosure might require a debit to 
a loss account and a credit to an estimated liability. 
But the court might view the making of this entry 
as an admission of liability, which could adversely 
affect the outcome of the suit. The firm should debit 
expense or loss for the expected loss, as required by 
SFAS No. 5 (Codification Topic 450), but need not use 
such accurate account titles that the court can spot an 
admission of liability.
adjunct account An account that accumulates additions 
to another account. For example, Premium on Bonds 
Payable is adjunct to the liability Bonds Payable; the 
effective liability is the sum of the two account bal-
ances at a given date. Contrast with contra account.
adjusted An adjective often used in accounting (see next 
several entries) whose meaning changes from term to 
term. There typically are no standard adjustments, so 
when you see this word in a financial term, you should 
seek out how the number presented differs from the 
unadjusted version. Our search of the FASB Web site 
yielded over 75 instances of the word “adjusted” in 
various contexts.
adjusted acquisition (historical) cost Sometimes said of the 
carrying value of a plant asset, that is, acquisition cost 
less accumulated depreciation. Also, cost adjusted to 
a constant-dollar amount to reflect general price-level 
changes.
adjusted bank balance of cash The balance shown on the 
statement from the bank plus or minus amounts, such 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

739
Glossary
of errors. U.S. GAAP does not include this concept in 
its pure form.
allocate, allocation As a verb, to divide or spread a cost 
from one account into several accounts, to several 
products or activities, or to several periods. As a noun, 
a spreading of costs to accounts or to products or to 
periods.
allocation base The systematic method that assigns joint 
costs to cost objectives. For example, a firm might 
assign the cost of a truck to periods based on miles 
driven during the period; the allocation base is miles. 
Or the firm might assign the cost of a factory supervi-
sor to a product based on direct labor hours; the allo-
cation base is direct labor hours.
allocation of income taxes See deferred income tax.
allowance A balance sheet contra account generally used 
for receivables and depreciable assets. See sales (or 
purchase) allowance for another use of this term.
allowance for funds used during construction In account-
ing for public utilities, a revenue account credited for 
implicit interest earnings on shareholders’ equity bal-
ances. One principle of public utility regulation and 
rate setting requires that customers should pay the 
full costs of producing the services (for example, elec-
tricity) that they use, nothing more and nothing less. 
Thus, an electric utility must capitalize into an asset 
account the full costs, but no more, of producing a 
new electric power-generating plant. One of the costs 
of building a new plant is the interest cost on cash tied 
up during construction. If funds are explicitly bor-
rowed by an ordinary business, the journal entry for 
interest of $1,000 is typically:
Interest Expense. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000
 
Interest Payable. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
Interest expense for the period.
 
If the firm is constructing a new plant, then another 
entry would be made, capitalizing interest into the 
plant-under-construction account:
Construction Work-in-Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
750
 
Interest Expense  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
750
Capitalize relevant portion of interest relating 
to construction work in progress into the asset 
account.
 
 
The cost of the plant asset increases; when the firm 
uses the plant, it charges depreciation. The interest will 
become an expense through the depreciation process 
in the later periods of use, not currently as the firm 
pays for interest. Thus, the firm reports the full cost 
of the electricity generated during a given period as 
expense in that period. But suppose, as is common, 
that the electric utility does not explicitly borrow the 
funds but uses some of its own funds, including funds 
raised from equity issues as well as from debt. Even 
though the firm incurs no explicit interest expense or 
other explicit expense for capital, the funds have an 
affiliated company A company controlling or controlled 
by another company. Some users of this term mean 
significant influence, not control.
AFS; Available for Sale See Available for Sale (Securities).
after closing Post-closing; a trial balance at the end of the 
period.
after cost A term sometimes used for estimated expenses.
AG (Aktiengesellschaft) Germany: the form of a Ger-
man company whose shares can trade on the stock 
exchange.
agency cost The cost to the principal caused by agents 
pursuing their own interests instead of the principal’s 
interests. Includes both the costs incurred by prin-
cipals to control agents’ actions and the cost to the 
principals if agents pursue their own interests that are 
not in the interest of the principals.
agency fund An account for assets received by governmen-
tal units in the capacity of trustee or agent.
agency theory A branch of economics relating the behavior 
of principals (such as owner non-managers or bosses) 
and that of their agents (such as non-owner managers 
or subordinates). The principal assigns responsibility 
and authority to the agent, but the agent’s own risks 
and preferences differ from those of the principal. The 
principal cannot observe all activities of the agent. 
Both the principal and the agent must consider the 
differing risks and preferences in designing incentive 
contracts.
agent One authorized to transact business, including exe-
cuting contracts, for another.
aging accounts receivable; aging-of-accounts receivable 
procedure The process of classifying accounts receiv-
able by the time elapsed since the claim came into 
existence for the purpose of estimating the amount of 
uncollectible accounts receivable as of a given date. See 
sales contra, estimated uncollectibles, and allowance 
for uncollectibles.
aging schedule A listing of accounts receivable, classified 
by age, used in aging accounts receivable.
AICPA (American Institute of Certified Public Accoun-
tants) The national organization that represents 
CPAs. See AcSEC. It oversees the writing and grad-
ing of the Uniform CPA Examination. Each state 
sets its own requirements for becoming a CPA in that 
state. See certified public accountant. Web site: www.
aicpa.org. While the AICPA once set many auditing 
and professional standards for public accountants, the 
PCAOB now regulates auditing of public companies 
and the profession.
all-capital earnings rate Rate of return on assets.
all-current method Foreign currency translation in which 
all financial statement items are translated at the cur-
rent exchange rate. Contrast with monetary–nonmon-
etary method.
all-inclusive (income) concept A concept that does not dis-
tinguish between operating and non-operating revenues 
and expenses. Thus, the only entries to retained earn-
ings are for net income and dividends. Under this con-
cept, the income statement reports all income, gains, 
and losses; thus, net income includes events usually 
reported as prior-period adjustments and as corrections 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

740
Glossary
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants See 
AICPA.
American Stock Exchange (AMEX) (ASE) A public mar-
ket where various corporate securities are traded.
AMEX American Stock Exchange.
amortization Strictly speaking, the process of liquidat-
ing or extinguishing (“bringing to death”) a debt with 
a series of payments to the creditor (or to a sinking 
fund). From that usage has evolved a related use 
involving the accounting for the payments themselves: 
amortization schedule for a mortgage, which is a table 
showing the allocation between interest and principal. 
The term has also come to mean writing off (“liqui-
dating”) the cost of an asset. In this context, it means 
the general process of allocating the acquisition cost of 
an asset either to the periods of benefit as an expense 
or to inventory accounts as a product cost. This is 
called depreciation for plant assets, depletion for wast-
ing assets (natural resources), and “amortization” for 
intangibles. SFAC No. 6 refers to amortization as “the 
accounting process of reducing an amount by periodic 
payments or write-downs.” The expressions “unam-
ortized debt discount or premium” and “to amortize 
debt discount or premium” relate to accruals, not to 
deferrals. The expressions “amortization of long-term 
assets” and “to amortize long-term assets” refer to 
deferrals, not accruals. Contrast with accretion.
amortization schedule A table that shows, period by 
period, the opening balance of an item, such as a 
bond payable (or bond investment held as asset), the 
interest expense (revenue) for the period (= beginning 
balance multiplied by the historical interest rate for 
this item), the cash payment (receipt for asset), and 
the ending balance (= beginning balance plus inter-
est expense (revenue) less cash paid (received)). Some 
amortization schedules have other columns of redun-
dant information.
amortized cost A measure required by SFAS No. 115 
(Codification Topic 320) for held-to-maturity securi-
ties. This amount results from applying the method 
described at effective interest method. The firm records 
the security at its initial cost and computes the effec-
tive interest rate for the security. Whenever the firm 
receives cash from the issuer of the security, or 
whenever the firm reaches the end of one of its own 
accounting periods (that is, reaches the time for its 
own adjusting entries), it takes the following steps. It 
multiplies the amount currently recorded on the books 
by the effective interest rate (which remains constant 
over the time the firm holds the security). It debits that 
amount to the debt security account and credits the 
amount to Interest Revenue. If the firm receives cash, 
it debits Cash and credits the debt security account. 
The firm re-computes the carrying value of the debt 
security as: the carrying value before these entries; 
plus the increase for the interest revenue; less the 
decrease for the cash received. The resulting amount 
is the amortized cost for the end of that period.
analysis of variances See variance analysis.
annual report (to shareholders) A report prepared once 
a year for shareholders and other interested parties. 
opportunity cost. Put another way, the plant under 
construction will not have lower economic cost just 
because the firm used its own cash rather than bor-
rowing. The public utility using its own funds, on 
which it would have to pay $750 of interest if it had 
explicitly borrowed the funds, will make the following 
entry:
Construction Work-in-Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . 
750
 
Allowance for Funds Used During 
 
 
Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
750
Recognition of interest, an opportunity cost, 
on own funds used.
 
The allowance account is a form of revenue, to appear 
on the income statement, and the firm will close it to 
Retained Earnings, increasing it. On the statement of 
cash flows it is an income or revenue item not producing 
funds, and so the firm must subtract it from net income 
in deriving cash provided by operations. SFAS No. 34 
(Codification Topic 835) specifically prohibits nonutil-
ity companies from capitalizing, into plant under con-
struction, the opportunity cost (interest) on their own 
funds used. See allowance method for the usual context 
of the word “allowance” as a contra-asset account.
allowance for uncollectibles (accounts receivable) A contra 
account that shows the estimated accounts receivable 
amount that the firm expects not to collect. When the 
firm uses such an allowance, the actual write-off of 
specific accounts receivable (debit allowance, credit 
specific customer’s account) does not affect reve-
nue or expense at the time of the write-off. The firm 
reduces revenue when it debits bad debt expense (or, 
our preference, a revenue contra account) and credits 
the allowance; the firm can base the amount of the 
credit to the allowance on a percentage of sales on 
account for a period of time or compute it from aging 
accounts receivable. This contra account enables the 
firm to show an estimated receivables amount that it 
expects to collect without identifying specific uncol-
lectible accounts. See allowance method.
allowance method; allowance method for uncollectibles; 
allowance method for warranties A method of attempt-
ing to match all expenses of a transaction with their 
associated revenues; usually involves a debit to expense 
and a credit to an estimated liability, such as for esti-
mated warranty expenditures, or a debit to a revenue 
(contra) account and a credit to an asset (contra) 
account, such as in some firms’ accounting for uncol-
lectible accounts. See allowance for uncollectibles for 
further explanation. When the firm uses the allow-
ance method for sales discounts, the firm records sales 
at gross invoice prices (not reduced by the amounts of 
discounts made available). The firm debits an estimate 
of the amount of discounts to be taken to a revenue 
contra account and credits an allowance account, 
shown contra to accounts receivable.
American Accounting Association (AAA) An organization 
primarily for academic accountants but open to all 
interested in accounting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

741
Glossary
appraisal method of depreciation The periodic depreciation 
charge that equals the difference between the begin-
ning-of-period and the end-of-period appraised values 
of the asset if that difference is positive. If negative, 
there is no charge. Not based on historical cost, this 
method is thus not generally accepted.
appreciation An increase in economic value caused by ris-
ing market prices for an asset. Contrast with accretion.
appropriated retained earnings See retained earnings, 
appropriated.
appropriation In governmental accounting, an expenditure 
authorized for a specified amount, purpose, and time.
appropriation account In governmental accounting, an 
account set up to record specific authorizations to 
spend. The governmental unit credits this account 
with appropriation amounts. At the end of the period, 
the unit closes to (debits) this account all expenditures 
during the period and all encumbrances outstanding at 
the end of the period.
approximate net realizable value method A method of 
assigning joint costs to joint products based on revenues 
minus additional processing costs of the end products.
ARB Accounting Research Bulletin.
arbitrage Strictly speaking, the simultaneous purchase in 
one market and sale in another of a security or com-
modity in hope of making a profit on price differences 
in the different markets. Often writers use this term 
loosely when a trader sells an item that is somewhat dif-
ferent from the item purchased; for example, the sale of 
shares of common stock and the simultaneous purchase 
of a convertible bond that is convertible into identical 
common shares. The trader hopes that the market will 
soon see that the similarities of the items should make 
them have equal market values. When the market val-
ues converge, the trader closes the positions and profits 
from the original difference in prices, less trading costs.
arbitrary Having no causation basis. Accounting theorists 
and practitioners often, properly, say, “Some cost 
allocations are arbitrary.” In that sense, the accoun-
tant does not mean that the allocations are capricious 
or haphazard but does mean that theory suggests no 
unique solution to the allocation problem at hand. 
Accountants require that arbitrary allocations be sys-
tematic, rational, and consistently followed over time.
arm’s length A transaction negotiated by unrelated par-
ties, with both acting in their own self-interests; the 
basis for a fair value estimation or computation.
arrears Cumulative dividends on preferred shares that the 
firm has not yet declared; overdue debt payments. See 
annuity in arrears for another context.
ARS Accounting Research Study.
articles of incorporation Document filed with state author-
ities by persons forming a corporation. When the state 
returns the document with a certificate of incorpora-
tion, the document becomes the corporation’s charter.
articulate The relation between any operating statement 
(for example, income statement or statement of cash 
flows) and comparative balance sheets, where the oper-
ating statement explains (or reconciles) the change 
in some major balance sheet category (for example, 
retained earnings or cash).
It includes a balance sheet, an income statement, a 
statement of cash flows, a reconciliation of changes 
in owners’ equity accounts, a summary of signifi-
cant accounting principles, other explanatory notes, 
the auditor’s report, and comments from manage-
ment about the year’s events. See 10-K and financial 
statements.
annuitant One who receives an annuity.
annuity A series of payments of equal amount, usually 
made at equally spaced time intervals.
annuity certain An annuity payable for a definite number 
of periods. Contrast with contingent annuity.
annuity due An annuity whose first payment occurs at 
the start of the first period. Contrast with annuity in 
arrears.
annuity in advance An annuity due.
annuity in arrears An ordinary annuity whose first pay-
ment occurs at the end of the first period.
annuity method of depreciation See compound interest 
depreciation.
antidilutive Said of a potentially dilutive security that will 
increase earnings per share if its holder exercises it or 
converts it into common stock. In computing diluted 
earnings per share, the firm must assume that hold-
ers of antidilutive securities will not exercise their 
options or convert securities into common shares. The 
opposite assumption would lead to increased reported 
earnings per share in a given period.
APB Accounting Principles Board of the AICPA. It set 
accounting principles from 1959 through 1973, issuing 
31 APB Opinions and 4 APB Statements. The FASB 
superseded the APB but retained the APB’s Opinions 
and Statements, although it has, by now, modified, or 
repealed, or amended many of them.
APB Opinion The name for the APB pronouncements 
that compose parts of generally accepted accounting 
principles; the APB issued 31 APB Opinions from 1962 
through 1973.
APB Statement The APB issued four APB Statements 
between 1962 and 1970. The Statements were approved 
by at least two-thirds of the board, but they state 
recommendations, not requirements. For example, 
Statement No. 3 (1969) suggested the publication of 
constant-dollar financial statements but did not require 
them.
APBs An abbreviation used for APB Opinions.
APIC Additional paid-in capital.
applied cost A cost that a firm has allocated to a depart-
ment, product, or activity; not necessarily based on 
actual costs incurred.
applied overhead Overhead costs charged to departments, 
products, or activities. Also called absorbed overhead.
appraisal In valuing an asset or liability, a process that 
involves expert opinion rather than evaluation of 
explicit market transactions.
appraisal costs In cost accounting, costs incurred to detect 
individual units of products that do not conform to 
specifications, including end-process sampling and 
field-testing. Also called detection costs. In other con-
texts, a term referring to the cost of an appraisal of 
land, or equipment, or a building.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

742
Glossary
users. The FASB describes accounting’s constituency 
as comprising preparers, attestors, and users.
attribute measured The particular attribute, such as cost 
or fair value reported in the balance sheet. When mak-
ing physical measurements, such as of a person, one 
needs to decide the units with which to measure, such 
as inches or centimeters or pounds or grams. One 
chooses the attribute height or weight independently 
of the measuring unit, English or metric. Conven-
tional accounting has used for many years historical 
cost as the attribute measured and nominal dollars 
as the measuring unit. Standard setters have moved 
toward using more fair value attributes. Some theo-
rists argue that accounting would better serve readers 
if it used constant dollars as the measuring unit. Some, 
including us, think accounting should change both 
the measuring unit and the attribute measured. One 
can measure the attribute historical cost in nominal 
dollars or in constant dollars. One can also measure 
the attribute fair value in nominal dollars or constant 
dollars. Choosing between the two attributes and the 
two measuring units implies four different accounting 
systems. Each of these four has its uses.
attribute(s) sampling The use of sampling technique in 
which the observer selects each item in the sample 
on the basis of whether it has a particular qualitative 
characteristic, in order to ascertain the rate of occur-
rence of this characteristic in the population. See also 
estimation sampling. Compare variables sampling. 
Example of attributes sampling: take a sample popu-
lation of people, note the fraction that is male (say, 
40%), and then infer that the entire population con-
tains 40% males. Example of variables sampling: take 
a sample population of people, observe the weight 
of each sample point, compute the mean of those 
sampled people’s weights (say, 160 pounds), and then 
infer that the mean weight of the entire population 
equals 160 pounds.
audit Systematic inspection of accounting records involving 
analyses, tests, and confirmations. See internal audit.
audit committee A committee of the board of directors of a 
corporation, usually comprising outside directors, who 
nominate the independent auditors and discuss the 
auditors’ work with them. If the auditors believe the 
shareholders should know about certain matters, the 
auditors first bring these matters to the attention of 
the audit committee; in the past, the auditors some-
times informally discussed the issues with management 
before they notified the audit committee.
Audit Guides See Industry Audit Guides.
audit opinion See opinion.
audit program The procedures followed by the auditor in 
carrying out the audit.
audit trail A reference accompanying an entry, or post, to 
an underlying source record or document. Efficiently 
checking the accuracy of accounting entries requires 
an audit trail. See cross-reference.
Auditing Research Monograph Publication series of the 
AICPA.
auditing standards Standards promulgated by the PCAOB 
or the AICPA, including general standards, standards 
ASE American Stock Exchange.
ASR Accounting Series Release.
assess To value property for the purpose of property taxa-
tion; to levy a charge on the owner of property for 
improvements thereto, such as for sewers or sidewalks. 
The taxing authority computes the assessment.
assessed valuation For real estate or other property, a dol-
lar amount that a government uses as a basis for levy-
ing taxes. The amount need not have some relation to 
market value.
asset definition and recognition SFAC No. 6 defines assets 
as “probable future economic benefits obtained or con-
trolled by a particular entity as a result of past transac-
tions. . . . An asset has three essential characteristics: 
(a) it embodies a probable future benefit that involves 
a capacity, singly or in combination with other assets, 
to contribute directly or indirectly to future net cash 
inflows, (b) a particular entity can obtain the benefit 
and control others’ access to it, and (c) the transaction 
or other event giving rise to the entity’s right to or 
control of the benefit has already occurred.” A foot-
note points out that “probable” means that which we 
can reasonably expect or believe but that is not certain 
or proved. You may understand condition (c) better if 
you think of it as requiring that a future benefit can-
not be an asset if it arises from an executory contract, 
a mere exchange of promises. Receiving a purchase 
order from a customer provides a future benefit, but 
it is an executory contract, so the order cannot be an 
asset. An asset may be tangible or intangible, short-
term (current) or long-term (noncurrent).
asset revaluation Under some circumstances, when the 
firm can readily observe market values, the IASB 
allows firms to increase the carrying value of assets to 
fair values. The matching credit is to other comprehen-
sive income for property, plant, and equipment (IAS 36, 
par. 39 and 40) and to profit and loss for investment 
property (IAS 40, par. 35). The FASB allows firms to 
increase the carrying value of financial assets to fair 
value; with the matching credit to income.
asset securitization Securitization.
asset turnover Net sales divided by average assets. See 
ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
assignment of accounts receivable Transfer of the legal 
ownership of an account receivable through its sale. 
Contrast with pledging accounts receivable, where the 
receivables serve as collateral for a loan.
at par A bond or preferred shares issued (or selling) at face 
amount.
ATB Accounting Terminology Bulletin, issued more than 
50 years ago by a committee of the organization that 
preceded the AICPA.
attachment The laying claim to the assets of a borrower 
(or debtor) by a lender (or creditor) when the bor-
rower has failed to pay debts on time.
attest An auditor’s rendering of an opinion that the finan-
cial statements are fair. Common usage calls this 
procedure the attest function of the CPA. See fair 
presentation.
attestor Typically independent CPAs, who audit financial 
statements prepared by management for the benefit of 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

743
Glossary
avoidable cost A cost that ceases if a firm discontinues 
an activity; an incremental or variable cost. See pro-
grammed cost.
B
backflush costing A method of allocating indirect costs 
and overhead; used by companies that hope to have 
zero or small work-in-process inventory at the end of 
the period. The method debits all product costs to cost 
of goods sold (or finished goods inventory) during the 
period. To the extent that work in process actually 
exists at the end of the period, the method then deb-
its work-in-process and credits cost of goods sold (or 
finished goods inventory). This method is “backflush” 
in the sense that costing systems ordinarily, but not 
in this case, allocate first to work-in-process and then 
forward to cost of goods sold or to finished goods. 
Here, the process allocates first to cost of goods sold 
(or finished goods) and then, later if necessary, to 
work-in-process.
backlog In financial reporting, orders for delivery at a 
future date. In managerial accounting, orders for 
which a firm has insufficient inventory on hand for 
current delivery and will fill in a later period.
backlog depreciation In current cost accounting, a prob-
lem arising for the accumulated depreciation on plant 
assets. Consider an asset costing $10,000 with a 
10-year life depreciated with the straight-line method. 
Assume that a similar asset has a current cost of 
$10,000 at the end of the first year but $12,000 at the 
end of the second year. Assume that the firm bases the 
depreciation charge on the average current cost dur-
ing the year, $10,000 for the first year and $11,000 
for the second. The depreciation charge for the first 
year is $1,000 and for the second is $1,100 (= 0.10 × 
$11,000), so the accumulated depreciation account is 
$2,100 after two years. Note that at the end of the sec-
ond year, the firm has used 20% of the asset’s future 
benefits, so the accounting records based on current 
costs must show a net carrying value of $9,600 (= 0.80 
× $12,000), which results only if accumulated depre-
ciation equals $2,400, so that carrying value equals 
$9,600 (= $12,000 – $2,400). But the sum of the 
depreciation charges equals only $2,100 (= $1,000 + 
$1,100). The journal entry to increase the accumulated 
depreciation account requires a credit to that account 
of $300. The backlog depreciation question arises: 
what account do we debit? Some theorists would debit 
an income account, and others would debit a bal-
ance sheet owners’ equity account without reducing 
 current-period earnings. The answer to the question 
of what to debit interrelates with how the firm records 
the holding gains on the asset. When the firm debits 
the asset account for $2,000 to increase the recorded 
amount from $10,000 to $12,000, it records a holding 
gain of $2,000 with a credit. Many theorists believe 
that whatever account the firm credits for the holding 
gain is the same account that the firm should debit for 
backlog depreciation. This is sometimes called catch-
up depreciation.
of field work, and standards of reporting. According to 
the AICPA, these standards “deal with the measures of 
the quality of the performance and the objectives to be 
attained” rather than with specific auditing procedures.
Auditing Standards Board AICPA operating committee 
that promulgates auditing rules for private companies. 
The PCAOB promulgates rules for public companies.
auditor Without a modifying adjective, usually refers to an 
external auditor—one who checks the accuracy, fair-
ness, and general acceptability of accounting records 
and statements and then attests to them. See internal 
auditor.
auditor’s opinion Auditor’s report.
auditor’s report The auditor’s statement of the work done 
and an opinion of the financial statements. The auditor 
usually gives unqualified (“clean”) opinions but may 
qualify them, or the auditor may disclaim an opinion 
in the report. Often called the “accountant’s report.” 
See adverse opinion.
AudSEC The former Auditing Standards Executive Com-
mittee of the AICPA, now functioning as the Auditing 
Standards Board.
authorized capital stock The number of shares of stock 
that a corporation can issue; specified by the articles 
of incorporation.
available for sale financial assets IFRS term for available 
for sale securities.
available for sale (securities) AFS Marketable securities a 
firm holds that are classified as neither trading secu-
rities nor held-to-maturity (debt) securities. This clas-
sification is important in SFAS No. 115 (Codification 
Topic 320), which requires the owner to carry market-
able equity securities on the balance sheet at market 
value, not at cost. Under SFAS No. 115 (Codifica-
tion Topic 320), the income statement reports hold-
ing gains and losses on trading securities but not on 
securities available for sale. The required accounting 
credits (debits) holding gains (losses) on securities 
available for sale to other comprehensive income. On 
sale, the firm reports realized gain or loss as the dif-
ference between the selling price and the original cost, 
for securities available for sale, and as the difference 
between the selling price and the carrying value at the 
beginning of the period of sale, for trading securi-
ties and for debt securities held to maturity. By their 
nature, however, the firm will only rarely sell held-to-
maturity debt securities. U.S. GAAP allows firms to 
elect to use the fair value option for SAS, as well as for 
trading securities and held-to-maturity securities.
average The arithmetic mean of a set of numbers; obtained 
by summing the items and dividing by the number of 
items.
average collection period of receivables See ratio and 
Exhibit 7.12.
average-cost flow assumption An inventory flow assump-
tion in which the cost of units equals the weighted 
average cost of the beginning inventory and purchases. 
See inventory equation.
average tax rate The rate found by dividing income tax 
expense by net income before taxes. Contrast with 
marginal tax rate and statutory tax rate.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

744
Glossary
requires relatively equal periodic payments with a 
large final payment. Usage calls the large final pay-
ment a “balloon” payment and the loan, a “balloon” 
loan. Although a coupon bond meets this definition, 
usage seldom, if ever, applies this term to bond loans.
bank balance The amount of the balance in a checking 
account shown on the bank statement. Compare with 
adjusted bank balance of cash, and see bank reconcili-
ation schedule.
bank prime rate See prime rate.
bank reconciliation schedule A schedule that explains 
the difference between the book balance of the cash 
in a bank account and the bank’s statement of that 
amount; takes into account the amount of items such 
as checks that have not cleared or deposits that have 
not been recorded by the bank, as well as errors made 
by the bank or the firm.
bank statement A statement sent by the bank to a checking 
account customer showing deposits, checks cleared, 
and service charges for a period, usually one month.
bankrupt Occurs when a company’s liabilities exceed its 
assets and the firm or one of its creditors has filed a 
legal petition that the bankruptcy court has accepted 
under the bankruptcy law. A bankrupt firm is usually, 
but need not be, insolvent.
bankruptcy The state or condition of being bankrupt.
bargain purchase Said of a purchase acquisition when the 
fair value of the net assets acquired exceeds the fair 
value of all consideration given. Both U.S. GAAP and 
IFRS require the acquirer to use the fair valuations 
for initial balance sheet amounts and recognize a gain 
in income for the period of acquisition for the excess 
of fair valuations over purchase price.
base stock method A method of inventory valuation that 
assumes that a firm must keep on hand at all times a 
minimum normal, or base, stock of goods for effec-
tive continuity of operations. The firm values this base 
quantity at acquisition cost of the inventory on hand 
in the earliest period when inventory was on hand. 
Firms may not use this method, either for financial 
reporting or for tax reporting, but most theorists con-
sider it to be the forerunner of the LIFO cost-flow 
assumption.
basic accounting equation Accounting equation.
basic cost-flow equation Cost-flow equation.
basic earnings per share (BEPS) Net income to holders of 
common shares, divided by the weighted average num-
ber of common shares outstanding during the period. 
Required by SFAS No. 128 (Codification Topic 260) 
and by IASB. Formerly called “primary earnings per 
share.”
basis Acquisition cost, or some substitute therefore, of an 
asset or liability used in computing gain or loss on dis-
position or retirement; attribute measured. This term 
appears in both financial and income tax reporting, 
but the basis of a given item need not be the same for 
both purposes.
basis point (bp) One one-hundredth (= 1/100). Terminology 
usually quotes interest rates in percentage terms, such 
as 5.60% or 5.67%. The difference between those two 
interest rates is described as “7 basis points” or 0.07%. 
bad debt An uncollectible account; see bad debt expense 
and sales contra, estimated uncollectibles.
bad debt expense The name for an account debited in 
both the allowance method for uncollectible accounts 
and the direct write-off method. Under the allowance 
method, some prefer to treat the account as a revenue 
contra, not as an expense, and give it an account title 
such as Uncollectible Accounts Adjustment.
bad debt recovery Collection, perhaps partial, of a specific 
account receivable previously written off as uncollect-
ible. If a firm uses the allowance method, it will usu-
ally credit the allowance account, assuming that it has 
correctly assessed the amount of bad debts but has 
merely misjudged the identity of one of the nonpaying 
customers. If the firm decides that its charges for bad 
debts have been too large, it will credit the Bad Debt 
Expense account. If the firm uses the direct write-off 
method, it will credit a revenue account.
bailout period In a capital budgeting context, the total time 
that elapses before accumulated cash inflows from a 
project, including the potential salvage value of assets 
at various times, equal or exceed the accumulated 
cash outflows. Contrast with payback period, which 
assumes completion of the project and uses terminal 
salvage value. Bailout, in contrast with payback, takes 
into account, at least to some degree, the present value 
of the cash flows after the termination date that the 
analyst is considering. The potential salvage value at 
any time includes some estimate of the flows that can 
occur after that time.
balance As a noun, the opening balance in an account, 
plus the amounts of increases, less the amounts of 
decreases. (In the absence of a modifying adjective, 
the term means closing balance, in contrast to open-
ing balance. The closing balance for a period becomes 
the opening balance for the next period.) As a verb, 
“balance” means to find the closing value described 
above or to correct an error in an account, so that its 
ending balance is correct.
balance sheet Statement of financial position that shows 
Total Assets = Total Liabilities + Owners’ equity. The 
balance sheet usually classifies Total Assets as (1) cur-
rent assets, (2) investments, (3) property, plant, and 
equipment, or (4) intangible assets. The balance sheet 
accounts composing Total Liabilities usually appear 
under the headings Current Liabilities and Long-
Term Liabilities.
balance sheet account An account that can appear on a 
balance sheet; a permanent account. Contrast with 
temporary account.
balance sheet equation Assets = Liabilities + Owners’ 
equity, or Assets = All Sources of Financing. In some 
countries: Assets – Liabilities = Owners’ Equity.
balanced scorecard A set of performance targets, not all 
expressed in dollar amounts, for setting an organiza-
tion’s goals for its individual employees or groups or 
divisions. A community relations employee might, for 
example, set targets in terms of number of employee 
hours devoted to local charitable purposes.
balloon Most mortgage and installment loans require rela-
tively equal periodic payments. Sometimes the loan 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

745
Glossary
Most public policy makers who address the subject 
think that fewer than four would pose issues of com-
petition and conflicts of interest, so that the number 
will not likely decline below four in the near future.
bill An invoice of charges and terms of sale for goods and 
services; also, a piece of currency.
bill of materials A specification of the quantities of direct 
materials that a firm expects to use to produce a given 
job or quantity of output.
blocked currency Currency that the holder, by law, cannot 
withdraw from the issuing country or exchange for the 
currency of another country.
board Board of directors.
board of directors The governing body of a corporation; 
elected by the shareholders.
bond A certificate to show evidence of debt. The par method 
is the principal or face amount of the bond payable at 
maturity. The coupon rate is the amount of the yearly 
payments divided by the principal amount. Until 1982, 
coupon bonds had coupons attached with perforations, 
that the holder could detach and redeem at stated 
dates. Increasingly, firms issue not coupon bonds but 
registered bonds; the firm or its agent keeps track of 
the owners of registered bonds. Normally, bonds call 
for semiannual payments. Physical coupons enabled 
some holders to engage in income tax evasion, so the 
tax authorities have outlawed physical coupon arrange-
ments. Even though bonds no longer have physical 
coupons, common terminology continues to refer to 
“coupon rate” as the amount of the yearly payments 
divided by the principal amount.
bond conversion The act of exchanging convertible bonds 
for preferred or common shares.
bond discount From the standpoint of the issuer of a bond 
at the issue date, the excess of the par method of a bond 
over its initial sales price and, at later dates, the excess 
of par over the sum of the following two amounts: 
initial issue price and the portion of discount already 
amortized; from the standpoint of a bondholder, the 
difference between par value and selling price when 
the bond sells below par.
bond indenture The contract between an issuer of bonds 
and the bondholders.
bond premium Exactly parallel to bond discount except 
that the issue price (or current selling price) exceeds 
par method.
bond ratings Corporate and municipal bond issue ratings, 
based on the issuer’s existing debt level, its previous 
record of payment, the coupon rate on the bonds, and 
the safety of the assets or revenues that are committed 
to paying off principal and interest. Moody’s Investors 
Service, Standard & Poor’s Corporation, and Fitch 
publish bond ratings: Moody’s top rating is Aaa; both 
Standard & Poor’s and Fitch use AAA for the top.
bond redemption Retirement of bonds.
bond refunding To incur debt, usually through the issue of 
new bonds, intending to use the proceeds to retire an 
outstanding bond issue.
bond sinking fund See sinking fund.
bond table A table showing the current price (as present 
values or percentages of par) of a bond as a function 
Why this term? Consider “interest rates increased by 
one percent.” Does this mean that 6.00% increased 
to 7.00% or from 6.00% to 6.06% (= 1.01 × 6%)? In 
order to avoid confusion, we say in the first case, inter-
est rates increased by 100 basis points and in the sec-
ond, by 6 basis points. Financial writers often extend 
this usage to other contexts involving decimals. For 
example, if the mean grade point average in the class 
is 3.25 and a given student scores 3.30, we might say 
that the student scored “5 basis points” above the class 
average. Some pronounce the abbreviation as “bip.”
basket purchase Purchase of a group of assets (and liabili-
ties) for a single price; the acquiring firm must assign 
costs to each item so that it can record the individual 
items with their separate amounts in the accounts.
batch-level activities Work required to ready equipment or 
people for a production run.
bear One who believes that security prices will fall. A 
“bear market” refers to a time when stock prices are 
generally declining. Contrast with bull.
bearer bond See registered bond for contrast and definition.
beginning inventory Measurement of inventory on hand at 
the beginning of the accounting period; equals ending 
inventory from the preceding period.
behavioral congruence Goal congruence.
benchmarking Process of measuring a firm’s performance, 
or products, or services against standards based on 
best levels of performance achievable or, sometimes, 
achieved by other firms.
benefit element in stock option On the exercise date of a 
stock option, the excess of market price of the stock 
over the exercise price; same as intrinsic value.
BEPS Basic earnings per share.
betterment An improvement, usually capitalized, not 
expensed.
bid An offer to purchase; the amount of an offer to 
purchase.
bid-ask spread The range in prices between the maximum 
the buyer of an item is willing to pay and the mini-
mum the seller is willing to accept. If the buyer’s max-
imum exceeds the seller’s minimum, then the parties 
will not transact.
Big 4; Final 4 The four largest U.S. public accounting part-
nerships; in alphabetical order: Deloitte & Touche; 
Ernst & Young; KPMG Peat Marwick; and  Price-
waterhouseCoopers. See Big N.
big bath A write-off of a substantial amount of costs pre-
viously treated as assets; usually occurs when a cor-
poration drops a business line that earlier required a 
large investment but that proved to be unprofitable. 
The term is sometimes used to describe a situation 
in which a corporation takes a large write-off in one 
period in order to free later periods of gradual write-
offs of those amounts. In this sense, it frequently 
occurs when the top management of the firm changes.
Big N The largest U.S. public accounting partnerships. 
When we first prepared this glossary, there were eight 
such partnerships, referred to as the “Big 8.” See Big 
4. The term “Big N” came into use when various of 
the Big 8 proposed to merge with each other and the 
ultimate number of large partnerships was in doubt. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

746
Glossary
bottleneck An operation in which the work to be per-
formed equals or exceeds the available capacity, thus 
holding up further operations.
branch A sales office or other unit of an enterprise physi-
cally separated from the home office of the enterprise 
but not organized as a legally separate subsidiary. 
Writers seldom use this term to refer to manufactur-
ing units.
branch accounting An accounting procedure that enables 
the firm to report the financial position and operations 
of each branch separately but later combine them for 
published statements.
brand; brand name See trademark and trademark right.
breakeven A measure of activity at which revenues or 
other inflows equal some measure of costs of other 
outflows.
breakeven analysis See breakeven chart.
breakeven chart Two kinds of breakeven charts appear 
here. The charts use the following information for one 
month. Revenue is $30 per unit.
Cost Classification
Variable Cost, 
Per Unit
Fixed Cost, 
Per Month
Manufacturing costs:
Direct material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$ 4
—
Direct labor  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  9
—
Overhead. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  4
$3,060
 
 
Total manufacturing costs. . . . .
$17
$3,060
Selling, general, and 
 
administrative costs  . . . . . . . . . .
  5
 1,740
 
 
Total costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$22
$4,800
 
The cost-volume-profit graph presents the relation 
between changes in volume to the amount of profit, 
or income. Such a graph shows total revenue and total 
costs for each volume level, and the user reads profit or 
loss at any volume directly from the chart. The profit–
volume graph does not show revenues and costs but 
more readily indicates profit (or loss) at various output 
levels. Keep in mind two caveats about these graphs:
 
1.  Although the curve depicting variable cost and 
total cost appears as a straight line for its entire 
length, at low or high levels of output, variable 
cost will probably differ from $22 per unit. The 
variable cost figure usually results from studies of 
operations at some broad central area of produc-
tion, called the relevant range. The chart will not 
usually provide accurate results for low (or high) 
levels of activity. For this reason, the total cost and 
the profit–loss curves sometimes appear as dotted 
lines at lower (or higher) volume levels.
 
2.  This chart, simplistically, assumes a single-prod-
uct firm. For a multi-product firm, the horizontal 
axis would have to be stated in dollars rather than 
in physical units of output. Breakeven charts for 
multi-product firms necessarily assume that the 
firm sells constant proportions of the several prod-
ucts, so that changes in this mixture, as well as in 
costs or selling prices, invalidate such a chart.
of the coupon rate, current (remaining) term maturity, 
and effective yield to maturity (or effective rate). In 
the financial press, a bond table shows for each bond 
issue, the issuer, coupon, maturity date, bid price, and 
yield percentage based on the bid price. Some bond 
tables include the ask price.
Bonds Payable An account title for the liability resulting 
from the obligation arising from a bond issue.
bonus Premium over normal wage or salary, paid usually 
for meritorious performance.
bonus method One of two methods to recognize an excess, 
say, $10,000, when a partnership admits a new partner 
and when the new partner’s capital account is to show 
an amount larger than the amount of tangible assets 
that he or she contributes. First, the old partners may 
transfer $10,000 from themselves to the new partner. 
This is the bonus method. Second, the partnership 
may recognize goodwill in the amount of $10,000, 
with the credit to the new partner’s capital account. 
This is the goodwill method. (Notice that the new part-
ner’s percentage of total ownership differs under the 
two methods.) If the new partner’s capital account is 
to show an amount smaller than the tangible assets 
that he or she contributed, then the old partners will 
receive bonus or goodwill, depending on the method.
book As a verb, to record a transaction; as a noun, usu-
ally plural, the journals and ledgers; as an adjective, 
see book value.
book cost Book value.
book inventory An inventory amount that results not from 
physical count but from the amount of beginning 
inventory plus invoice amounts of net purchases less 
invoice amounts of requisitions or withdrawals; implies 
a perpetual inventory method.
book of original entry Journal.
book value Formerly, a nontechnical term describing the 
balance sheet amount for an item, such as an asset or 
total owners’ equity. It often referred to amortized cost 
of a debt a firm issued or of a fixed-income security 
the firm held as an asset. It also refers to the histori-
cal cost of a fixed asset, less accumulated depreciation. 
Accounting standards, such as SFAS 115 (Codification 
Topic 320), often require, or allow, the firm to show 
items at fair value. The balance sheet amount of an 
item can now mean the fair value of that item, such 
as a marketable security classified as available for sale. 
Thus, the “book value” of a marketable security avail-
able for sale is also the fair value of the security. Of a 
firm, it continues to refer to the excess of total assets 
over total liabilities; net assets, or owners’ equity. 
Contrast with carrying amount.
book value per share of common stock Common sharehold-
ers’ equity divided by the number of shares of com-
mon stock outstanding.
bookkeeping The process of analyzing and recording 
transactions in the accounting records.
boot The additional cash paid (or received), along with 
a used item, in a trade-in or exchange transaction for 
another item. See trade-in.
borrower See loan.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

747
Glossary
bull One who believes that security prices will rise. A “bull 
market” refers to a time when stock prices are gener-
ally rising. Contrast with bear.
burden See overhead costs.
burn rate A new business usually begins life with cash-
absorbing operating losses but with a limited amount 
of cash. Analysts use the “burn rate” to measure how 
long the new business can survive before operating 
losses must stop or the firm must receive a new infu-
sion of cash. Writers usually express the burn rate as 
dollars used per month.
business A set of activities comprising inputs, processes 
applied to the inputs, and outputs sold to generate rev-
enues. To be a business, the set must include all the 
preceding, except that a unit can be a business if it can 
easily acquire the missing pieces, or if it is a startup 
that expects to acquire the missing pieces.
business combination As defined in FASB Statement No. 
141R (Codification Topic 805), a transaction or other 
event in which an acquirer obtains control of one or 
more businesses. The new entity will account for the 
merger with the acquisition method. See conglomerate.
business entity Entity; accounting entity.
business model In classic usage, a model represents a struc-
ture: a model railroad, a model house, a model car, 
a mathematical model. Modern business terminology 
often uses “business model” to mean the structure 
itself, an implementation of a business strategy. One 
classic case is the “bait and hook” model, where the 
company sells for low prices some basic device, such 
as a razor or cell phone, and then sells the critical non-
durable components, such as razor blades and air time 
minutes, at high prices. More recently, some retailers 
implement a “bricks and clicks” model, with both 
physical and online stores.
BV (besloten vennootschap) Netherlands: a private limited-
liability company.
bylaws The rules adopted by the shareholders of a corpo-
ration; specify the general methods for carrying out 
the functions of the corporation.
by-product A joint product whose sales value is so small 
relative to the sales value of the other joint product(s) 
that it does not receive normal accounting treatment. 
The costs assigned to by-products reduce the costs of 
the main product(s). Accounting allocates by-products 
a share of joint costs such that the expected gain or 
loss at their sale is zero. Thus, by-products appear in 
the accounts at net realizable value.
C
C corporation In tax terminology, a corporation paying its 
own income taxes. Contrast with S corporation.
CA Chartered accountant.
call (option) An option to buy shares of a publicly traded 
corporation at a fixed price during a fixed time span. 
Contrast with put.
call premium See callable bond.
call price See callable bond. The price of a call option.
breakeven point The volume of sales required so that total 
revenues equals total costs; may be expressed in units 
(fixed costs + contribution per unit) or in sales dollars 
[selling price per unit × (fixed costs + contribution 
per unit)].
breakeven time Time required before the firm recovers the 
amounts it invested in developing a new product.
budget A financial plan that a firm uses to estimate the 
results of future operations; frequently used to help 
control future operations. In governmental opera-
tions, budgets often become the law. See standard 
costs for further elaboration and contrast.
budgetary accounts In governmental accounting, the 
accounts that reflect estimated operations and finan-
cial condition, as affected by estimated revenues, 
appropriations, and encumbrances. Contrast with pro-
prietary accounts, which record the transactions.
budgetary control Management of governmental (non-
governmental) unit in accordance with an official 
(approved) budget in order to keep total expenditures 
within authorized (planned) limits.
budgeted cost; budgeted fixed cost; budgeted variable cost 
See standard costs for definition and contrast.
budgeted statements Pro forma statements prepared before 
the event or period occurs.
$40,000
30,000
20,000
18,000
10,000
4,800
0
300
600
900
1,200
Fixed Costs
Revenue
Breakeven
Point
Variable Costs
($22 per Unit)
Total
Cost
Revenue
($30 per Unit)
Total
Cost
Revenue and Costs
during Month
Units Sold during Month
Profit
Loss
(a) Cost-Volume-Profit Graph
$6,000
4,800
4,000
2,000
2,000
4,000
0
0
300
600
900
1,200
Breakeven
Point
Profit-Loss Line
Profit
Loss
Profit or Loss
during Month
Units Sold during Month
(b) Profit-Volume Graph
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

748
Glossary
The confusion is so prevalent that we tend to avoid 
using the word, except to mean shareholders’ equity.
capital asset A term used by the IRS to designate the 
kinds of property that qualify for taxation at a capi-
tal gains tax rate, which is lower than the tax rate for 
ordinary income. Lower capital gains rates primarily 
relate to individuals. The IRS designates the following 
as capital assets: stocks and bonds, a home owned and 
occupied by the taxpayer, timber on home property 
or investment property, even if the individual makes 
sales of the timber, household furnishings, a car used 
for pleasure or commuting, coin or stamp collections, 
gems and jewelry, and gold, silver, and other metals. 
The IRS excludes from capital gains taxation, prop-
erty that the taxpayer acquires to generate income as a 
business, such as: cash, inventoriable assets, goods held 
primarily for sale, most depreciable property, real 
estate, receivables, and certain intangibles. Sometimes 
writers use this term imprecisely to describe plant and 
equipment, which are clearly not capital assets under 
the income tax definition. Writers often use the term 
to refer to an investment in securities.
capital budget Plan of proposed outlays for acquiring long-
term assets and the means of financing the acquisition.
capital budgeting The process of choosing investment proj-
ects for an enterprise by considering the present value 
of cash flows and deciding how to raise the funds the 
investment requires.
capital consumption allowance The term used for depre-
ciation expense in national income accounting and the 
reporting of funds in the economy.
capital contributed in excess of par (or stated) value A 
preferred title for the account that shows the amount 
received by the issuer for capital stock in excess of par 
(or stated) value. Often called additional paid-in capital 
or APIC.
capital expenditure (outlay) An expenditure to acquire 
long-term assets.
capital gain The excess of proceeds over cost, or other 
basis, from the sale of a capital asset as defined by the 
Internal Revenue Code. If the taxpayer has held the 
capital asset for a sufficiently long time before sale, 
then the gain is taxed at a rate lower than that used 
for other gains and ordinary income.
capital lease (method) A lease treated by the lessee as 
both the borrowing of funds and the acquisition of an 
asset to be amortized. The lessee (tenant) recognizes 
both the liability and the asset on its balance sheet. 
Expenses consist of interest on the debt and amortiza-
tion of the asset. The lessor (landlord) treats the lease 
as the sale of the asset in return for a series of future 
cash receipts. Same as financing lease (method) as used 
by IFRS. Contrast with operating lease.
capital loss A negative capital gain; see capital gain.
capital rationing In a capital budgeting context, the impo-
sition of constraints on the amounts of total capital 
expenditures in each period.
capital stock The ownership shares of a corporation. Con-
sists of all classes of common and preferred shares.
callable bond A bond for which the issuer reserves the right 
to pay a specific amount, the call price, to retire the 
obligation at specified times before its maturity date. 
If the issuer agrees to pay more than the face amount 
of the bond when called, the excess of the payment 
over the face amount is the call premium.
callable preferred shares Refer to the definition of callable 
bond and substitute the word “shares” for “bond.” 
Also, in the context of preferred shares, we’d use the 
word “issue” not “obligation.”
called-up share capital United Kingdom: common stock at 
par method.
Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants (CICA) 
The national organization that represents chartered 
accountants in Canada. Web site: www.cica.ca.
cancelable lease See lease.
CAP Committee on Accounting Procedure.
capacity Stated in units of product, the amount that a firm 
can produce per unit of time; stated in units of input, 
such as direct labor hours, the amount of input that 
a firm can use in production per unit of time. A firm 
uses this measure of output or input in allocating fixed 
costs if the amounts producible are normal, rather 
than maximum, amounts.
capacity cost A fixed cost incurred to provide a firm with 
the capacity to produce or to sell. Consists of standby 
costs and enabling costs. Contrast with programmed 
costs.
capacity variance Production volume variance.
capital Owners’ equity in a business; often used, equally 
correctly, to mean the total assets of a business; some-
times used to mean long-term assets. Sometimes used to 
mean funds raised or all assets or long-term financing. 
This word causes confusion in accounting and finance. 
Uninformed users mix up the funds (and their uses) 
with the sources of the funds. Consider the following 
transactions. A firm raises $100 cash by issuing shares 
and uses the $100 to acquire inventory and plant assets. 
Did the investor “invest capital” of $100 or did the firm 
“invest capital” of $100 or both? You will hear “invest 
capital” used for both sides of that transaction. Now 
focus on the firm who issued the shares and received 
the cash. Some would say the first transaction, the 
issue of shares, “raised capital.” (If you ask of a per-
son who answers this way, “What is the capital, the 
increase in owners’ equity or the increased cash?” you 
will not get a clear answer, consistent across all such 
people.) Others would say only the second transaction, 
spending the cash, raised capital and only then for 
the plant assets, not the inventory. When a regulator 
focuses on a bank’s capital ratios, it looks to the right-
hand side of the balance sheet, not to how the firm 
has invested its funds. Sometimes bank regulators will 
take the owners’ equity total and subtract from that 
amount the amount of intangible assets, resulting in 
a total with no clear conception, which they call “tan-
gible capital.” See cost of capital for further discussion 
of the confusion between the cost of raising funds and 
the return to, or opportunity cost of, investing funds. 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

749
Glossary
Policy, itself a part of the Office of Management and 
Budget, part of the Executive Office of the President 
of the United States.
cash Currency and coins, negotiable checks, and balances 
in bank accounts. For the statement of cash flows, 
“cash” also includes cash equivalents.
cash basis of accounting In contrast to the accrual basis of 
accounting, a system of accounting in which a firm rec-
ognizes revenues when it receives cash and recognizes 
expenses as it makes disbursements. The firm makes 
no attempt to match revenues and expenses in mea-
suring income. See modified cash basis.
cash budget A schedule of expected cash receipts and 
disbursements.
cash change equation For any period, the change in cash 
equals the change in liabilities plus the change in own-
ers’ equity minus the change in non-cash assets.
cash collection basis The installment method for recogniz-
ing revenue. Do not confuse with the cash basis of 
accounting.
cash conversion cycle Cash cycle.
cash cycle The period of time during which a firm con-
verts cash into inventories, inventories into accounts 
receivable, and receivables back into cash. Sometimes 
called earnings cycle or operating cycle.
cash disbursements journal A specialized journal used to 
record expenditures by cash and by check. If a check 
register is also used, a cash disbursements journal 
records only expenditures of currency and coins.
cash discount A sales or purchase price reduction allowed 
for prompt payment.
cash dividend See dividend.
cash equivalent value A term used to describe the amount 
for which an asset could be sold. Sometimes called 
fair value, market value, or fair market value.
cash equivalents According to SFAS No. 95 (Codifica-
tion Topic 230), “short-term, highly liquid investments 
that are both readily convertible to known amounts 
of cash [and] so near their maturity that they pres-
ent insignificant risk of changes in value because of 
changes in interest rates. . . . Examples of items com-
monly considered to be cash equivalents are Treasury 
bills, commercial paper, [and] money market funds.”
cash flow Cash receipts minus disbursements from a given 
asset, or group of assets, for a given period. Financial 
analysts sometimes use this term to mean net income 
+ depreciation + depletion + amortization. See also 
operating cash flow and free cash flow.
cash flow from financing activities Section of statement 
of cash flows reporting cash inflows related to raising 
funds through issues of securities and cash outflows 
related to retiring securities and for paying dividends.
cash flow from investing activities Section of statement of 
cash flows reporting cash outflows related to acquisi-
tions of non-operating assets, such as property, plant, 
equipment, investments, and intellectual property pur-
chased from others, and inflows related to selling these.
cash flow from operations Receipts from customers and 
from investments, less expenditures for inventory, labor, 
capital stock contract The legal document stating the agree-
ments between the corporation and its shareholders.
capital structure The composition of a corporation’s equi-
ties; the relative proportions of short-term debt, long-
term debt, and owners’ equity.
capital structure leverage ratio See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
capital surplus An inferior term for capital contributed in 
excess of par (or stated) value.
capitalization of a corporation A term used by investment 
analysts to indicate shareholders’ equity plus bonds 
outstanding.
capitalization of earnings The process of estimating the 
fair value of a firm by computing the net present value 
of the predicted net income (not cash flows) of the firm 
for the future. If one assumes that the future amounts 
are constant and persist forever, then one divides the 
annual amount by the discount rate. See perpetuity.
capitalization rate An interest rate used to convert a series 
of payments or receipts or earnings into a single pres-
ent value.
capitalize To record an expenditure that may benefit 
a future period as an asset rather than to treat the 
expenditure as an expense of the period of its occur-
rence. Whether expenditures for advertising or for 
research and development should be capitalized is 
controversial, but SFAS No. 2 (Codification Topic 
730) forbids capitalizing R&D costs. We believe U.S. 
GAAP should allow firms to capitalize expenditures 
when they lead to future benefits and thus meet the 
criterion to be an asset.
carryback, carryforward, carryover The use of losses or 
tax credits in one period to reduce income taxes pay-
able in other periods. Two common kinds of carry-
backs exist: for net operating losses and for capital 
losses. They apply against taxable income. Different 
tax jurisdictions have different rules for the length of 
the carryback and carryforward periods.
carrying cost Costs (such as property taxes and insurance) 
of holding, or storing, inventory from the time of pur-
chase until the time of sale or use.
carrying value (amount) The balance sheet amount of an 
item. Can be an acquisition cost, an amortized acquisi-
tion cost, or a fair value. Whereas the term is synony-
mous with book value with respect to a single balance 
sheet item, when one refers the total amount of own-
ers’ equity of a firm, or that amount per share, com-
mon terminology uses only “book value” or “book 
value per share.”
CASB (Cost Accounting Standards Board) A board autho-
rized by the U.S. Congress to “promulgate cost-
accounting standards designed to achieve uniformity 
and consistency in the cost-accounting principles 
followed by defense contractors and subcontractors 
under federal contracts.” The principles the CASB 
promulgated since 1970 have considerable weight in 
practice wherever the FASB has not established a 
standard. Congress allowed the CASB to go out of 
existence in 1980 but reinstated it in 1990. It is a func-
tion located within the Office of Federal Procurement 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

750
Glossary
central corporate expenses General overhead expenses 
incurred in running the corporate headquarters and 
related supporting activities of a corporation. Account-
ing treats these expenses as period expenses. Contrast 
with manufacturing overhead. Line-of-business report-
ing must decide how to treat these expenses—whether 
to allocate them to the individual segments and, if so, 
how to allocate them.
central processing unit (CPU) The computer system com-
ponent that carries out the arithmetic, logic, and data 
transfer.
certificate The document that is the physical embodiment 
of a bond or a share of stock; a term sometimes used 
for the auditor’s report.
certificate of deposit A form of deposit in a bank or thrift 
institution. Federal law constrains the rate of inter-
est that banks can pay to their depositors. Current 
law allows banks to pay a rate higher than the one 
allowed on a time deposit if the depositor promises 
to leave funds on deposit for several months or more. 
When the bank receives such funds, it issues a certifi-
cate of deposit. The depositor can withdraw the funds 
before maturity by paying a penalty.
certified check The check of a depositor drawn on a bank. 
The bank inserts the words “accepted” or “certified” 
on the face of the check, with the date and a signature 
of a bank official. The check then becomes an obliga-
tion of the bank. Compare with cashier’s check.
certified financial statement A financial statement attested 
to by an independent auditor who is a CPA or who 
hold a similar certification such as CA.
certified internal auditor See CIA.
certified management accountant CMA.
certified public accountant (CPA) An accountant who has 
satisfied the statutory and administrative requirements 
of his or her jurisdiction to be registered or licensed as 
a public accountant. In addition to passing the Uni-
form CPA Examination administered by the AICPA, 
the CPA must meet certain educational, experience, 
and moral requirements that differ from jurisdiction 
to jurisdiction. The jurisdictions are the 50 states, the 
District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the 
Virgin Islands.
CFA Chartered Financial Analyst.
CGA (Certified General Accountant) Canada: an accoun-
tant who has satisfied the experience, education, and 
examination requirements of the Certified General 
Accountants’ Association.
chain discount A series of discount percentages. For exam-
ple, if a chain discount of 10% and 5% is quoted, then 
the actual, or invoice, price is the nominal, or list, 
price times 0.90 times 0.95, or 85.5%, of invoice price.
change fund Coins and currency issued to cashiers, deliv-
ery drivers, and so on.
change in accounting principle See accounting changes.
change in estimates See accounting changes.
changes, accounting See accounting changes.
changes in financial position See statement of cash flows.
channel stuffing Assume a company’s ordinary prac-
tices record revenue when it ships to customers goods 
and services used in the usual activities of the firm, less 
interest expenditures. See statement of cash flows and 
operations. Same as cash provided by operations.
cash flow from operations to current liabilities ratio See 
ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
cash flow from operations to total liabilities ratio See ratio 
and Exhibit 7.12.
cash flow hedge A hedge of an exposure to variability in 
the cash flows of a recognized asset or liability or of a 
forecasted transaction, such as expected future foreign 
sales. The cash flows hedged do not themselves appear 
on the balance sheet. The hedging instrument itself is a 
marketable security and appears on the balance sheet 
at fair value. If the firm uses hedge accounting and 
the hedging instrument is highly effective, then it will 
be able to report in other comprehensive income the 
gains and losses, so these amounts will not appear in 
periodic net income until the firm settles or closes the 
hedging instrument.
cash flow statement Statement of cash flows.
cash-generating unit IFRS term for reporting unit in U.S. 
GAAP, which is a segment or a component of a seg-
ment that is a business with separate financial infor-
mation that management regularly reviews.
cash provided by operations An important subtotal in the 
statement of cash flows. This amount equals revenues 
producing cash minus expenses requiring cash. Often, 
the amount appears as net income plus expenses not 
requiring cash (such as depreciation charges) minus 
revenues not producing cash (such as revenues rec-
ognized under the equity method of accounting for a 
long-term investment). The statement of cash flows 
maintains the same distinctions between continuing 
operations, discontinued operations, and income or loss 
from extraordinary items as does the income statement.
cash receipts journal A specialized journal used to record 
all receipts of cash.
cash (surrender) value of life insurance An amount equal 
not to the face value of the policy to be paid in the 
event of death but to the amount that the owner 
could realize by immediately canceling the policy and 
returning it to the insurance company for cash. A firm 
owning a life insurance policy reports it as an asset at 
an amount equal to this value.
cash yield See yield.
cashier’s check A bank’s own check drawn on itself and 
signed by the cashier or other authorized official. It is 
a direct obligation of the bank. Compare with certi-
fied check.
catch-up depreciation Backlog depreciation.
cause-and-effect analysis An identification of poten-
tial causes of defects and taking actions to cure the 
problem found. To use this analysis, first define the 
effect and then identify the causes of the problem. 
The potential causes fall into four categories: human 
factors, methods and design factors, machine-related 
factors, and materials or components factors. As man-
agement identifies the prevailing causes, it develops 
and implements corrective measures.
CCA Current cost accounting; current value accounting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

751
Glossary
including experience, ethics, education, and passing 
examinations.
CICA Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants.
CIF (cost, insurance, and freight) In contracts, a term used 
along with the name of a given port, such as New 
Orleans, to indicate that the quoted price includes 
insurance, handling, and freight charges up to delivery 
by the seller at the given port.
circulating capital Working capital.
clean opinion See auditor’s report.
clean surplus concept The notion that all entries to the 
retained earnings account must record net income and 
dividends. See comprehensive income. Contrast with 
current operating performance concept. This concept, 
with minor exceptions, now controls U.S. GAAP. A 
parallel concept provides guidance in understanding 
OCI and AOCI. All entries to AOCI must come from 
closing an OCI account. Over the life of a transaction, 
AOCI will have a zero balance as all initial increases 
to AOCI will be later offset by decreases and vice 
versa.
clearing account An account containing amounts to be 
transferred to another account(s) before the end of the 
accounting period. Examples are the income summary 
account (whose balance transfers to retained earnings) 
and the purchases account (whose balance transfers to 
inventory or to cost of goods sold).
close As a verb, to transfer the balance of a temporary or 
contra or adjunct account to the main account to which 
it relates; for example, to transfer revenue and expense 
accounts directly, or through the income summary 
account, to an owners’ equity account or to transfer 
purchase discounts to purchases.
closed account An account with equal debits and credits, 
usually as a result of a closing entry.
closing entries (process) The entries that accomplish the 
transfer of balances in temporary accounts to the related 
balance sheet accounts. See close. See work sheet.
closing inventory Ending inventory.
CMA (Certified Management Accountant) certificate 
Awarded by the Institute of Certified Management 
Accountants of the Institute of Management Accountants 
to those who pass a set of examinations and meet cer-
tain experience and continuing-education requirements.
CoCoA Continuously Contemporary Accounting.
Codification (Project) The FASB has issued a compila-
tion of U.S. GAAP, including Statements of Financial 
Accounting standards, Accounting Principles Board 
Opinions, Accounting Research Bulletins, Staff Account-
ing Bulletins, EITF Consensuses, FASB Interpretations, 
and several other sorts of pronouncements. This com-
pilation, which organizes the material by topic, brings 
together into one place the various accounting methods 
and procedures that treat that topic. The codification 
does not include Statements of Financial Accounting 
Concepts, so it omits definitions of such fundamental 
concepts as asset and revenue. The codification does 
not contain the Basis for Conclusions, the nonauthori-
tative portion of authoritative guidance that describes 
the Board’s reasoning in arriving at its conclusions.
previously ordered. A company engaging in channel 
stuffing will ship goods not yet ordered but record 
them as sales, as though a real customer had ordered 
them. It might even get permission from the customer 
to ship, saying it will not bill the customer until next 
period and that the customer will get its usual grace 
period to pay the bill starting from that later date, next 
period. Often, sales staff eager to boost their own sales 
commissions will send a letter to the customer laying 
out the agreement: the customer will accept the ship-
ment and, if asked, confirm that it ordered the goods, 
but the seller will not send an invoice until later, and 
the customer need not pay until later or can return the 
goods. Such a letter is called a “side letter” and even 
honest managements have a hard time locating these. 
All a management can do is to be diligent and deal 
severely with employees found issuing side letters.
Chapter 7; Chapter 11 Provisions of the Bankruptcy Code. 
Chapter 7 provides for the liquidation of the business. 
Chapter 11 provides for its continued operations.
charge As a noun, a debit to an account; as a verb, to 
debit.
charge off To treat as a loss or expense an amount origi-
nally recorded as an asset; use of this term implies that 
the charge is not in accord with original expectations.
chart of accounts A systematic list of account names and 
numbers.
charter Document issued by a state government authoriz-
ing the creation of a corporation.
chartered accountant(s) (CA) The title used in British 
Commonwealth countries, such as Australia, Canada, 
India, the United Kingdom, and New Zealand, for an 
accountant who has satisfied the requirements of the 
institute of his or her jurisdiction to be qualified to 
serve as a public accountant.
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) A person who has 
passed three examinations, over at least an 18-month 
period, covering topics in accounting, economics, 
financial economics, portfolio management, and secu-
rity analysis. The CFA Institute administers the pro-
gram. Beyond passing examinations, the person needs 
to have approved working experience and satisfy stan-
dards of professional conduct.
check You know what a check is. The Federal Reserve 
Board defines a check as “a draft or order upon a 
bank or banking house purporting to be drawn upon 
a deposit of funds for the payment at all events of 
a certain sum of money to a certain person therein 
named or to him or his order or to bearer and pay-
able instantly on demand.” It must contain the phrase 
“pay to the order of.” The amount shown on the 
check must be clearly readable, and the check must 
have the signature of the drawer. The drawer need not 
date the check. In the accounts, the drawer usually 
reduces the balance in the cash account when it issues 
the check, not later when the check clears the bank. 
See remittance advice.
check register A journal to record checks issued.
CIA (Certified Internal Auditor) One who has satisfied cer-
tain requirements of the Institute of Internal Auditors 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

752
Glossary
common monetary measuring unit For U.S. corporations, 
the dollar. See also stable monetary unit assumption 
and constant-dollar accounting.
common shares (stock) Shares representing the class of 
owners who have residual claims on the assets and 
earnings of a corporation after the firm meets all debt 
and claims of holders of preferred shares.
common-size statement; common-size balance sheet; 
 common- size income statement A percentage statement 
usually based on total assets (balance sheet) or net 
sales or revenues (income statement).
common-stock equivalent A security whose primary value 
arises from its holder’s ability to exchange it for com-
mon shares; includes stock options, warrants, and also 
convertible bonds or convertible preferred stock whose 
effective interest rate at the time of issue is less than 
two-thirds the average Aa corporate bond yield. See 
bond ratings.
company-wide control See control system.
comparable The qualitative characteristic of accounting 
information that firms record like transactions and 
events similarly.
comparative (financial) statements Financial statements 
showing information for the same company for dif-
ferent times. The SEC requires two successive years 
for balance sheets and three for income and cash flow 
statements; the IASB requires two successive years for 
all financial statements. Nearly all published financial 
statements are in this form. Contrast with historical 
summary.
compensating balance The amount required to be left on 
deposit for a loan. When a bank lends funds to cus-
tomers, it often requires that the customers keep on 
deposit in their checking accounts an amount equal 
to some percentage—say, 20%—of the loan. Such 
amounts effectively increase the interest rate. The bor-
rower must disclose the amounts of such balances in 
notes to the financial statements.
completed contract method Recognizing revenues and 
expenses for a job or order only when the firm fin-
ishes it, except that when the firm expects a loss on 
the contract, the firm must recognize all revenues and 
expenses in the period when the firm first foresees a 
loss. Accountants generally use this term only for 
long-term contracts. This method is otherwise equiva-
lent to the sales basis of revenue recognition.
completed sale(s) basis; completed sale(s) method See sales 
basis of revenue recognition.
compliance audit Obtaining and evaluating verifiable evi-
dence regarding assertions, actions, and events to 
ascertain the degree of correspondence between them 
and established performance criteria.
compliance procedure An audit procedure used to gain 
evidence as to whether the prescribed internal controls 
are operating effectively.
composite cost of capital See cost of capital.
composite depreciation or composite life method Group 
depreciation when the items are of unlike kind. The 
term also applies when the firm depreciates as a whole 
a single item (for example, a crane, which consists of 
coding of accounts The numbering of accounts, as for a 
chart of accounts, that is necessary for computerized 
accounting.
coinsurance Common condition of insurance policies that 
protect against hazards such as fire or water damage. 
These often specify that the owner of the property 
may not collect the full amount of insurance for a loss 
unless the insurance policy covers at least some speci-
fied “coinsurance” percentage, usually about 80%, 
of the replacement cost of the property. Coinsurance 
clauses induce the owner to carry full, or nearly full, 
coverage.
COLA Cost-of-living adjustment. See indexation.
collateral Assets pledged by a borrower who will surrender 
those assets if he or she fails to repay a loan.
collectible Capable of being converted into cash—now if 
due, later otherwise.
collusion Cooperative effort by employees to commit fraud 
or another unethical act.
combination See business combination.
combined financial statements Financial statements for a 
group of companies under common control, but for 
which there is no parent–subsidiary relation. Such 
statements eliminate intercompany transactions and 
balances.
comfort letter A letter in which an auditor conveys nega-
tive assurances as to unaudited financial statements in 
a prospectus or draft financial statements included in 
a preliminary prospectus.
commercial paper Short-term notes issued by corporate 
borrowers.
commercial substance Said of a transaction expected to 
change the future cash flows of a business. See com-
mercial transaction.
commercial transaction A transaction expected to change 
the future cash flows of a business. Accounting for 
trade-in transactions depends upon whether the firm 
expects the new asset to change firm-wide cash flows 
from what they would have been had the firm kept 
the old asset.
commission Employee remuneration, usually expressed as 
a percentage, based on an activity rate, such as sales.
committed costs Capacity costs.
Committee on Accounting Procedure (CAP) Predecessor 
of the APB. The AICPA’s principles-promulgating 
body from 1939 through 1959. Its 51 pronouncements 
are Accounting Research Bulletins.
common cost Cost resulting from the use of raw materi-
als, a facility (for example, plant or machines), or a 
service (for example, fire insurance) that benefits sev-
eral products or departments. A firm must allocate this 
cost to those products or departments. Common costs 
result when two or more departments produce mul-
tiple products together even though the departments 
could produce them separately; joint costs occur when 
two or more departments must produce multiple 
products together. Many writers use “common costs” 
and “joint costs” synonymously. See joint cost, indi-
rect costs, overhead, and sterilized allocation.
common-dollar accounting Constant-dollar accounting.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

753
Glossary
expense account.) Computer programs— instructions—
query this database and perform arithmetic operations 
to construct whatever the user requests: a general jour-
nal or a general ledger or a special-purpose ledger or a 
budget report comparing actual and budgeted expenses 
for a department or a single financial statement or a set 
of financial statements or schedule. A manual record-
keeping process records transactions in journal entries, 
posts journal entry amounts into accounts in a ledger, 
totals the amounts in accounts to derive account bal-
ances, and uses the account balances to construct 
financial statements and other schedules. Even though 
a computer-based accounting system does not for-
mally undertake these steps, one needs to understand 
the steps of manual record keeping in order to pro-
gram the computer in the first place and to understand 
common business terminology. Students have diffi-
culty understanding the differences between
 
■ Temporary and permanent accounts,
 
■ Transaction and adjusting entries, and
 
■  Pre- and post-closing balances in the Retained 
Earnings account,
 
even when studying manual record-keeping systems. 
Mastering these distinctions with a computer-based 
system is more difficult. We recommend you master 
the record-keeping cycle, as presented in this book in 
Chapter 2, before thinking about how computer-based 
systems work.
conceptual framework A coherent system of interre-
lated objectives and fundamentals, promulgated by 
the FASB primarily through its SFAC publications, 
intended to lead to consistent standards for financial 
accounting and reporting. The IASB has a similar con-
ceptual framework.
confidence level The measure of probability that the actual 
characteristics of the population lie within the stated 
precision of the estimate derived from a sampling pro-
cess. A sample estimate may be expressed in the fol-
lowing terms: “Based on the sample, we are 95% sure 
[confidence level] that the true population value is 
within the range of X to Y [precision].” See precision.
confirmation A formal memorandum delivered by the cus-
tomers or suppliers of a company to its independent 
auditor verifying the amounts shown as receivable or 
payable. The auditor originally sends the confirmation 
document to the customer. If the auditor asks that the 
customer return the document whether the balance is 
correct or incorrect, usage calls it a “positive confirma-
tion.” If the auditor asks that the customer return the 
document only if it contains an error, usage calls it a 
“negative confirmation.”
conglomerate See holding company. This term implies that 
the owned companies operate in dissimilar lines of 
business. In a conglomerate, the top company often is, 
itself, an operation company.
conservatism A reporting objective that calls for antici-
pation of all losses and expenses but defers recogni-
tion of gains or profits until they are realized in arm’s 
length transactions. In the absence of certainty, report 
separate units with differing service lives, such as the 
chassis, the motor, the lifting mechanism, and so on), 
rather than treating each of its components separately.
compound entry A journal entry with more than one debit 
or more than one credit or both. See trade-in transac-
tion for an example.
compound interest Interest calculated on principal plus 
previously undistributed interest.
compound interest depreciation A method designed to hold 
the rate of return on an asset constant. First, find the 
internal rate of return on the cash inflows and out-
flows of the asset. The periodic depreciation charge 
equals the cash flow for the period less the internal rate 
of return multiplied by the asset’s carrying value at the 
beginning of the period. When the cash flows from the 
asset are constant over time, usage sometimes refers 
to the method as the annuity method of depreciation.
compounding period The time period, usually a year or a 
portion of a year, for which a firm calculates interest. 
At the end of the period, the borrower may pay interest 
to the lender or may add the interest (that is, convert 
it) to the principal for the next interest-earning period.
comprehensive budget Master budget.
comprehensive income Defined in SFAC No. 3 as “the 
change in equity (net assets) of an entity during a 
period from transactions and other events and cir-
cumstances from non-owner sources. It includes all 
changes in equity during a period except those result-
ing from investments by owners and distributions to 
owners.” In this definition, “equity” means owners’ 
equity or shareholders’ equity. SFAS No. 130 (Codifi-
cation Topic 220) requires firms to report comprehen-
sive income as part of a statement showing earnings 
(primarily from realized transactions), other compre-
hensive income (with additions for all other changes 
in owners’ equity, primarily holding gains and losses 
and foreign exchange gains and losses), and compre-
hensive income plus accounting adjustments. The 
FASB encourages the discontinuation of the term “net 
income.” The terms “earnings” and “comprehensive 
income” denote different concepts, with totals differ-
ent from that of the old “net income.” SFAS No. 130 
(Codification Topic 220) requires that the firm report 
comprehensive income in a format having the same 
prominence as other financial statements. We cannot 
predict which “income total”—earnings or compre-
hensive income—users of financial statements will 
focus on.
comptroller Same meaning and pronunciation as control-
ler. Modern users, however, tend to use this form for 
government and not-for-profit entities and controller 
for profit-seeking ones.
computer-based accounting systems Most modern record 
keeping systems operate on computers, not on paper 
and in books such as physical ledgers and journals. A 
database contains journal entries. The data entry dis-
cipline requires equal debits and credits—the system 
won’t let you continue without them. (The data entry 
discipline will not correct conceptual errors in journal 
entries, such as debiting an asset account rather than an 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

754
Glossary
Construction in Progress account; Construction in Pro-
cess account Analogous to work-in-progress (process) 
inventory, except that firms use work-in-process for 
items typically produced in quantity and with short 
(less than a few months) production times. When 
the firm produces items with long production times, 
such as a bridge or building, the inventory account 
that accumulates costs during production in accounts 
with titles such as these. These accounts accumulate 
costs of production until the firm completes the items 
and transfers the costs to an account such as Finished 
Goods Inventory or Buildings Constructed.
constructive capitalization Some long-term noncancellable 
leases are operating leases. Consider, for example, 
a ten-year lease on a shopping center store site. An 
analyst might want to see the effect on the lessee’s 
financial statements of treating the present value of the 
contractual commitments as balance sheet items, an 
asset for the leasehold and a liability for the obliga-
tions to pay. This term refers to the process of debiting 
the present value of the lease commitments to an asset 
and crediting the amount to a liability, for analysis.
constructive liability FASB’s term for an item recorded as 
an accounting liability, which the firm has no obliga-
tion to pay but intends to pay. An example is the lia-
bility with related expense that management establishes 
for future cash payments for severance payments for 
employees it intends to discharge in a restructuring.
constructive receipt An item included in taxable income 
when the taxpayer can control funds whether or not it 
has received cash. For example, interest added to prin-
cipal in a savings account is constructively received.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) A price index computed and 
issued monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of 
the U.S. Department of Labor. The index attempts to 
track the price level of a group of goods and services 
purchased by the average consumer. The CPI is used 
in constant-dollar accounting.
contingency A potential liability. If a specified event 
occurs, such as a firm’s losing a lawsuit, it would rec-
ognize a liability. The notes disclose the contingency, 
but so long as it remains contingent, it does not 
appear in the balance sheet. SFAS No. 5 (Codification 
Topic 450) requires treatment as a contingency until 
the outcome is “probable” (interpreted to mean 75% 
to 80% likely to occur) and the amount of payment 
can be reasonably estimated, perhaps within a range. 
When the outcome becomes probable (the future 
event is “likely” to occur) and the firm can reason-
ably estimate the amount (using the lower end of a 
range if it can estimate only a range), then the firm 
recognizes a liability in the accounts, rather than just 
disclosing it. A material contingency may lead to a 
qualified, “subject to” auditor’s opinion. Firms do not 
record gain contingencies in the accounts but merely 
disclose them in notes.
contingent annuity An annuity whose number of payments 
depends on the outcome of an event whose timing is 
uncertain at the time the annuity begins; for example, 
an annuity payable until death of the annuitant. Con-
trast with annuity certain.
events to minimize cumulative income. Conservatism 
does not mean reporting low income in every account-
ing period. Over long-enough time spans, income is 
cash-in less cash-out. If a (conservative) reporting 
method shows low income in early periods, it must 
show higher income in some later period.
consignee See on consignment.
consignment See on consignment.
consignor See on consignment.
consistency Treatment of like transactions in the same 
way in consecutive periods so that financial statements 
will be more comparable than otherwise; the reporting 
policy implying that a reporting entity, once it adopts 
specified procedures, should follow them from period 
to period. See accounting changes for the treatment of 
inconsistencies.
consol A bond that never matures; a perpetuity in the form 
of a bond; originally issued by Great Britain after the 
Napoleonic wars to consolidate debt issues of that 
period. The term arose as an abbreviation for “con-
solidated annuities.”
consolidated entity See consolidated financial statements.
consolidated (financial) statements; consolidated balance 
sheet; consolidated income statement; consolidated 
statement of cash flows Statements issued by legally 
separate companies under the control of a parent com-
pany and that show financial statements as they would 
appear if the companies were one economic entity, 
called the “consolidated entity.”
consolidation policy A company’s statement of which enti-
ties it includes in a particular set of consolidated finan-
cial statements. Sometimes firms have a choice as to 
which to consolidate, but most often in U.S. GAAP, 
the firm has little choice.
consolidation work sheet The paper or software representa-
tion thereof, which shows the firms being consolidated 
along with various additions and subtractions to elim-
inate double counting and intercompany transactions.
constant dollar A hypothetical unit of general purchasing 
power, denoted “C$” by the FASB.
constant-dollar accounting Accounting that measures items 
in constant dollars. See historical cost/constant-dollar 
accounting and current cost/nominal-dollar accounting. 
Sometimes called “general price level–adjusted account-
ing” or “general purchasing-power accounting.”
constant-dollar date The time at which the general pur-
chasing power of one constant dollar exactly equals the 
general purchasing power of one nominal dollar; that 
is, the date when C$1 = $1. When the constant-dollar 
date is midperiod, the nominal amounts of revenues and 
expenses spread evenly throughout the period equal 
their constant-dollar amounts but end-of-period bal-
ance sheet amounts measured in constant mid period 
dollars differ from their nominal-dollar amounts. When 
the constant-dollar date is at the end of the period, 
the constant-dollar amounts equal the nominal- dollar 
amounts on a balance sheet for that date.
constrained share company Canada: a public company 
whose charter specifies that people who are Canadian 
citizens or who are corporations resident in Canada 
must own a prescribed percentage of the shares.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

755
Glossary
contribution margin ratio Contribution margin divided by 
net sales; usually measured from the price and cost of 
a single unit; sometimes measured in total for compa-
nies with multiple products.
contribution per unit Selling price less variable costs per 
unit.
contributory Said of a pension plan in which employees, as 
well as employers, make payments to a pension fund. 
Note that the provisions for vesting apply only to the 
employer’s payments. Whatever the degree of vesting 
of the employer’s payments, employees typically gets 
back all their payments, with interest, in case of death 
or other cessation of employment before retirement.
control (controlling) account A summary account with 
totals equal to those of entries and balances that 
appear in individual accounts in a subsidiary ledger. 
Accounts Receivable is a control account backed up 
with an account for each customer. Do not change the 
balance in a control account unless you make a corre-
sponding change in one of the subsidiary accounts. A 
control account in a computerized accounting system 
is programmed to be the sum of individual accounts 
that comprise the subsidiary ledger for that control 
account.
control charts Presentations of warning signals that help 
management distinguish between random or routine 
variations in quality and variations that it should 
investigate. The presentations show the results of sta-
tistical process-control measures for a sample, batch, 
or some other unit. These presentations depict varia-
tion in a process and its behavior over time. Manage-
ment specifies an acceptable level of variation and 
plans to investigate the causes of deviations beyond 
that level.
control system A device used by top management to 
ensure that lower-level management carries out its 
plans or to safeguard assets. Control designed for a 
single function within the firm is “operational control”; 
control designed for autonomous segments that gen-
erally have responsibility for both revenues and costs 
is “divisional control”; control designed for activities 
of the firm as a whole is “company-wide control.” 
“Internal control” systems include those designed for 
safeguarding assets and to ensure that financial state-
ments and their components are correct.
controllable cost A cost influenced by the way a firm car-
ries out operations. For example, marketing execu-
tives control advertising costs. These costs can be 
fixed or variable. See programmed costs and managed 
costs.
controlled company A company in which an individual or 
corporation holds a majority of the voting shares. An 
owner can sometimes exercise effective control even 
though it owns less than 50% of the shares.
controller A title for the chief accountant of an organiza-
tion; often spelled comptroller when used to identify 
that person in a government or not-for-profit entity.
convergence The process by which the International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) collaborates with 
selected national standard setters around the world to 
reduce or eliminate substantive differences between 
contingent asset An item that meets some, but not all, 
the tests to be an asset and, hence, is not an asset, 
but might become one, such as the potential proceeds 
from winning a lawsuit or other lottery.
contingent issue (securities) Securities issuable to specific 
individuals at the occurrence of some event, such as 
the firm’s attaining a specified level of earnings.
contingent liability; contingent obligation; contingent provi-
sion Contingency. Avoid the term “contingent liability” 
because it refers to something not (yet) a liability on 
the balance sheet. The IASB has said it will formally 
express disapproval of the term “contingent liability.” 
See provision.
continuing appropriation A governmental appropriation 
automatically renewed without further legislative 
action until altered or revoked or expended.
continuing operations See income from continuing operations.
continuity of operations The assumption in accounting 
that the business entity will continue to operate long 
enough to carry out its current plans. The going con-
cern assumption.
continuous budget A budget that adds a future period as 
the current period ends. This budget, then, always 
reports on the same number of periods.
continuous compounding Compound interest in which the 
compounding period is every instant of time. See e for 
the computation of the equivalent annual or periodic 
rate.
continuous flow processing Mass production of homoge-
neous products in a continuous flow, such as chemicals 
or petroleum products. Companies manufacturing 
with continuous flow processes use process costing to 
account for product costs.
continuous improvement Modern total quality management 
(TQM) practitioners believe that the process of seek-
ing quality is never complete. This attitude reflects 
that assumption, seeking always to improve activities.
continuous inventory method The perpetual inventory method.
Continuously Contemporary Accounting (CoCoA) A name 
coined by the Australian theorist Raymond J. Cham-
bers to indicate a combination of current value account-
ing in which the measuring unit is constant dollars and 
the attribute measured is exit value.
contra account An account, such as accumulated depre-
ciation, that accumulates subtractions from another 
account, such as machinery. Contrast with adjunct 
account.
contributed capital Name for the owners’ equity account 
that represents amounts paid in, usually in cash, 
by owners; the sum of the balances in capital stock 
accounts plus capital contributed in excess of par (or 
stated) value accounts. Contrast with donated capital.
contributed surplus An inferior term for capital contributed 
in excess of par method.
contribution approach Income statement preparation 
method that reports contribution margin, by separat-
ing variable costs from fixed costs, in order to empha-
size the importance of cost-behavior patterns for 
purposes of planning and control.
contribution margin Revenue from sales less all variable 
expenses. Contrast with gross margin.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

756
Glossary
products and by-products that, by their very nature, 
a firm must produce together, such as the various 
grades of wood a lumber factory produces.
copyright Exclusive right granted by the government to an 
individual author, composer, playwright, or the like 
for the life of the individual plus 70 years. Corpora-
tions and anonymous authors get copyrights for vary-
ing periods set out in the law. The economic life of a 
copyright can be less than the legal life, such as, for 
example, the copyright of this book.
core deposit intangible A bank borrows funds from its 
customers, called “depositors,” who open checking 
and savings accounts. Those depositors can take out 
their funds at any time, but usually don’t. The amount 
that depositors leave on deposit for long periods of 
time are called core deposits. The bank lends those 
funds to other customers, called borrowers, at inter-
est rates larger than the amount it pays the depositors 
for the funds. (For checking accounts, the rate the 
bank pays depositors is often zero.) The fact that the 
depositors can remove their funds at any time, but, 
on average, leave amounts on deposit relatively per-
manently means that the bank can lend those funds 
for relatively long periods of time, usually at higher 
interest rates, than it can charge for shorter-term 
loans. (See yield curve.) The bank’s ability to bor-
row from some customers at a low rate and lend to 
other customers at a high rate creates wealth for the 
bank. Bankers and banking analysts call this wealth 
the “core deposit intangible.” It represents an asset 
not recognized in the financial statements by the bank 
that created the wealth, although some SEC commis-
sioners have expressed the thought that accounting 
should recognize such items as assets. When one bank 
buys another in a purchase, however, it will pay for 
this asset and will record it as an asset. Usually, the 
acquiring bank does not use the specific account title 
Core Deposit Intangible, but instead uses the account 
title Goodwill.
corner The control of a quantity of shares, or a commod-
ity, sufficiently large that the holder can control the 
market price.
corporate bylaws The set of rules and procedures for the 
operations of the corporation enacted by its founders 
or board of directors.
corporate charter The document provided by a state, 
such as Delaware, to a corporate to operate as a 
corporation.
corporation A legal entity authorized by a state to operate 
under the rules of the entity’s charter.
correcting entry An adjusting entry that results in the 
proper entry for a previously, improperly recorded 
transaction. If one were to reverse the original, incor-
rect, entry, then record the correct entry, and then 
reduce the two previous entries to a single one, per-
haps with multiple debit and credit parts, one has the 
correcting entry. Do not confuse with entries that cor-
rect accounting errors.
correction of errors See accounting errors.
cost The sacrifice, measured by the price paid or to be paid, 
to acquire goods or services. See acquisition cost and 
the international and national standards at a high 
level of quality. The national standard setter with 
which the IASB works most proactively in the con-
vergence process is the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB).
convergence (process) The intention of the FASB and 
IASB to eliminate differences between U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS.
conversion The act of exchanging a convertible security 
for another security.
conversion audit An examination of changeover proce-
dures, and new accounting procedures and files, that 
takes place when a significant change in the account-
ing system (for example, a change from a manual to 
a computerized system or a change of computers or 
computer systems) occurs.
conversion cost Direct labor costs plus factory overhead 
costs incurred in producing a product; that is, the cost 
to convert raw materials to finished products. Manu-
facturing cost.
conversion period Compounding period; also, period during 
which the holder of a convertible bond or convertible 
preferred stock can convert it into common shares.
convertible bond A bond whose owner may convert it into 
a specified number of shares of capital stock during 
the conversion period.
convertible preferred shares (stock) Preferred shares whose 
owner may convert them into a specified number of 
common shares.
cookie-jar accounting A name, most prominently used 
by a chairman of the SEC, to indicate the practice 
of reporting lower income in an early period, so that 
management at its discretion can report higher income 
in a later period. Consider, for example, the entry 
to estimate normal warranty costs for products sold. 
The journal entry debits an expense account, reduc-
ing income, and credits a liability account. In some 
later period, the firm can debit a warranty cost to the 
liability account, not to an expense account, reliev-
ing that later period of the income reduction that an 
expense would have caused. Cookie-jar accounting 
occurs when the amount debited is larger than nec-
essary, resulting in lower-than-correct income in the 
current period. In a later period, income can be higher 
as the debit for warranty costs can be to the liability 
account, rather than to expense, which would reduce 
income in that period. See quality of earnings. Often, 
users refer to the excess liability amount, the amount 
in the cookie jar, later available for income enhance-
ment, as a “reserve.” See reserve for our warnings 
about using that word in any context.
cooperative An incorporated organization formed for 
the benefit of its members (owners), who are either 
producers or consumers, in order to acquire for them 
profits or savings that otherwise accrue to middlemen. 
Members exercise control on the basis of one vote per 
member.
coproduct A product sharing production facilities with 
another product. For example, if an apparel manufac-
turer produces shirts and jeans on the same line, these 
are coproducts. Distinguish coproducts from joint 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

757
Glossary
cost method (for investments) In accounting for an invest-
ment in the capital stock or bonds of another com-
pany, method in which the firm shows the investment 
at acquisition cost and treats only dividends declared 
or interest receivable as revenue; not allowed by U.S. 
GAAP.
cost method (for treasury stock) The method of showing 
treasury stock in a contra account to all other items of 
shareholders’ equity in an amount equal to that paid 
to reacquire the stock.
cost object(ive) Any activity for which management desires 
a separate measurement of costs. Examples include 
departments, products, and territories.
cost of capital Opportunity cost of funds invested in a busi-
ness; the rate of return that rational owners require 
an asset to earn before they will devote that asset 
to a particular purpose; sometimes measured as the 
average annual rate that a company must pay for its 
equities. In efficient capital markets, this cost is the 
discount rate that equates the expected present value 
of all future cash flows to common shareholders with 
the market value of common stock at a given time. 
Analysts often measure the cost of capital by tak-
ing a weighted average of the firm’s debt and various 
equity securities. We sometimes call the measurement 
so derived the composite cost of capital, and some 
analysts confuse this measurement of the cost of capi-
tal with the cost of capital itself. For example, if the 
equities of a firm include substantial amounts for the 
deferred income tax liability, the composite cost of 
capital will underestimate the true cost of capital, the 
required rate of return on a firm’s assets, because the 
deferred income tax liability has no explicit cost.
cost of goods manufactured The sum of all costs allocated 
to products completed during a period, including mate-
rials, labor, and overhead.
cost of goods purchased Net purchase price of goods 
acquired plus costs of storage and delivery to the place 
where the owner can productively use the items.
cost of goods sold Inventoriable costs that firms expense 
because they sold the units; equals beginning inventory 
plus cost of goods purchased or manufactured minus 
ending inventory.
cost of goods sold percentage See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
cost of sales Generally refers to cost of goods sold, occa-
sionally to selling expenses.
cost of services rendered Costs the firm incurs to provide 
services, in contrast to selling goods, to its customers.
cost or market, whichever is lower See lower of cost or 
market.
cost percentage One minus the markup percentage; cost 
of goods available for sale divided by selling prices of 
goods available for sale (when FIFO is used); cost of 
purchases divided by selling prices of purchases (when 
LIFO is used). See markup for further detail on inclu-
sions in the calculation of cost percentage.
cost-plus transfer pricing Transfer price equal to the cost 
of the product transferred to another company in an 
affiliated group, plus a markup.
cost pool Indirect cost pool; groupings or aggregations of 
costs, usually for subsequent analysis or allocation.
replacement cost. Terminology often uses “cost” when 
referring to the valuation of a good or service acquired. 
When writers use the word in this sense, a cost is an 
asset. When the benefits of the acquisition (the goods 
or services acquired) expire, the cost becomes an 
expense or loss. Some writers, however, use “cost” and 
“expense” as synonyms. Contrast with expense. The 
word “cost” appears in more than 50 accounting terms, 
each with sometimes subtle distinctions in meaning. See 
cost terminology for elaboration. Clarity requires that 
the user include with the word “cost” an adjective or 
phrase to be clear about intended meaning.
cost accounting Classifying, summarizing, recording, report-
ing, and allocating current or predicted costs; a subset 
of managerial accounting.
Cost Accounting Standards Board See CASB.
cost accumulation Bringing together, usually in a single 
account, all costs of a specified activity. Contrast with 
cost allocation.
cost allocation Assigning costs to individual products, 
organizational units, or time periods. Contrast with 
cost accumulation.
cost basis Cost in contrast to fair value or other 
measurement.
cost-based transfer price A transfer price based on histori-
cal costs.
cost behavior The functional relation between changes in 
activity and changes in cost; for example, fixed versus 
variable costs; linear versus curvilinear cost.
cost/benefit criterion Some measure of costs compared 
with some measure of benefits for a proposed under-
taking. If the costs exceed the benefits, then the ana-
lyst judges the undertaking not worthwhile. This 
criterion will not yield good decisions unless the ana-
lyst estimates all costs and benefits flowing from the 
undertaking.
cost center A unit of activity for which a firm accumulates 
expenditures and expenses.
cost constraints A pervasive consideration in financial 
reporting, capturing the idea that the costs of prepar-
ing and using financial information must be justified 
by the benefits of reporting that information.
cost driver A factor that causes an activity’s costs. See 
driver and activity basis.
cost driver rate Rate at which the cost driver causes costs.
cost-effective Among alternatives, the one whose benefit, 
or payoff, per unit of cost is highest; sometimes said 
of an action whose expected benefits exceed expected 
costs whether or not other alternatives exist with 
larger benefit–cost ratios.
cost estimation The process of measuring the functional 
relation between changes in activity levels and changes 
in cost.
cost-flow assumption See flow assumption.
cost-flow equation Beginning Balance + Transfers In = 
Transfers Out + Ending Balance; BB + TI = TO + 
EB. Equivalent to: BB + TI – TO = EB.
cost flows Costs passing through various classifications 
within an entity. See flow of costs for a diagram.
cost hierarchy Categorizes costs according to whether they 
are capacity, product, customer, batch, or unit costs.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

758
Glossary
“interest” in this term. See interest payment for discus-
sion of why.
covenant A promise with legal validity. A loan covenant 
specifies the terms under which the lender can force 
the borrower to repay funds otherwise not yet due. For 
example, a bond covenant might say that the principal 
of a bond issue falls due on December 31, 2010, unless 
the firm’s debt–equity ratio falls below 40%, in which 
case the amount becomes due immediately.
CPA See certified public accountant. The AICPA suggests 
that no periods appear in the abbreviation.
CPI Consumer price index.
CPP Current purchasing power; usually used, primarily 
in the United Kingdom, as an adjective modifying the 
word “accounting” to mean the accounting that pro-
duces constant-dollar financial statements.
Cr. Abbreviation for credit, always with initial capital let-
ter. Quiz: what do you suppose Cr. stands for? For 
the answer, see Dr.
creative accounting Selection of accounting principles and 
interpretation of transactions or events designed to 
manipulate, typically to increase but sometimes merely 
to smooth, reported income from continuing opera-
tions; one form of fraudulent financial reporting. Many 
attempts at creative accounting involve premature rev-
enue recognition.
credit As a noun, an entry on the right-hand side of an 
account; as a verb, to make an entry on the right-hand 
side of an account; records increases in liabilities, own-
ers’ equity, revenues, and gains; records decreases in 
assets and expenses. See debit and credit conventions. 
This term also refers to the ability or right to buy or 
borrow in return for a promise to pay later.
credit bureau An organization that gathers and evaluates 
data on the ability of a person to meet financial obli-
gations and sells this information to its clients.
credit loss The amount of accounts receivable that the firm 
finds, or expects to find, uncollectible.
credit memorandum A document used by a seller to inform 
a buyer that the seller is crediting (reducing) the buy-
er’s account receivable because of errors, returns, or 
allowances; also, the document provided by a bank to 
a depositor to indicate that the bank is increasing the 
depositor’s balance because of some event other than 
a deposit, such as the collection by the bank of the 
depositor’s note receivable.
creditor One who lends. In the United Kingdom, account 
payable.
critical accounting judgments All numbers on a balance 
sheet, except the date, require some judgment or 
estimate. (The previous sentence passes for a joke in 
accounting.) The SEC requires that management in its 
annual report to shareholders identify the accounting 
issues whose judgments and estimates have potential 
for significant effect on earnings and financial position. 
Examples include inventory valuation, measurement 
of goodwill impairment, accounting for hedges, and 
revenue recognition.
critical path method (CPM) A method of network anal-
ysis in which the analyst estimates normal duration 
time for each activity within a project. The critical 
cost principle The principle that requires reporting assets 
at historical or acquisition cost, less accumulated 
amortization. This principle relies on the assumption 
that cost equals fair value at the date of acquisition 
and that subsequent changes are not likely to be 
significant.
cost recovery method; cost-recovery-first method A method 
of revenue recognition that credits inventory as the firm 
receives cash collections and continues until the firm 
has collected cash equal to the sum of all costs. Only 
after the firm has collected cash equal to costs does 
it recognize income. A firm may not use this method 
in financial reporting unless the total amount of col-
lections is highly uncertain. It is never allowed for 
income tax reporting. Contrast with the installment 
method, allowed for both book and tax, in which the 
firm credits constant proportions of each cash collec-
tion both to cost and to income.
cost sheet Statement that shows all the elements compos-
ing the total cost of an item.
cost structure For a given set of total costs, the percent-
ages of fixed and variable costs, typically two percent-
ages that add to 100%.
cost terminology The word “cost” appears in many account-
ing terms. The exhibit starting on the next page classi-
fies some of these terms according to the distinctions 
between the terms in accounting usage. Joel Dean was, 
to our knowledge, the first to attempt such distinctions; 
we have used some of his ideas here. We discuss some 
of the terms in more detail under their own listings.
cost-to-cost The percentage-of-completion method in which 
the firm estimates the fraction of completion as the 
ratio of costs incurred to date divided by the total 
costs the firm expects to incur for the entire project.
cost–volume–profit analysis A study of the sensitivity of 
profits to changes in units sold (or produced) or costs 
or prices, often done with a cost-volume-profit graph.
cost–volume–profit graph (chart) A graph that shows the 
relation between fixed costs, contribution per unit, 
breakeven point, and sales. See breakeven chart.
costing The process of calculating the cost of activi-
ties, products, or services; the British word for cost 
accounting.
counterparty The term refers to the opposite party in a 
legal contract. In accounting and finance, a frequent 
usage arises when an entity purchases (or sells) a 
derivative financial contract, such as an option, swap, 
forward contract, and futures contract.
coupon That portion of a bond document redeemable 
at a specified date for payments. Its physical form 
resembles a series of tickets; each coupon has a date, 
and the holder either deposits it at a bank, just like a 
check, for collection or mails it to the issuer’s agent 
for collection. Coupons have been made illegal in the 
United States since 1982 because of the possibility of 
tax fraud.
coupon bond A bond that promises periodic payments. See 
coupon.
coupon (interest) rate Of a bond, the total dollar amount 
of coupons paid in any one year divided by par value. 
Contrast with effective rate. Better not to use the word 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

759
Glossary
Cost Terminology Distinctions Among Terms Containing the Word “Cost”
Terms (Synonyms Given in Parentheses)
Distinctions and Comments
1. The following pairs of terms distinguish the basis measured in accounting.
Historical Cost 
(Acquisition Cost)
vs.
Current Cost
A distinction used in financial accounting. Current cost can be used more specifically 
to mean replacement cost, net realizable value, or present value of cash flows. “Current 
cost” is often used narrowly to mean replacement cost.
Historical Cost 
(Actual Cost)
vs.
Standard Cost
The distinction between historical and standard costs arises in product costing for 
inventory valuation. Some systems record actual costs; others record the standard costs.
2. The following pairs of terms denote various distinctions among historical costs. For each 
pair of terms, the sum of the two kinds of costs equals total historical cost used in 
financial reporting.
Variable Cost
vs.
Fixed Cost 
(Constant Cost)
Distinction used in breakeven analysis and in the design of cost accounting systems, 
particularly for product costing. See (4), below, for a further subdivision of fixed costs 
and (5), below, for the economic distinction between marginal and average cost closely 
paralleling this one.
Traceable Cost
vs.
Common Cost 
(Joint Cost)
Distinction arises in allocating manufacturing costs to product. Common costs are 
allocated to product, but the allocations are more or less arbitrary. The distinction 
also arises in preparing segment reports and in separating manufacturing from 
nonmanufacturing costs.
Direct Cost
vs.
Indirect Cost
Distinction arises in designing cost accounting systems and in product costing. Direct 
costs can be traced directly to a cost object (for example, a product, a responsibility 
center), whereas indirect costs cannot.
Out-of-Pocket Cost 
(Outlay Cost; Cash 
Cost)
vs.
Book Cost
Virtually all costs recorded in financial statements require a cash outlay at one time or 
another. The distinction here separates expenditures to occur in the future from those 
already made and is used in making decisions. Book costs, such as for depreciation, 
reduce income without requiring a future outlay of cash. The cash has already been 
spent. See future cost vs. past cost in (5), below.
Incremental Cost 
(Marginal Cost; 
Differential Cost)
vs.
Unavoidable Cost 
(Inescapable Cost; 
Sunk Cost)
Distinction used in making decisions. Incremental costs will be incurred (or saved) if a 
decision is made to go ahead (or to stop) some activity, but not otherwise. Unavoidable 
costs will be reported in financial statements whether the decision is made to go ahead 
or not because cash has already been spent or committed. Not all unavoidable costs are 
book costs, such as, for example, a salary that is promised but not yet earned and that 
will be paid even if a no-go decision is made.
The economist restricts the term marginal cost to the cost of producing one more unit. 
Thus, the next unit has a marginal cost; the next week’s output has an incremental cost. 
If a firm produces and sells a new product, the related new costs would properly be 
called incremental, not marginal. If a factory is closed, the costs saved are incremental, 
not marginal.
Escapable Cost
vs.
Inescapable Cost 
(Unavoidable Cost)
Same distinction as incremental cost vs. unavoidable cost, but this pair is used only 
when the decision maker is considering stopping something—ceasing to produce a 
product, closing a factory, or the like. See next pair.
Avoidable Cost
vs.
Unavoidable Cost
A distinction sometimes used in discussing the merits of variable and absorption costing. 
Avoidable costs are treated as product costs, and unavoidable costs are treated as period 
expenses under variable costing.
Controllable Cost
vs.
Uncontrollable Cost
The distinction here is used in assigning responsibility and in setting bonus or incentive 
plans. All costs can be affected by someone in the entity; those who design incentive 
schemes attempt to hold a person responsible for a cost only if that person can 
influence the amount of the cost.
3. In each of the following pairs, used in historical cost accounting, the word “cost” 
appears in one of the terms where “expense” is meant.
Expired Cost
vs.
Unexpired Cost
The distinction is between expense and asset.
Product Cost
vs.
Period Cost
The terms distinguish product cost from period expense. When a given asset is used, is 
its cost converted into work-in-process and then finished goods on the balance sheet 
until the goods are sold, or is it an expense shown on this period’s income statement? 
Product costs appear on the income statement as part of cost of goods sold in the period 
when the goods are sold. Period expenses appear on the income statement with an 
appropriate caption for the item in the period when the cost is incurred or recognized.
4. The following subdivisions of fixed (historical) costs are used in analyzing operations. 
The relation between the components of fixed costs is as follows:
76666866669 
76666866669
Fixed
Costs
   =
Capacity
Costs
Semifixed
Costs
+
“Pure”
Fixed Costs
+
Fixed 
Portions 
of Semi-
variable 
Costs
Standby 
Costs
+
Enabling 
Costs
 (continued on next page)
+
Programmed
Costs
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

760
Glossary
Terms (Synonyms Given in Parentheses)
Distinctions and Comments
Capacity Cost 
(Committed Cost)
vs.
Programmed Cost 
(Managed Cost; 
Discretionary Cost)
Capacity costs give a firm the capability to produce or to sell. Programmed costs, 
such as for advertising or research and development, may not be essential, but once a 
decision to incur them is made, they become fixed costs.
Standby Cost
vs.
Enabling Cost
Standby costs will be incurred whether capacity, once acquired, is used or not, such as 
property taxes and depreciation on a factory. Enabling costs, such as for a security force, 
can be avoided if the capacity is unused.
Semifixed Cost
vs.
Semivariable Cost
A cost that is fixed over a wide range but that can change at various levels is a 
semifixed cost or step cost. An example is the cost of rail lines from the factory to the 
main rail line, where fixed cost depends on whether there are one or two parallel lines 
but is independent of the number of trains run per day. Semivariable costs combine a 
strictly fixed component cost plus a variable component. Telephone charges usually have 
a fixed monthly component plus a charge related to usage.
5. The following pairs of terms distinguish among economic uses or decision-making uses 
or regulatory uses of cost terms.
Fully Absorbed Cost
vs.
Variable Cost 
(Direct Cost)
Fully absorbed costs refer to costs where fixed costs have been allocated to units or 
departments as required by generally accepted accounting principles. Variable costs, in 
contrast, may be more relevant for making decisions, such as setting prices.
Fully Absorbed Cost
vs.
Full Cost
In full costing, all costs, manufacturing costs as well as central corporate expenses 
(including financing expenses), are allocated to products or divisions. In full absorption 
costing, only manufacturing costs are allocated to products. Only in full costing will 
revenues, expenses, and income summed over all products or divisions equal corporate 
revenues, expenses, and income.
Opportunity Cost
vs.
Outlay Cost 
(Out-of-Pocket Cost)
Opportunity cost refers to the economic benefit forgone by using a resource for one 
purpose instead of for another. The outlay cost of the resource will be recorded in 
financial records. The distinction arises because a resource is already in the possession 
of the entity with a recorded historical cost. Its economic value to the firm, opportunity 
cost, generally differs from the historical cost; it can be either larger or smaller.
Future Cost
vs.
Past Cost
Effective decision making analyzes only present and future outlay costs, or out-of-pocket 
costs. Opportunity costs are relevant for profit maximizing; past costs are used in 
financial reporting.
Short-Run Cost
vs.
Long-Run Cost
Short-run costs vary as output is varied for a given configuration of plant and 
equipment. Long-run costs can be incurred to change that configuration. This pair 
of terms is the economic analog of the accounting pair, see (2) above, variable and 
fixed costs. The analogy is not perfect because some short-run costs are fixed, such as 
property taxes on the factory, from the point of view of breakeven analysis.
Imputed Cost
vs.
Book Cost
In a regulatory setting some costs, for example the cost of owners’ equity capital, are 
calculated and used for various purposes; these are imputed costs. Imputed costs are 
not recorded in the historical costs accounting records for financial reporting. Book 
costs are recorded.
Average Cost
vs.
Marginal Cost
The economic distinction equivalent to fully absorbed cost of product and variable cost 
of product. Average cost is total cost divided by number of units. Marginal cost is the 
cost to produce the next unit (or the last unit).
Differential Cost 
(Incremental Cost)
vs.
Variable Cost
Whether a cost changes or remains fixed depends on the activity basis being considered. 
Typically, but not invariably, costs are said to be variable or with respect to an activity 
basis such as changes in production levels. Typically, but not invariably, costs are said 
to be incremental or not with respect to an activity basis such as the undertaking of 
some new venture. For example, consider the decision to undertake the production of 
food processors, rather than food blenders, which the manufacturer has been making. 
To produce processors requires the acquisition of a new machine tool. The cost of the 
new machine tool is incremental with respect to a decision to produce food processors 
instead of food blenders but, once acquired, becomes a fixed cost of producing food 
processors. If costs of direct labor hours are going to be incurred for the production of 
food processors or food blenders, whichever is produced (in a scenario when not both 
are to be produced), such costs are variable with respect to production measured in 
units but are not incremental with respect to the decision to produce processors rather 
than blenders. This distinction is often blurred in practice, so a careful understanding of 
the activity basis being considered is necessary to understand the concepts being used 
in a particular application.
path identifies the shortest completion period possible 
based on the most time-consuming sequence of activi-
ties from the beginning to the end of the network. 
Compare PERT.
critical success factors The important things a company 
must do to be successful; may vary from one company 
to another.
cross-reference (index) A number placed beside each 
account in a journal entry indicating the ledger account 
to which the record keeper posted the entry and plac-
ing in the ledger the page number of the journal, or the 
journal entry number, where the record keeper first 
recorded the journal entry; used to link the debit and 
credit parts of an entry in the ledger accounts back 
Cost Terminology Distinctions Among Terms Containing the Word “Cost” 
(continued from previous page)
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

761
Glossary
current (gross) margin See operating margin based on cur-
rent costs.
current liability A debt or other obligation that a firm must 
discharge within a short time, usually the earnings cycle 
or one year, normally by expending current assets.
current market interest rate At a given time, the rate the 
market charges a borrower. Pertinent for fair value 
accounting for debt.
current operating performance concept The notion that 
reported income for a period ought to reflect only ordi-
nary, normal, and recurring operations of that period. A 
consequence is that extraordinary and nonrecurring items 
are entered directly in the Retained Earnings account. 
Contrast with clean surplus concept. This concept is no 
longer acceptable. (See APB Opinion No. 9 and No. 30.)
current ratio Sum of current assets divided by sum of cur-
rent liabilities. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
current realizable value Realizable value.
current replacement cost Of an asset, the amount currently 
required to acquire an identical asset (in the same con-
dition and with the same service potential) or an asset 
capable of rendering the same service at a current 
fair market value. If these two amounts differ, use the 
lower. Contrast with reproduction cost.
current selling price The amount for which an asset could 
be sold as of a given time in an arm’s length transac-
tion rather than in a forced sale.
current service costs Service costs of a pension plan.
current value accounting The form of accounting in which 
all assets appear at current replacement cost (entry 
value) or current selling price or net realizable value 
(exit value) and all liabilities appear at present value. 
Entry and exit values may differ from each other, so 
theorists have not agreed on the precise meaning of 
“current value accounting.”
current yield Of a bond, the annual amount of coupons 
divided by the current market price of the bond. Con-
trast with yield to maturity.
currently attainable standard cost Normal standard cost.
curvilinear (variable) cost A continuous, but not necessar-
ily linear (straight-line), functional relation between 
activity levels and costs.
customer-level activities Work performed to meet the needs 
of a specific customer, aggregated over all customers.
customer response time Period that elapses from the 
moment a customer places an order for a product or 
requests service to the moment the firm delivers the 
product or service to the customer.
customers’ ledger The ledger that shows accounts receiv-
able of individual customers. It is the subsidiary ledger 
for the control account Accounts Receivable.
cutoff rate Hurdle rate.
D
data bank An organized file of information, such as a cus-
tomer name and address file, used in and kept up to 
date by a processing system.
database A comprehensive collection of interrelated infor-
mation stored together in computerized form to serve 
several applications.
to the original entry in the journal. Nearly every firm 
now uses a computerized accounting system which 
provides cross-references. See audit trail.
cross-section analysis Analysis of financial statements of 
various firms for a single period of time; contrast with 
time-series analysis, in which analysts examine state-
ments of a given firm for several periods of time.
Crown corporation Canada and United Kingdom: a cor-
poration that is ultimately accountable, through a 
minister of the Crown, to Parliament or a legislature 
for the conduct of its affairs.
cum div. (dividend) The condition of shares whose quoted 
market price includes a declared but unpaid dividend. 
This condition pertains between the declaration date 
of the dividend and the record date. Compare ex div 
(dividend).
cum rights The condition of securities whose quoted mar-
ket price includes the right to purchase new securities. 
Compare ex rights.
cumulative dividend (rights) Preferred stock dividends that, 
if not paid, accrue as a commitment that the firm 
must pay before it can declare dividends to common 
shareholders.
cumulative preferred shares Preferred shares with cumula-
tive dividend rights.
current An adjective referring to something that will 
require cash inflow or outflow within the company’s 
operating cycle, usually one year.
current amount A valuation or basis using fair values or 
market values as of the balance sheet date, in contrast 
an historical cost.
current assets Cash and other assets that a firm expects 
to turn into cash, sell, or exchange within the normal 
operating cycle of the firm or one year, whichever is 
longer. One year is the usual period for classifying 
asset balances on the balance sheet. Current assets 
include cash, marketable securities, receivables, inven-
tory, and current prepayments.
current cost Cost stated in terms of current values (of pro-
ductive capacity) rather than in terms of acquisition 
cost. See net realizable value and current selling price.
current cost accounting The FASB’s term for financial 
statements in which the attribute measured is current 
cost.
current cost/nominal-dollar accounting Accounting based 
on current cost valuations measured in nominal dol-
lars. Components of income include an operating mar-
gin and holding gains and losses.
current exchange rate The rate at which the holder of one 
unit of currency can convert it into another at the end 
of the accounting period being reported on or, for rev-
enues, expenses, gains, and losses, the date of recogni-
tion of the transaction.
current exit value Exit value.
current fund In governmental accounting, a synonym for 
general fund.
current funds Cash and other assets readily convertible 
into cash; in governmental accounting, funds spent for 
operating purposes during the current period; includes 
general, special revenue, debt service, and enterprise 
funds.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

762
Glossary
debit memorandum A document used by a seller to inform 
a buyer that the seller is debiting (increasing) the 
amount of the buyer’s accounts receivable. Also, the 
document provided by a bank to a depositor to indi-
cate that the bank is decreasing the depositor’s bal-
ance because of some event other than payment for a 
check, such as monthly service charges or the printing 
of checks.
debt An amount owed. The general name for notes, 
bonds, mortgages, and the like that provide evidence 
of amounts owed and have definite payment dates.
debt capital Noncurrent liabilities. See debt financing, and 
contrast with equity financing.
debt–equity ratio Long-term debt divided by shareholders’ 
equity. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12. Some analysts put 
long-term debt and total shareholders’ equity in the 
denominator. Sometimes debt includes all liabilities.
debt financing Leverage. Raising funds by issuing bonds, 
mortgages, or notes. Contrast with equity financing.
debt guarantee See guarantee.
debt ratio Debt–equity ratio.
debt retirement The issuer of debt gives cash or shares or 
other assets to the holder of the obligation and then 
removes the associated liability from the balance sheet.
debt securities held to maturity A debt issue held by an 
investor who has both the ability and intent to hold 
the security until it matures. See security held to matu-
rity for accounting procedures.
debt service fund In governmental accounting, a fund estab-
lished to account for payment of interest and principal 
on all general-obligation debt other than that payable 
from special assessments.
debt service payment The payment required by a lend-
ing agreement, such as periodic coupon payment on 
a bond or installment payment on a loan or a lease 
payment. It is sometimes called interest payment, but 
this term will mislead the unwary. Only rarely will the 
amount of a debt service payment equal the interest 
expense for the period preceding the payment. A debt 
service payment will always include some amount for 
interest, but the payment will usually differ from the 
interest expense.
debt service requirement The amount of cash required for 
payments of interest, current maturities of principal on 
outstanding debt, and payments to sinking funds (cor-
porations) or to the debt service fund (governmental).
debtor One who borrows; in the United Kingdom, account 
receivable.
decentralized decision making Management practice in 
which a firm gives a manager of a business unit respon-
sibility for that unit’s revenues and costs, and some-
times for investments, freeing the manager to make 
decisions about prices, sources of supply, and the like, 
as though the unit were a separate business that the 
manager owns. See responsibility accounting and trans-
fer price.
declaration date Time when the board of directors declares 
a dividend.
declining-balance (methods) depreciation The method of 
calculating the periodic depreciation charge by multi-
plying the carrying value at the start of the period by a 
database management system Generalized software pro-
grams used to handle physical storage and manipula-
tion of databases.
days of average inventory on hand See ratio and Exhibit 
7.12.
days of grace The days allowed by law or contract for 
payment of a debt after its due date.
days receivables outstanding Accounts receivable turnover 
ratio divided into 365.
DCF Discounted cash flow.
DDB Double declining-balance depreciation.
debenture bond A bond not secured with collateral.
debit As a noun, an entry on the left-hand side of an 
account; as a verb, to make an entry on the left-
hand side of an account; records increases in assets 
and expenses; records decreases in liabilities, owners’ 
equity, and revenues. See debit and credit conventions.
debit and credit conventions The conventional use of the 
T-account form and the rules for debit and credit in 
balance sheet accounts (see below). The equality of 
the two sides of the accounting equation results from 
recording equal amounts of debits and credits for 
each transaction.
Typical Asset Account
Opening Balance
Increase
Decrease
+
–
Dr.
Cr.
Ending Balance
Typical Liability Account
Opening Balance
Decrease
Increase
–
+
Dr.
Cr.
Ending Balance
Typical Owners’ Equity Account
Opening Balance
Decrease
Increase
–
+
Dr.
Cr.
Ending Balance
 
Revenue and expense accounts belong to the owners’ 
equity group. The relation and the rules for debit and 
credit in these accounts take the following form:
Owners’ Equity
Decrease
Increase
–
+
Dr.
Cr.
Expenses
Dr.
Cr.
+
–
*
Revenues
Dr.
Cr.
–
+
*
*Normal balance before closing.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

763
Glossary
asset from a current cash payment (as for prepaid 
insurance or a long-term depreciable asset).
deferral method See flow-through method (of accounting 
for the investment credit) for definition and contrast.
deferred annuity An annuity whose first payment occurs 
sometime after the end of the first period.
deferred asset Deferred charge.
deferred charge Expenditure not recognized as an expense 
of the period when made but carried forward as an 
asset to be written off in future periods, such as for 
advance rent payments or insurance premiums. See 
deferral.
deferred compensation Compensation earned by an 
employee in the current period, but not paid by 
employer until a later period, sometimes many years 
later.
deferred cost Deferred charge.
deferred credit Sometimes used to indicate advances from 
customers.
deferred debit Deferred charge.
deferred expense Deferred charge.
deferred gross margin Unrealized gross margin.
deferred income Advances from customers.
deferred income tax (liability) A liability that arises when 
the pretax income shown on the tax return is less than 
what it would have been had the firm used the same 
accounting principles and cost basis for assets and lia-
bilities in tax returns as it used for financial report-
ing. SFAS No. 109 (Codification Topic 740) requires 
that the firm debit income tax expense and credit 
deferred income tax liability with the amount of the 
taxes delayed by using accounting principles in tax 
returns different from those used in financial reports. 
See temporary difference, timing difference, permanent 
difference, and installment sales. If, as a result of tem-
porary differences, cumulative taxable income exceeds 
cumulative reported income before taxes, the deferred 
income tax account will have a debit balance, which 
the firm will report as a “deferred tax asset.”
deferred performance obligations The seller has promised 
the buyer that after the sale seller will provide further 
goods or services as part of the initial sale. Examples 
are warranty repairs, technical support, and software 
upgrades.
deferred revenue Sometimes used to indicate advances 
from customers.
deferred tax See deferred income tax.
deferred tax asset See deferred income tax. The taxpayer 
will not report a deferred tax asset unless it believes 
that it will have future taxable income sufficiently high 
so that it can offset that income with the expenses 
subject to temporary differences—appearing in the 
financial statements in a period before they appear as 
deductions on the tax return. To the extent the tax-
payer thinks future income will be insufficient for it 
to be able to offset taxable income with the items gen-
erating the deferred tax asset, it will report the effect 
of the shortfall in an account, contra to the deferred 
tax asset, called deferred tax assetvaluation allowance.
deferred tax asset valuation allowance See deferred tax 
asset.
constant percentage. In pure declining-balance depre-
ciation, the constant percentage is 1 – ns/c, where n is 
the depreciable life, s is salvage value, and c is acquisi-
tion cost. See double declining-balance depreciation.
deep discount bonds Said of bonds selling much below 
(exactly how much is not clear) par method.
defalcation Embezzlement.
default Failure to pay interest or principal on a debt when 
due.
defeasance Transaction with the economic effect of debt 
retirement that does not retire the debt. When interest 
rates increase, many firms find that the market value of 
their outstanding debt has dropped substantially below 
its carrying value. In historical cost accounting for debt 
retirements, retiring debt with a cash payment less 
than the carrying value of the debt results in a gain 
(generally, an extraordinary item). Many firms would 
like to retire the outstanding debt issues and report 
the gain. Two factors impede doing so: (1) the gain 
can be a taxable event generating adverse income tax 
consequences; and (2) the transaction costs in retir-
ing all the debt can be large, in part because the firm 
cannot easily locate all the debt holders or persuade 
them to sell back their bonds to the issuer. The pro-
cess of defeasance serves as the economic equivalent 
to retiring a debt issue while it saves the issuer from 
experiencing adverse tax consequences and from actu-
ally having to locate and retire the bonds. The process 
works as follows. The debt-issuing firm turns over to 
an independent trustee, such as a bank, amounts of 
cash or low-risk government bonds sufficient to make 
all debt service payments on the outstanding debt, 
including bond retirements, in return for the trustee’s 
commitment to make all debt service payments. The 
debt issuer effectively retires the outstanding debt. It 
debits the liability account, credits Cash or Marketable 
Securities as appropriate, and credits Extraordinary 
Gain on Debt Retirement. The trustee can retire debt 
or make debt service payments, whichever it chooses. 
For income tax purposes, however, the firm’s debt 
remains outstanding. The firm will have taxable inter-
est deductions for its still-outstanding debt and taxable 
interest revenue on the investments held by the trustee 
for debt service. In law, the term defeasance means 
“a rendering null and void.” This process renders the 
outstanding debt economically null and void, without 
causing a taxable event.
defensive interval A financial ratio equal to the number 
of days of normal cash expenditures covered by quick 
assets. It is defined as follows:
Quick Assets
(All Expenses Except Amortization and
Others Not Using Funds ÷ 365)
 
The denominator of the ratio is the cash expenditure 
per day. Analysts have found this ratio useful in pre-
dicting bankruptcy.
deferral The accounting process concerned with past cash 
receipts and payments; in contrast to accrual; recog-
nizing a liability resulting from a current cash receipt 
(as for magazines to be delivered) or recognizing an 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

764
Glossary
make substantial payments while still having the right 
to back out of the deal and receive a refund. When 
the seller cannot predict with reasonable precision the 
amount of cash it will ultimately collect and when it 
will receive cash, the seller must credit Deposits, a 
liability account, rather than revenue. (In this regard, 
the accounting differs from that in the completed con-
tract method, in which the account credited offsets the 
Work-in-Process Inventory account.) When the sale 
becomes complete, the firm credits a revenue account 
and debits the Deposits account.
deposits (by customers) A liability that the firm credits 
when receiving cash (as in a bank, or in a grocery store 
when the customer pays for soda-pop bottles with cash 
to be repaid when the customer returns the bottles) 
and when the firm intends to discharge the liability by 
returning the cash. Contrast with the liability account 
Advances from Customers, which the firm credits on 
receipt of cash, expecting later to discharge the liability 
by delivering goods or services. When the firm delivers 
the goods or services, it credits a revenue account.
deposits in transit Deposits made by a firm but not yet 
reflected on the bank statement.
depreciable cost That part of the cost of an asset, usually 
acquisition cost less salvage value, that the firm will 
charge off over the life of the asset through the process 
of depreciation.
depreciable life For an asset, the time period or units of 
activity (such as miles driven for a truck) over which the 
firm allocates the depreciable cost. For tax returns, depre-
ciable life may be shorter than estimated service life.
depreciation Amortization of plant assets; the process of 
allocating the cost of an asset to the periods of ben-
efit—the depreciable life; classified as a production 
cost or a period expense, depending on the asset and 
whether the firm uses full absorption or variable cost-
ing. Depreciation methods described in this glossary 
include the annuity method, appraisal method, compos-
ite method, compound interest method, declining-bal-
ance method, production method, replacement method, 
retirement method, straight-line method, sinking fund 
method, and sum-of-the-years’-digits method.
depreciation reserve An inferior term for accumulated 
depreciation. See reserve. Do not confuse with a 
replacement fund.
derecognize Remove an assetor liability from the balance 
sheet.
derivative (financial instrument) A financial instrument, 
such as an option to purchase a share of stock, whose 
value depends on the underlying value of another 
financial instrument, such as a share of stock, or 
some variable, such as an interest rate or currency; an 
instrument, such as a swap, whose value depends on 
the value of another asset called the “underlying”—for 
example, the right to receive the difference between 
the interest payments on a fixed-rate five-year loan for 
$1 million and the interest payments on a floating-rate 
five-year loan for $1 million. To qualify as a derivative 
under FASB rules, SFAS No. 133 (Codification Topic 
815), the instrument has one or more underlyings, and 
one or more notional amounts or payment provisions 
deficit A debit balance in the Retained Earnings account; 
presented on the balance sheet in a contra account to 
shareholders’ equity; sometimes used to mean negative 
net income for a period.
defined benefit (pension) plan A pension plan in which 
the employer promises specific dollar amounts per 
month to each eligible employee, usually until death 
of the employee, or at a reduced amount until death 
of both the employee and the employee’s spouse; the 
amounts usually depend on a formula that takes into 
account such things as the employee’s earnings, years 
of employment, and age at retirement. The employer 
adjusts its cash contributions and pension expense to 
actuarial experience in the eligible employee group 
and investment performance of the pension fund. This 
is sometimes called a “fixed-benefit” pension plan. 
Contrast with money purchase plan or defined-contri-
bution plan.
defined contribution plan A money purchase (pension) plan 
or other arrangement, based on formula or discretion, 
in which the employer makes cash contributions to 
eligible individual employee accounts under the terms 
of a written plan document. The employee or trustee 
of the funds in the account manages the funds, and 
the employee–beneficiary receives at retirement (or 
at some other agreed time) the amount in the fund. 
The employer makes no promise about that amount. 
Profit-sharing pension plans are of this type.
deflation A period of declining general price-level changes.
Delphi technique Forecasting method in which members 
of the forecasting group prepare individual fore-
casts, share them anonymously with the rest of the 
group, and only then compare forecasts and resolve 
differences.
demand deposit Funds in a checking account at a bank. 
See check.
demand loan See term loan for definition and contrast.
denial of opinion Canada: the statement that an auditor, 
for reasons arising in the audit, is unable to express 
an opinion on whether the financial statements provide 
fair presentation.
denominator volume Capacity measured in the number of 
units the firm expects to produce this period; when 
divided into budgeted fixed costs, results in fixed costs 
applied per unit of product.
department(al) allocation Obtained by first accumulating 
costs in cost pools for each department and then, using 
separate rates, or sets of rates, for each department, 
allocating from each cost pool to products produced 
in that department.
dependent variable See regression analysis.
depletion Exhaustion or amortization of a wasting asset or 
natural resource. Also see percentage depletion.
depletion allowance See percentage depletion.
deposit intangible See core deposit intangible.
deposit, sinking fund Payments made to a sinking fund.
deposit method (of revenue recognition) A method of rev-
enue recognition that is the same as the completed sale 
or completed contract method. In some contexts, such 
as when the customer has the right to return goods for 
a full refund or in retail land sales, the customer must 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

765
Glossary
no unambiguous answer. The meaning of “an accoun-
tant determining acceptable accounting principles” is 
also vague. Does the clause mean merely choosing one 
principle from the set of generally acceptable princi-
ples, or does it mean using professional judgment to 
decide that some of the generally accepted principles 
are not correct under the current circumstances? We 
try never to use “determine” unless we mean “cause.” 
Otherwise, we use “measure,” “report,” “calculate,” 
“compute,” or whatever specific verb seems appropri-
ate. We suggest that careful writers will always deter-
mine to use the most specific verb to convey meaning. 
“Determine” seldom best describes a process in which 
those who make decisions often differ from those who 
apply technique. The term predetermined (factory) 
overhead rate contains an appropriate use of the word.
development stage enterprise As defined in SFAS No. 7 
(Codification Topic 915), a firm whose planned prin-
cipal operations have not commenced or, having com-
menced, have not generated significant revenue. The 
financial statements should identify such enterprises, 
but no special accounting principles apply to them.
diagnostic signal See warning signal for definition and 
contrast.
differentiable cost The cost increments associated with 
infinitesimal changes in volume. If a total cost curve 
is smooth (in mathematical terms, differentiable), then 
we say that the curve graphing the derivative of the 
total cost curve shows differentiable costs.
differential An adjective used to describe the change 
(increase or decrease) in a cost, expense, investment, 
cash flow, revenue, profit, and the like as the firm 
produces or sells one or more additional (or fewer) 
units or undertakes (or ceases) an activity. This term 
has virtually the same meaning as incremental, but if 
the item declines, “decremental” better describes the 
change. Contrast with “marginal,” which means the 
change in cost or other item for a small (one unit or 
even less) change in number of units produced or sold.
differential analysis Analysis of differential costs, rev-
enues, profits, investment, cash flow, and the like.
differential cost See differential.
differential cost analysis See relevant cost analysis.
diluted earnings per share For common stock, smallest 
earnings per share figure that one can obtain by com-
puting an earnings per share for all possible combina-
tions of assumed exercise or conversion of potentially 
dilutive securities.
dilution A potential reduction in earnings per share or book 
value per share by the potential conversion of securities 
or by the potential exercise of warrants or options.
dilutive Said of a security that will reduce earnings per 
share if it is exchanged for common shares.
dip(ping) into LIFO layers See LIFO inventory layer.
direct access Access to computer storage where informa-
tion can be located directly, regardless of its position 
in the storage file. Compare sequential access.
direct cost Cost of direct materials and direct labor incurred 
in producing a product. See prime cost. In some 
accounting literature, writers use this term to mean the 
same thing as variable cost.
or both, it either does not require an initial net invest-
ment or it requires one smaller than would be required 
for other types of contracts expected to have a similar 
response to changes in market factors, and its terms 
permit settlement for cash in lieu of physical delivery 
or the instrument itself trades on an exchange. See 
also forward contract and futures contract.
Descartes’s rule of signs In a capital budgeting context, a 
rule that says a series of cash flows will have a non-
negative number of internal rates of return. The num-
ber equals the number of variations in the sign of the 
cash flow series or is less than that number by an even 
integer. Consider the following series of cash flows, 
the first occurring now and the others at subsequent 
yearly intervals: –100, –100, +50, +175, –50, +100. 
The internal rates of return are the numbers for r that 
satisfy the following equation:
–100 –
100
+
50
+
175
−
50
+
100
= 0
(1 + r)
(1 + r)2
(1 + r)3
(1 + r)4
(1 + r)5
 
The series of cash flows has three variations in sign: 
a change from minus to plus, a change from plus to 
minus, and a change from minus to plus. The rule says 
that this series must have either one or three internal 
rates of return; in fact, it has only one, about 12%. 
But also see reinvestment rate.
detection costs See appraisal costs.
detective controls Internal controls designed to detect, or 
maximize the chance of detecting errors and other 
irregularities.
determination See determine.
determine A term often used (in our opinion, overused) 
by accountants and those who describe the accounting 
process. A leading dictionary associates the following 
meanings with the verb “determine”: settle, decide, 
conclude, ascertain, cause, affect, control, impel, termi-
nate, and decide upon. In addition, accounting writers 
can mean any one of the following: measure, allo-
cate, report, calculate, compute, observe, choose, and 
legislate. In accounting, there are two distinct sets of 
meanings: those encompassed by the synonym “cause 
or legislate” and those encompassed by the synonym 
“measure.” The first set of uses conveys the active 
notion of causing something to happen, and the second 
set of uses conveys the more passive notion of observ-
ing something that someone else has caused to happen.
 
 
An accountant who speaks of cost or income 
determination generally means measurement or obser-
vation, not causation; management and economic con-
ditions cause costs and income to be what they are. 
One who speaks of accounting principles determina-
tion can mean choosing or applying (as in “determin-
ing depreciation charges” from an allowable set) or 
causing to be acceptable (as in the FASB’s determin-
ing the accounting for leases). In the long run, income 
is cash-in less cash-out, so management and economic 
conditions determine (cause) income to be what it 
is. In the short run, reported income is a function 
of accounting principles chosen and applied, so the 
accountant “determines” (measures) income. A ques-
tion such as “Who determines income?” has, therefore, 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

766
Glossary
larger IRR will lead to undertaking the first, not the 
second. Usage calls this shortcoming of choosing 
between alternatives based on the magnitude of the 
internal rate of return, rather than based on the mag-
nitude of the net present value of the cash flows, the 
scale effect.
discounted payback period The shortest amount of time 
that must elapse before the discounted present value 
of cash inflows from a project, excluding potential sal-
vage value, equals the discounted present value of the 
cash outflows.
discounting a note See note receivable discounted and fac-
toring. See also discounted cash flow.
discounts lapsed (lost) The sum of discounts offered for 
prompt payment that the purchaser did not take 
because the discount period expired. See terms of sale.
discovery sampling Acceptance sampling in which the 
analyst accepts an entire population if and only if the 
sample contains no disparities.
discovery value accounting See reserve recognition accounting.
discretionary cost center See engineered cost center for 
definition and contrast.
discretionary costs Programmed costs.
Discussion Memorandum A neutral discussion of all the 
issues concerning an accounting problem of current 
concern to the FASB. The publication of such a docu-
ment usually signals that the FASB will consider issu-
ing a new pronouncement on this particular problem. 
The discussion memorandum brings together material 
about the particular problem to facilitate interaction 
and comment by those interested in the matter. A 
public hearing follows before the FASB will issue an 
Exposure Draft.
dishonored note A promissory note whose maker does 
not repay the loan at maturity, for a term loan, or on 
demand, for a demand loan.
disintermediation Moving funds from one interest-earning 
account to another, typically one promising a higher 
rate. Federal law regulates the maximum interest rate 
that both banks and savings-and-loan associations 
can pay for time deposits. When free-market interest 
rates exceed the regulated interest ceiling for such time 
deposits, some depositors withdraw their funds and 
invest them elsewhere at a higher interest rate. This 
process is known as disintermediation.
distributable income The portion of conventional account-
ing net income that the firm can distribute to owners 
(usually in the form of dividends) without impairing 
the physical capacity of the firm to continue opera-
tions at current levels. Pretax distributable income is 
conventional pretax income less the excess of current 
cost of goods sold and depreciation charges based on 
the replacement cost of productive capacity over cost 
of goods sold and depreciation on an acquisition cost 
basis. Contrast with sustainable income. See inventory 
profit.
distributable surplus Canada and the United Kingdom: 
the statutory designation to describe the portion of 
the proceeds of the issue of shares without not allo-
cated to share capital.
direct costing Another, less-preferred, term for variable 
costing.
direct-financing (capital) lease See sales-type (capital) lease 
for definition and contrast.
direct labor (material) cost Cost of labor (material) applied 
and assigned directly to a product; contrast with indi-
rect labor (material).
direct labor variance Difference between actual and stan-
dard direct labor allowed.
direct method See statement of cash flows.
direct posting A method of bookkeeping in which the 
firm makes entries directly in ledger accounts, without 
using a journal.
direct write-off method See write-off method.
disbursement Payment by cash or by check. See expenditure.
disclaimer of opinion An auditor’s report stating that the 
auditor cannot give an opinion on the financial state-
ments. Usually results from material restrictions on 
the scope of the audit or from material uncertainties, 
which the firm has been unable to resolve by the time 
of the audit, about the accounts.
disclosure The showing of facts in financial statements, 
notes thereto, or the auditor’s report.
discontinued operations See income from discontinued 
operations.
discount In the context of compound interest, bonds and 
notes, the difference between face amount (or future 
value) and present value of a payment; in the context 
of sales and purchases, a reduction in price granted 
for prompt payment. See also chain discount, quantity 
discount, and trade discount.
discount factor The reciprocal of one plus the discount 
rate. If the discount rate is 10% per period, the dis-
count factor for three periods is 1/(1.10)3 = (1.10)–3 = 
0.75131.
discount rate Interest rate used to convert future payments 
to present values.
discount to face value; premium to face value See discount 
and premium.
discounted bailout period In a capital budgeting context, 
the total time that must elapse before discounted value 
of net accumulated cash flows from a project, includ-
ing potential salvage value at various times of assets, 
equals or exceeds the present value of net accumu-
lated cash outflows. Contrast with discounted payback 
period.
discounted (future) cash flow(s) (DCF) Using either the 
net present value or the internal rate of return in an 
analysis to measure the value of future expected cash 
expenditures and receipts at a common date. In dis-
counted cash flow analysis, choosing the alterna-
tive with the largest internal rate of return may yield 
wrong answers given mutually exclusive projects with 
differing amounts of initial investment for two of the 
projects. Consider, to take an unrealistic example, a 
project involving an initial investment of $1, with an 
IRR of 60%, and another project involving an initial 
investment of $1 million, with an IRR of 40%. Under 
most conditions, most firms will prefer the second 
project to the first, but choosing the project with the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

767
Glossary
could be depreciated under the straight-line method at 
$10.80 = 1/2 × ($100 – $40 – $24 – $14.40) per year 
for tax purposes. Note that salvage value does not 
affect these computations except that the method will 
depreciate the carrying value to salvage value.
double entry In recording transactions, a system that 
maintains the equality of the accounting equation 
or the balance sheet. Each entry results in recording 
equal amounts of debits and credits.
double taxation Occurs when the taxing authority (U.S. 
or state) taxes corporate income as earned (first tax) 
and then the same taxing authority taxes the after-tax 
income, distributed to owners as dividends, again as 
personal income tax (second tax).
doubtful accounts Accounts receivable that the firm esti-
mates to be uncollectible.
Dr. The abbreviation for debit, always with the initial 
capital letter. Dr. is a shortened from of the word 
“debitor,” and Cr. comes from the word creditor. 
In the early days of double-entry record keeping in 
the United Kingdom, the major asset was accounts 
receivable, called creditors, and the major liability 
was accounts payable, called debitors. Thus the r in 
Cr. does not refer to the r in credit but to the second 
r in creditor.
draft A written order by the first party, called the drawer, 
instructing a second party, called the drawee (such as 
a bank) to pay a third party, called the payee. See also 
check, cashier’s check, certified check, NOW account, 
sight draft, and trade acceptance.
drawee See draft.
drawer See draft.
drawing account A temporary account used in sole pro-
prietorships and partnerships to record payments to 
owners or partners during a period. At the end of the 
period, the firm closes the drawing account by credit-
ing it and debiting the owner’s or partner’s share of 
income or, perhaps, his or her capital account.
drawings Payments made to a sole proprietor or to a part-
ner during a period. See drawing account.
driver, cost driver A cause of costs incurred. Examples 
include processing orders, issuing an engineering 
change order, changing the production schedule, and 
stopping production to change machine settings. The 
notion arises primarily in product costing, particularly 
activity-based costing.
drop ship(ment) Occurs when a distributor asks a manu-
facturer to send an order directly to the customer 
(ordinarily a manufacturer sends goods to a distribu-
tor, who sends the goods to its customer). Usage calls 
the shipment a “drop shipment” and refers to the 
goods as “drop shipped.”
dry-hole accounting See reserve recognition accounting for 
definition and contrast.
dual effects of transactions The proper recording of any 
transaction in accounting records results in equal 
amounts debited to various accounts as credited to 
various accounts.
dual-transactions assumption (fiction) Occurs when an ana-
lyst, in understanding cash flows, views transactions 
distribution expense Expense of selling, advertising, and 
delivery activities.
dividend A distribution of assets generated from earnings 
to owners of a corporation. The firm may distribute 
cash (cash dividend), stock (stock dividend), property, 
or other securities (dividend in kind). Dividends, 
except stock dividends, become a legal liability of the 
corporation when the corporation’s board declares 
them. Hence, the owner of stock ordinarily recognizes 
revenue when the board of the corporation declares 
the dividend, except for stock dividends. See also liq-
uidating dividend and stock dividend.
dividend yield Dividends declared for the year divided by 
market price of the stock as of the time for which the 
analyst computes the yield.
dividends in arrears Dividends on cumulative preferred 
shares that the corporation’s board has not yet declared 
in accordance with the preferred stock contract. The 
corporation must usually clear such arrearages before 
it can declare dividends on common shares.
dividends in kind See dividend. Sometimes called a property 
dividend.
division A more or less self-contained business that is part 
of a larger family of business units under common 
control. A division may be, but need not be, a sepa-
rate legal entity.
division return on investment (ROI) Equals the division 
profit divided by the investment in the division.
divisional control See control system.
divisional reporting See segment reporting.
dollar sign rules In accounting statements or schedules 
(but not in journal entries), place a dollar sign beside 
the first figure in each column and beside any figure 
below a horizontal line drawn under the preceding fig-
ure. This rule applies for other currency symbols and 
the percentage sign, as well.
dollar-value LIFO method A form of LIFO inventory 
accounting with inventory quantities (layers) mea-
sured in dollar, rather than physical, terms. The 
method adjusts for changing prices by using specific 
price indexes appropriate for the kinds of items in the 
inventory.
donated capital A shareholders’ equity account credited 
when the company receives gifts, such as land or 
buildings, without issuing shares or other owners’ 
equity interest in return. A city might donate a plant 
site hoping the firm will build a factory and employ 
local residents. Do not confuse with contributed 
capital.
double declining-balance depreciation (DDB) Declining-
balance depreciation in which the constant percentage 
used to multiply by carrying value in computing the 
depreciation charge for the year is 2/n, where n is the 
depreciable life in periods. Omit salvage value from the 
depreciable amount. Thus, if the asset cost $100 and 
has a depreciable life of five years, the depreciation in 
the first year would be $40 = 2/5 × $100, in the second 
year would be $24 = 2/5 × ($100 – $40), and in the 
third year would be $14.40 = 2/5 × ($100 – $40 – $24). 
By the fourth year, the remaining undepreciated cost 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

768
Glossary
E
e The base of natural logarithms; 2.71828. . . . If interest 
compounds continuously during a period at stated 
rate of r per period, then the effective interest rate is 
equivalent to interest compounded once per period at 
rate i where i = er – 1. Tables of er are widely avail-
able. If 12% annual interest compounds continuously, 
the effective annual rate is e12 – 1 = 12.75%. The Excel 
function is = exp(number). The formula for the effec-
tive annual rate is r = exp(0.12) – 1 = 12.75%. Interest 
compounded continuously at rate r for d days is erd/365 
– 1. For example, interest compounded for 92 days at 
12% is e12 × 92/365 – 1 = 3.07% [= exp(0.12*92/365) – 1 
= 3.07%].
earn-out For two merging firms, an agreement in which 
the amount paid by the acquiring firm to the acquired 
firm’s shareholders depends on the future earnings of 
the acquired firm or, perhaps, of the consolidated entity.
earned surplus A term that writers once used, but no lon-
ger use, for retained earnings.
earnings A term with no precise meaning but used to mean 
income or sometimes profit. The FASB, in requiring 
that firms report comprehensive income, encouraged 
firms to use the term “earnings” for the total formerly 
reported as net income. Firms will likely only slowly 
change from using the term “net income” to the term 
“earnings.”
earnings, retained See retained earnings.
earnings cycle The period of time, or the series of trans-
actions, during which a given firm converts cash into 
goods and services, then sells goods and services to 
customers, and finally collects cash from customers. 
Cash cycle.
earnings per (common) share (of common stock) Net income 
to common shareholders (net income minus preferred 
dividends) divided by the average number of common 
shares outstanding; see also basic earnings per share and 
diluted earnings per share. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
earnings per share (of preferred stock) Net income divided 
by the average number of preferred shares outstanding 
during the period. This ratio indicates how well income 
covers (or protects) the preferred dividends; it does not 
indicate a legal share of earnings.
earnings statement Income statement.
easement The acquired right or privilege of one person 
to use, or have access to, certain property of another. 
For example, a public utility’s right to lay pipes or 
lines under the property of another and to service 
those facilities.
EBIT Earnings before interest and (income) taxes; acro-
nym used by analysts.
EBITDA Earnings before interest, (income) taxes, depre-
ciation, and amortization; acronym used by analysts 
to focus on a particular measure of cash flow; used 
in valuation. This is not the same as, but is similar in 
concept to, cash flow from operations. Some analysts 
exclude nonrecurring items from this total.
economic consequences The FASB says that in setting 
accounting principles, it should take into account the 
not involving cash as though the firm first generated 
cash and then used it. For example, the analyst might 
view the issue of capital stock in return for the asset 
land as though the firm issued stock for cash and then 
used cash to acquire the land. Other examples of 
transactions that could involve the dual-transaction 
assumption are the issue of a mortgage in return for a 
noncurrent asset and the issue of stock to bondholders 
on conversion of their convertible bonds.
dual transfer prices Occurs when the transfer price charged 
to the buying division differs from that credited to the 
selling division. Such prices make sense when the sell-
ing division needs to recover full costs, which exceed 
market price, while the buying division wants not to 
pay more than market price. Seldom seen in practice 
when the two divisions operate in different income 
tax jurisdictions, as the differences in price lead to 
arguments with at least one of the taxing authorities. 
An exception occurs when the minimum selling price 
required by regulatory authorities in the selling coun-
try exceeds the maximum buying price allowed by the 
regulatory authorities in the purchasing country.
duality The double entry record-keeping axiom that every 
transaction must result in equal debit and credit amounts.
due diligence An investigation of the financial affairs of 
a company for the purpose of disclosing matters that 
may influence the terms or conclusion of a potential 
acquisition.
dumping A foreign firm’s selling a good or service in one 
country at a price below market price at home or, in 
some contexts, below some measure of cost (which 
concept is not clearly defined). The practice is illegal 
in the United States if it harms (or threatens to harm) 
a U.S. industry.
DuPont decomposition analysis The ratio A/B is algebra-
ically equal to A/C × C/B, so long as B and C are 
both not zero. The splitting of A/B into A/C × C/B 
is referred to as a “decomposition.” Often, in under-
standing changes to the financial ratio A/B, such as 
Rate of Return on Assets, across time or across com-
panies, one understands better by examining sepa-
rately the changes in A/C and C/B. Analysts at the 
DuPont Corporation in the 1950s discovered that 
they could better understand changes in financial 
ratios by decomposing into components. Consider, 
for example,
Rate of Return on Assets = Net Income
Total Assets
 
This is equivalent to:
Rate of Return on Assets = Net Income × Sales
Sales
Assets
 
The first term on the right measures profitability of 
sales, and the second term measures how efficiently 
a firm uses its assets to generate sales. Analysts at 
DuPont decomposed several financial ratios and, in 
the intervening years, other analysts have decomposed 
other ratios but used the term “DuPont decomposi-
tion analysis” to refer to the general principle.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

769
Glossary
and give the same amount as results from compound-
ing interest each period during the year. For example, 
if 12% per year compounds monthly, the effective 
annual interest rate is 12.683%. That is, if you com-
pound $100 each month at 1% per month, the $100 
will grow to $112.68 at the end of the year. In general, 
if the nominal rate of r % per year compounds m times 
per year, then the effective rate is (1 + r/m)m – 1.
efficiency variance A term used for the quantity variance 
for materials or labor or variable overhead costs in a 
standard costing system.
efficient capital market A market in which security prices 
reflect all available information and react nearly 
instantaneously and in an unbiased fashion to new 
information.
efficient market hypothesis The finance supposition that 
security prices trade in efficient capital markets.
EITF Emerging Issues Task Force.
electronic data processing Performing computations and 
other data-organizing steps in a computer, in con-
trast to doing these steps by hand or with mechanical 
calculators.
eligible Under income tax legislation, a term that restricts or 
otherwise alters the meaning of another tax or account-
ing term, generally to signify that the related assets or 
operations may receive a specified tax treatment.
eliminations In preparing consolidated statements, work 
sheet entries made to avoid duplicating the amounts of 
assets, liabilities, owners’ equity, revenues, and expenses 
of the consolidated entity when the firm sums the 
accounts of the parent and subsidiaries. These entries 
eliminate any intercompany profit in beginning inven-
tory, if any.
Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) A group convened 
by the FASB to deal more rapidly with accounting 
issues than the FASB’s due-process procedures can 
allow. The task force comprises about 15 members 
from public accounting, industry, and several trade 
associations. Several FASB board members usually 
attend and participate. The chief accountant of the 
SEC has indicated that the SEC will require that 
published financial statements follow guidelines set 
by a consensus of the EITF. The EITF requires that 
nearly all its members agree on a position before that 
position receives the label of “consensus.” Such posi-
tions appear in Abstracts of the EITF, published by 
the FASB and now included in its Codification. Since 
1984, the EITF has become one of the promulgators 
of U.S. GAAP.
employee stock option (ESO) See stock option.
Employee Stock Ownership Trust (or Plan) See ESOT.
employer, employee payroll taxes See payroll taxes.
enabling costs A type of capacity cost that a firm will stop 
incurring if it shuts down operations completely but 
will incur in full if it carries out operations at any 
level. Examples include costs of a security force or of 
a quality-control inspector for an assembly line. Con-
trast with standby costs.
encumbrance In governmental accounting, an anticipated 
expenditure or funds restricted for an anticipated 
real effects on various participants in the business 
world. It calls these effects “economic consequences.”
economic depreciation Decline in current cost (or fair 
value) of an asset during a period.
economic entity See entity.
economic life The time span over which the firm expects to 
receive the benefits of an asset. The economic life of 
a patent, copyright, or franchise may be less than the 
legal life. Service life.
economic order quantity (EOQ) In mathematical inventory 
analysis, the optimal amount of stock to order when 
demand reduces inventory to a level called the “reor-
der point.” If A represents the incremental cost of 
placing a single order, D represents the total demand 
for a period of time in units, and H represents the 
incremental holding cost during the period per unit of 
inventory, then the economic order quantity is Usage 
sometimes calls EOQ the “optimal lot size.”
economic transfer pricing rule Transfer at the differential 
outlay cost to the selling division (typically variable 
costs), plus the opportunity cost to the company of 
making the internal transfers ($0 if the seller has idle 
capacity, or selling price minus variable costs if the 
seller is operating at capacity).
economic value added (EVA®) The amount of earnings gen-
erated above the cost of funds invested to generate those 
earnings. To calculate economic value added, find the 
difference between (the net after-tax operating profit) 
and (the product of the weighted-average cost of capital 
multiplied by the investment in the economic unit).
ED Exposure Draft.
EDP Electronic data processing.
effective interest method In computing interest expense (or 
revenue), a systematic method that makes the inter-
est expense (revenue) for each period divided by the 
amount of the net liability (asset) at the beginning 
of the period equal to the yield rate on the liability 
(asset) at the time of issue (acquisition). Interest for a 
period is the yield rate (at time of issue) multiplied by 
the net liability (asset) at the start of the period. The 
amortization of discount or premium is the plug to give 
equal debits and credits. (Interest expense is a debit, 
and the amount of debt service payment is a credit.)
effective annual yield See effective (interest) rate.
effective (income) tax rate For a taxpayer, the amount of 
income tax expense (not amount payable) divided by 
pretax income.
effective (interest) rate Of a liability such as a bond, the 
internal rate of return or yield to maturity at the time 
of issue. Contrast with coupon rate. If the borrower 
issues the bond for a price below par, the effective rate 
is higher than the coupon rate; if it issues the bond 
for a price greater than par, the effective rate is lower 
than the coupon rate.
 
 
In the context of compound interest, the effective 
rate occurs when the compounding period on a loan 
differs from one year, such as a nominal interest rate 
of 12% compounded monthly. The effective interest is 
the single rate that one could use at the end of the year 
to multiply the principal at the beginning of the year 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

770
Glossary
EOQ Economic order quantity.
EPS Earnings per share.
EPVI Excess present value index.
equalization reserve An inferior title for the allowance 
or estimated liability account when the firm uses the 
allowance method for such things as maintenance 
expenses. Periodically, the accountant will debit main-
tenance expense and credit the allowance. As the firm 
makes expenditures for maintenance, it will debit the 
allowance and credit cash or the other asset used in 
maintenance.
equities Liabilities plus owners’ equity. See equity.
equity A claim to assets; a source of assets. SFAC No. 3 
defines equity as “the residual interest in the assets of 
an entity that remains after deducting its liabilities.” 
Thus, many knowledgeable people use “equity” to 
exclude liabilities and count only owners’ equities. We 
prefer to use the term to mean all liabilities plus all 
owners’ equity because there is no other single word 
that serves this useful purpose. We fight a losing 
battle.
equity financing Raising funds by issuing capital stock. 
Contrast with debt financing.
equity method In accounting for an investment in the stock 
of another company, a method that debits the propor-
tionate share of the earnings of the other company to 
the investment account and credits that amount to a 
revenue account as earned. When the investor receives 
dividends, it debits cash and credits the investment 
account. An investor who owns sufficient shares of 
stock of an unconsolidated company to exercise sig-
nificant control over the actions of that company must 
use the equity method. It is one of the few instances in 
which the firm recognizes revenue without an increase 
in working capital.
equity method investment An investment accounted for 
with the equity method. 
equity ratio Shareholders’ equity divided by total assets. 
See ratio.
equivalent production Equivalent units.
equivalent units (of work) The number of units of com-
pleted output that would require the same costs that 
a firm would actually incur for the production of 
completed and partially completed units during a 
period. For example, if at the beginning of a period 
the firm starts 100 units and by the end of the period 
has incurred costs for each of these equal to 75% of 
total costs to complete the units, then the equivalent 
units of work for the period would be 75. This is used 
primarily in process costing calculations to measure in 
uniform terms the output of a continuous process.
ERISA (Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974) The federal law that sets most pension plan 
requirements.
error accounting See accounting errors.
escalator clause Inserted in a purchase or rental contract, 
a clause that permits, under specified conditions, 
upward adjustments of price.
escapable cost Avoidable cost.
expenditure, such as for outstanding purchase orders. 
Appropriations less expenditures less outstanding 
encumbrances yields unencumbered balance.
ending inventory The cost of inventory on hand at the end 
of the accounting period; often called closing inventory. 
Ending inventory from the end of one period becomes 
the beginning inventory for the next period.
endorsee See endorser.
endorsement See draft. The payee signs the draft and 
transfers it to a fourth party, such as the payee’s bank.
endorser A note or draft payee, who signs the note after 
writing “Pay to the order of X,” transfers the note 
to person X, and presumably receives some benefit, 
such as cash, in return. Usage refers to person X as 
the endorsee. The endorsee then has the rights of the 
payee and may in turn become an endorser by endors-
ing the note to another endorsee.
engineered cost center Responsibility center with suffi-
ciently well-established relations between inputs and 
outputs that the analyst, given data on inputs, can 
predict the outputs or, conversely, given the outputs, 
can estimate the amounts of inputs that the process 
should have used. Consider the relation between 
pounds of flour (input) and loaves of bread (output). 
Contrast discretionary cost center, where such rela-
tions are so imprecise that analysts have no reliable 
way to relate inputs to outputs. Consider the relation 
between advertising the corporate logo or trademark 
(input) and future revenues (output).
engineering method (of cost estimation) To estimate unit 
cost of product from study of the materials, labor, and 
overhead components of the production process.
enterprise Any business organization, usually defining the 
accounting entity.
enterprise fund A fund that a governmental unit estab-
lishes to account for acquisition, operation, and main-
tenance of governmental services that the government 
intends to be self-supporting from user charges, such 
as for water or airports and some toll roads.
entity A person, partnership, corporation, or other orga-
nization. The accounting entity that issues accounting 
statements may not be the same as the entity defined 
by law. For example, a sole proprietorship is an 
accounting entity, but the individual’s combined busi-
ness and personal assets are the legal entity in most 
jurisdictions. Several affiliated corporations may be 
separate legal entities but issue consolidated financial 
statements for the group of companies operating as a 
single economic entity.
entity theory The corporation view that emphasizes the 
form of the accounting equation that says Assets = 
Equities. Contrast with proprietorship theory. The 
entity theory focuses less on the distinction between 
liabilities and shareholders’ equity than does the pro-
prietorship theory. The entity theory views all equities 
as coming to the corporation from outsiders who have 
claims of differing legal standings.
entry value The current cost of acquiring an asset or ser-
vice at a fair market value. Replacement cost.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

771
Glossary
ESOT or between the ESOT and the employees to be 
based on the appraised values of the shares.
estate planning The arrangement of an individual’s affairs 
to facilitate the passage of assets to beneficiaries and 
to minimize taxes at death.
estimated expenses Expenditures to be made after revenue 
recognition. For example, expenditures for repairs under 
warranty are after cost. Proper recognition of after cost 
involves a debit to expense at the time of the sale and a 
credit to an estimated liability. When the firm discharges 
the liability, it debits the estimated liability and credits 
the assets consumed. Sometimes called after cost.
estimated liability The preferred terminology for estimated 
costs the firm will incur for such uncertain things as 
repairs under warranty. An estimated liability appears 
on the balance sheet. Contrast with contingency.
estimated revenue A term used in governmental account-
ing to designate revenue expected to accrue during a 
period independent of whether the government will 
collect it during the period. The governmental unit 
usually establishes a budgetary account at the begin-
ning of the budget period.
estimated salvage value Synonymous with salvage value of 
an asset before its retirement.
estimates, changes in See accounting changes.
estimation sampling The use of sampling technique in 
which the sampler infers a qualitative (for example, 
fraction female) or quantitative (for example, mean 
weight) characteristic of the population from the 
occurrence of that characteristic in the sample drawn. 
See attribute(s) sampling; variables sampling.
EURL (entreprise unipersonnelle à responsabilité limi-
tée) France: similar to SARL but having only one 
shareholder.
event certain to occur See redeemable (preferred shares).
ex div (dividend) Said of shares whose market price quoted 
in the market has been reduced by a dividend already 
declared but not yet paid. The corporation will send 
the dividend to the person who owned the share on 
the record date. One who buys the share ex dividend 
will not receive the dividend although the corporation 
has not yet paid it.
ex rights The condition of securities whose quoted mar-
ket price no longer includes the right to purchase new 
securities, such rights having expired or been retained 
by the seller. Compare cum rights.
except for Qualification in auditor’s report, usually caused 
by a change, approved by the auditor, from one accept-
able accounting principle or procedure to another.
excess present value In a capital budgeting context, present 
value (of anticipated cash inflows minus cash outflows 
including initial cash outflow for a project. The ana-
lyst uses the cost of capital as the discount rate.
excess present value index Present value of future cash 
inflows divided by initial cash outlay.
exchange The generic term for a transaction (or, more 
technically, a reciprocal transfer) between one entity 
and another; in another context, the name for a mar-
ket, such as the New York Stock Exchange.
ESOP (Employee Stock Ownership Plan) See ESOT.
ESOT (Employee Stock Ownership Trust) A trust fund 
that is created by a corporate employer and that can 
provide certain tax benefits to the corporation while 
providing for employee stock ownership. The corpo-
rate employer can contribute up to 25% of its payroll 
per year to the trust. The corporation may deduct the 
amount of the contribution from otherwise taxable 
income for federal income tax purposes. The trustee of 
the assets must use them for the benefit of  employees—
for example, to fund death or retirement benefits. 
The assets of the trust are usually the common shares, 
sometimes nonvoting, of the corporate employer. 
For an example of the potential tax shelter, consider 
the case of a corporation with $1 million of debt out-
standing, which it wants to retire, and an annual pay-
roll of $2 million. The corporation sells $1 million of 
common stock to the ESOT. The ESOT borrows $1 
million with the loan guaranteed by, and therefore a 
contingency of, the corporation. The corporation uses 
the $1 million proceeds of the stock issue to retire its 
outstanding debt. (The debt of the corporation has 
been replaced with the debt of the ESOT.) The corpo-
ration can contribute $500,000 (= 0.25 × $2 million 
payroll) to the ESOT each year and treat the contri-
bution as a deduction for tax purposes. After a little 
more than two years, the ESOT has received sufficient 
funds to retire its loan. The corporation has effectively 
repaid its original $1 million debt with pretax dollars. 
Assuming an income tax rate of 40%, it has saved 
$400,000 (= 0.40 × $1 million) of after-tax dollars if 
the $500,000 expense for the contribution to the ESOT 
for the pension benefits of employees would have been 
made, in one form or another, anyway. Observe that 
the corporation could use the proceeds ($1 million in 
the example) of the stock issued to the ESOT for any 
of several different purposes: financing expansion, 
replacing plant assets, or acquiring another company. 
Basically this same form of pretax-dollar financing 
through pensions is available with almost any corpo-
rate pension plan, with one important exception. The 
trustees of an ordinary pension trust must invest the 
assets prudently, and if they do not, they are person-
ally liable to the employees. Current judgment about 
prudent investment requires diversification—trustees 
should invest pension trust assets in a wide variety of 
investment opportunities. (The trustee may not ordi-
narily invest more than 10% of a pension trust’s assets 
in the parent’s common stock.) Thus, the ordinary 
pension trust cannot, in practice, invest all, or even 
most, of its assets in the parent corporation’s stock. 
This constraint does not apply to the investments of 
an ESOT. The trustee may invest all ESOT assets in 
the parent company’s stock. The ESOT also provides 
a means for closely held corporations to achieve wider 
ownership of shares without going public. The laws 
enabling ESOTs provide for the independent profes-
sional appraisal of shares not traded in public markets 
and for transactions between the corporation and the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

772
Glossary
service potential. As a verb, “expense” means to des-
ignate an expenditure—past, current, or future—as a 
current expense.
expense account An account to accumulate expenses; 
closed to retained earnings at the end of the accounting 
period; a temporary owners’ equity account; also used 
to describe a listing of expenses that an employee sub-
mits to the employer for reimbursement.
expense recognition The process of recording an expense, 
to appear in the current period’s income statement. 
Often, the timing of expense recognition results from 
the matching convention, which suggests the firm rec-
ognize the expense in the same period when it recog-
nizes the revenue that expenses helped generate.
experience rating A term used in insurance, particularly 
unemployment insurance, to denote changes from 
ordinary rates to reflect extraordinarily large or small 
amounts of claims over time by the insured.
expired cost An expense or a loss.
Exposure Draft (ED) A preliminary statement of the 
FASB showing the contents of a pronouncement 
being considered for enactment by the board.
external failure costs Costs that a firm incurs when it 
detects nonconforming products and services after 
delivering them to customers, including warranty 
repairs, product liability, marketing costs to reach 
consumers, and sales allowances.
external reporting Reporting to shareholders and the pub-
lic, as opposed to internal reporting for management’s 
benefit. See financial accounting, and contrast with 
managerial accounting.
extraordinary gains (losses) (item) A material expense or 
revenue item characterized both by its unusual nature 
and by its infrequency of occurrence; appears along 
with its income tax effects separately in the income 
statement. A firm first reports its income after tax. 
It then reports three items, net of tax: Changes in 
accounting principles, extraordinary items, and income 
from discontinued operations. Accountants would 
probably classify a major loss from an earthquake as 
an extraordinary item.
extrinsic rewards Rewards that come from outside the 
individual, such as rewards from a teacher, a parent, 
an organization, and a spouse; they include grades, 
money, praise, and prizes. Contrast with intrinsic 
rewards.
F
face (par) amount (value) The nominal amount due at matu-
rity from a bond or note not including the contractual 
periodic coupon payment that may also come due 
on the same date. Good usage calls the correspond-
ing amount of a stock certificate the par or stated 
value, whichever applies. Not all shares have such an 
amount; such shares are called no-par.
facility-level activities Work that supports the entire orga-
nization. Examples include top management, human 
resources, and research and development.
exchange gain or loss The phrase used by the FASB for 
foreign exchange gain or loss.
exchange rate The price of one country’s currency in 
terms of another country’s currency. For example, the 
British pound sterling might be worth U.S.$1.95 at a 
given time. The exchange rate would be stated as “one 
pound is worth one dollar and ninety-five cents” or 
“one dollar is worth £0.513” (= £1/$1.95).
excise tax Tax on the manufacture, sale, or consumption 
of a commodity.
executory contract A mere exchange of promises; an agree-
ment providing for payment by a payor to a payee on 
the performance of an act or service by the payee, such 
as a labor contract. Accounting does not recognize 
benefits arising from executory contracts as assets, nor 
does it recognize obligations arising from such con-
tracts as liabilities. See partially executory contract.
exemption A term used for various amounts subtracted 
from gross income in computing taxable income. 
Usage does not call all such subtractions exemptions. 
See tax deduction.
exercise Occurs when owners of an option or warrant 
purchase the security that the option entitles them to 
purchase.
exercise price See option.
exit value The proceeds that would be received if assets 
were disposed of (or the amounts the firm would 
have to pay to transfer a liability) in an arm’s length 
transaction. Current selling price; net realizable value. 
Some definitions of fair value in U.S. GAAP define 
fair value in terms of exit value.
expectancy theory The notion that people act in ways to 
obtain rewards and prevent penalties.
expected value The mean or arithmetic average of a statis-
tical distribution or series of numbers.
expected value of (perfect) information Expected net ben-
efits from an undertaking with (perfect) information 
minus expected net benefits of the undertaking with-
out (perfect) information.
expendable fund In governmental accounting, a fund 
whose resources, principal, and earnings the govern-
mental unit may distribute.
expenditure Payment of cash for goods or services received. 
Payment may occur at the time the purchaser receives 
the goods or services or at a later time. Virtually syn-
onymous with disbursement except that disbursement 
is a broader term and includes all payments for goods 
or services. Contrast with expense.
expense As a noun, a decrease in owners’ equity accom-
panying the decrease in net assets caused by selling 
goods or rendering services or by the passage of time; 
a “gone” (net) asset; an expired cost. Measure expense 
as the cost of the (net) assets used. Do not confuse 
with expenditure or disbursement, which may occur 
before, when, or after the firm recognizes the related 
expense. Use the word “cost” to refer to an item that 
still has service potential and is an asset. Exceptions 
sometimes occur, as in Cost of Goods Sold. Use the 
word “expense” after the firm has used the asset’s 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

773
Glossary
reported in net income. If the hedge is effective, the 
gains and losses on these items will offset each other, 
although both will appear in net income.
fair value option Investors in marketable securities must 
report carrying value at fair value, with changes 
reported in income for trading securities and in other 
comprehensive income for securities available for sale. 
This option allows the investor to report the carry-
ing value of these items at fair value, with changes in 
fair value reported in income, not other comprehen-
sive income. Issuers (see issue) of debt may, but need 
not, report the carrying value of these items at fair 
value, with changes in fair value reported in income, 
not other comprehensive income.
faithful representation From the conceptual frameworks 
developed by the FASB and IASB, a qualitative char-
acteristic of decision-useful information. A faithful 
representation means that the words and numbers 
used to depict an economic phenomenon in finan-
cial reports correspond to the phenomenon being 
depicted. A perfectly faithful representation would be 
complete, neutral, in the sense of being unbiased, and 
free from error.
FAS Statement of Financial Accounting standards of the 
FASB.
FASAC Financial Accounting standards Advisory Council.
FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board) An inde-
pendent board responsible, since 1973, for establishing 
U.S. GAAP: generally accepted accounting principles. 
Its official pronouncements are Statements of Finan-
cial Accounting Concepts (SFAC), Statements of 
Financial Accounting standards (SFAS), and FASB 
Interpretations. See also Discussion Memorandum and 
Technical Bulletin. The FASB publishes its Codifica-
tion to bring all its guidance into a single place. Web 
site: www.fasb.org.
FASB Interpretation FIN An official FASB statement 
interpreting the meaning of Accounting Research 
Bulletins, APB Opinions, and Statements of Financial 
Accounting standards. FIN 46, for example, has cur-
tailed the use of off-balance-sheet financings. Part of 
the FASB Codification.
FASB Technical Bulletin See Technical Bulletin.
favorable variance An excess of actual revenues over 
expected revenues; an excess of standard cost over 
actual cost.
federal income tax Income tax levied by the U.S. govern-
ment on individuals and corporations.
Federal Insurance Contributions Act See FICA.
Federal Unemployment Tax Act See FUTA.
Fédération des Experts Comptables Européens (FEE) The 
European Federation of Accountants, based in Brus-
sels, represents the European accounting profession 
on matters relating to the initiatives of the European 
Union, including especially its administrative wing, 
the European Commission. See www.fee.org.
feedback The process of informing employees about how 
their actual performance compares with the expected 
or desired level of performance, in the hope that the 
factor For an interest rate r, a number of the form (1 + r)n. 
When n is positive, then the number is a future value 
factor or an accumulation factor. When n is negative, 
then the number is a discount factor or present value 
factor. In another context, as a noun, a firm who buys 
accounts receivable from their owner; as a verb, the 
process of factoring; to factor.
factoring The process of buying notes or accounts receiv-
able at a discount from the holder of the debt; from 
the holder’s point of view, the selling of such notes or 
accounts. When the transaction involves a single note, 
usage calls the process discounting a note.
factory Used synonymously with “manufacturing” as an 
adjective. See manufacturing cost.
factory burden Manufacturing overhead.
factory cost Manufacturing cost.
factory expense Manufacturing overhead. Expense is a 
poor term in this context because the item is a product 
cost.
factory overhead Usually an item of manufacturing cost 
other than direct labor or direct materials.
fair market value See fair value.
fair presentation (fairness) One of the qualitative standards 
of financial reporting. When the auditor’s report says 
that the financial statements “present fairly . . . ,” the 
auditor means that the accounting alternatives used by 
the entity all comply with U.S. GAAP. In recent years, 
however, courts have ruled that conformity with gener-
ally accepted accounting principles may be insufficient 
grounds for an opinion that the statements are fair.
fair value, fair market value (price) Price (value) negotiated 
at arm’s length between a willing buyer and a willing 
seller, each acting rationally in his or her own self-
interest in an unrestricted market, neither compelled 
to transact and both have reasonable knowledge of 
the relevant facts. The accountant may estimate this 
amount in the absence of a monetary transaction. U.S. 
GAAP presents a hierarchy of methods for measuring 
fair value, starting with observation of prices in mar-
ket transactions. The FASB and SEC have made clear 
that accountants need not base fair value measure-
ments of observed prices if the transactions generat-
ing those prices were in inactive markets. Accountants 
sometime measure fair value as the present value of 
expected cash flows. In some contexts, fair value dif-
fers from market value in that the former takes into 
account the identity, tastes, and utility of the specific 
parties to the transaction, while market value assumes 
typical buyers and sellers. In this sense a fair value 
may exceed a market value if the parties to a transac-
tions attach more value to the item than do other mar-
ket participants. The market value of used silverware 
might be less than the fair value two siblings are will-
ing to pay for a piece of their grandfather’s collection.
fair-value hedge A hedge of an exposure to changes in 
the fair value of a recognized asset or liability or of an 
unrecognized firm commitment. If the firm uses hedge 
accounting, it will report both the hedged item and the 
hedging instrument at fair value, with gains and losses 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

774
Glossary
 
[a]  imposes on one entity a contractual obligation 
(1) to deliver cash or another financial instrument 
to a second entity or (2) to exchange financial 
instruments on potentially unfavorable terms with 
the second entity, and
 
[b]  conveys to that second entity a contractual right 
(1) to receive cash or another financial instrument 
from the first entity or (2) to exchange other finan-
cial instruments on potentially favorable terms 
with the first entity.”
 
For some derivatives that qualify as financial instru-
ments, the obligation can be to deliver a commodity.
financial leverage See leverage.
financial liability An obligation to pay a specified amount 
of cash or to give another financial liability. See finan-
cial instrument.
financial literacy The NYSE and the NASDAQ have 
required that companies who list their shares with 
these groups have an audit committee comprising at 
least three independent board members who are finan-
cially literate. The organizations mention the ability 
to understand the financial statements, but leave the 
definition of financial literacy to the individual boards 
to define. We think financial literacy in this sense 
requires the ability to understand the transactions 
requiring critical accounting judgments or estimates; 
the accounting issues and choices for those judgments; 
what management chose, and why; and what opportu-
nities management’s choices provide for earnings man-
agement. See critical accounting judgments.
financial model Model, typically expressed with arithmetic 
relations, that allows an organization to test the inter-
action of economic variables in a variety of settings.
financial position (condition) Statement of the assets and 
equities of a firm; displayed as a balance sheet.
financial projection An estimate of financial position, 
results of operations, and changes in cash flows for one 
or more future periods based on a set of assumptions. 
If the assumptions do not represent the most likely 
outcomes, then GAAS call the estimate a projection. 
If the assumptions represent the most probable out-
comes, then GAAS call the estimate a forecast. “Most 
probable” means that management has evaluated the 
assumptions and that they are management’s judg-
ment of the most likely set of conditions and most 
likely outcomes.
financial ratio See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
financial reporting objectives Broad objectives that are 
intended to guide the development of specific account-
ing standards; set out by FASB SFAC No. 1.
financial reporting (process) Managers and governing 
boards of reporting entities select from accounting 
principles provided by standard setters and regulatory 
bodies and prepare financial statements, which inde-
pendent external auditors attest to, to enable users of 
financial statements to make informed decisions.
Financial Reporting Release Series of releases, issued by 
the SEC since 1982; replaces the Accounting Series 
Release. See SEC.
information will reinforce desired behavior and reduce 
unproductive behavior.
FEI Financial Executives International.
FICA (Federal Insurance Contributions Act) The law that 
sets Social Security taxes and benefits.
fiduciary Someone responsible for the custody or adminis-
tration of property belonging to another; for example, 
an executor (of an estate), agent, receiver (in bank-
ruptcy), or trustee (of a trust).
FIFO (first-in, first-out) The inventory flow assumption 
that firms use to compute ending inventory cost from 
most recent purchases and cost of goods sold from 
oldest purchases including beginning inventory. FIFO 
describes cost flow from the viewpoint of the income 
statement. From the balance sheet perspective, LISH 
(last-in, still-here) describes this same cost flow. Con-
trast with LIFO.
finance As a verb, to supply with funds through the issue 
of stocks, bonds, notes, or mortgages or through the 
retention of earnings.
finance lease (method) See capital lease method.
financial accounting The accounting for assets, liabilities, 
equities, revenues, expenses, and cash flows of a busi-
ness; primarily concerned with the historical report-
ing, to external users, of the financial position and 
operations of an entity on a regular, periodic basis. 
Contrast with managerial accounting.
Financial Accounting Foundation The independent foun-
dation (committee), governed by a board of trustees, 
that raises funds to support the FASB and GASB.
Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Council (FASAC) 
A committee of academics, preparers, attestors, and 
users giving advice to the FASB on matters of strat-
egy and emerging issues. The council spends much of 
each meeting learning about current developments in 
standard setting from the FASB staff.
Financial Accounting Standards Board FASB.
Financial Executives International (FEI) An organization 
of financial executives, such as chief accountants, con-
trollers, and treasurers, of large businesses. In recent 
years, the FEI has been a critic of the FASB because it 
views many of the FASB requirements as burdensome 
while not cost-effective.
financial asset Cash or the ownership interest in a contract, 
such as an account receivable, that gives its owner the 
right to receive cash or another financial instrument. 
This definition is recursive. See financial instrument.
financial assets at fair value through profit or loss  IFRS 
term for trading securities.
financial expense An expense incurred in raising or manag-
ing funds.
financial flexibility As defined by SFAC No. 5, “the ability 
of an entity to take effective actions to alter amounts 
and timing of cash flows so it can respond to unex-
pected needs and opportunities.”
financial forecast See financial projection for definition 
and contrast.
financial instrument The FASB defines this term as fol-
lows: “Cash, evidence of an ownership interest in an 
entity, or a contract that both:
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

775
Glossary
fixed Said of an item that does not vary with volume of 
activity, at least in the short run.
fixed assets Plant assets.
fixed assets turnover (ratio) Sales divided by average total 
fixed assets. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
fixed benefit plan A defined-benefit plan.
fixed budget A plan that provides for specified amounts of 
expenditures and receipts that do not vary with activ-
ity levels; sometimes called a static budget. Contrast 
with flexible budget.
fixed charges earned (coverage) ratio Income before inter-
est expense and income tax expense divided by interest 
expense.
fixed cost; fixed expense An expenditure or expense that 
does not vary with volume of activity, at least in the 
short run. See capacity costs, which include enabling 
costs and standby costs, and programmed costs for var-
ious subdivisions of fixed costs. See cost terminology.
fixed cost price variance (spending variance) The difference 
between actual and budgeted fixed costs.
fixed interval sampling A method of choosing a sample: 
the analyst selects the first item from the population 
randomly, drawing the remaining sample items at 
equally spaced intervals.
fixed liability Long-term liability.
fixed manufacturing overhead applied The portion of fixed 
manufacturing overhead cost allocated to units pro-
duced during a period.
fixed overhead variance Difference between actual fixed 
manufacturing costs and fixed manufacturing costs 
applied to production in a standard costing system.
flexible budget Budget that projects receipts and expen-
ditures as a function of activity levels. Contrast with 
fixed budget.
flexible budget allowance With respect to manufactur-
ing overhead, the total cost that a firm should have 
incurred at the level of activity actually experienced 
during the period.
float Checks whose amounts the bank has added to the 
depositor’s bank account but whose amounts the bank 
has not yet reduced from the drawer’s bank account. 
The number of shares publicly owned and available 
for trading, or the dollar value of a bond issue publicly 
owned and available for trading.
flow The change in the amount of an item over time. Con-
trast with stock.
flow assumption An assumption used when the firm makes 
a withdrawal from inventory. The firm must compute 
the cost of the withdrawal by a flow assumption if the 
firm does not use the specific identification method. 
The usual flow assumptions are FIFO, LIFO, and 
weighted average.
flow of costs Costs passing through various classifications 
within an entity engaging, at least in part, in manu-
facturing activities. See the diagram on page 776 for 
a summary of product and period cost flows. See also 
cost-flow assumption.
flow-through method Accounting for the investment credit 
to show all income statement benefits of the credit in 
the year of acquisition rather than spreading them 
financial statements The balance sheet, income statement, 
statement of retained earnings, statement of cash flows, 
statement of changes in owners’ equity accounts, state-
ment of comprehensive income, and notes thereto.
financial structure Capital structure.
financial vice president Person in charge of the entire 
accounting and finance function; typically one of the 
three most influential people in the company.
financial year Australia and the United Kingdom: term 
for fiscal year.
financing (activities) Obtaining resources from (a) own-
ers and providing them with a return on and a return 
of their investment and (b) creditors and repaying 
amounts borrowed (or otherwise settling the obliga-
tion). See statement of cash flows.
financing lease Capital lease.
financing structure The mix of debt and owners’ equity 
that provides the sources of funding for the assets of 
an entity.
finished goods (inventory account) Manufactured product 
ready for sale; a current asset (inventory) account.
finite life The owner of an intangible asset with an indefi-
nite life does not amortize it but tests it periodically 
for impairment. If the asset has non-indefinite life and 
a non-infinite life, it has a “finite life.” If an asset does 
not have a finite life, it has an indefinite life; “indefi-
nite” does not mean “infinite.”
firm Informally, any business entity. (Strictly speaking, a 
firm is a partnership.)
firm commitment The FASB, in SFAS No. 133 (Codifi-
cation Topic 815), defines this as “an agreement with 
an unrelated party, binding on both parties and usu-
ally legally enforceable,” which requires that the firm 
promise to pay a specified amount of a currency and 
that the firm has sufficient disincentives for nonpay-
ment that the firm will probably make the payment. 
A firm commitment resembles a liability, but it is an 
executory contract, so is not a liability. SFAS No. 
133 (Codification Topic 815) allows the firm to rec-
ognize certain financial hedges in the balance sheet if 
they hedge firm commitments. The FASB first used 
the term in SFAS No. 52 (Codification Topic 830) but 
made the term more definite and more important in 
SFAS No. 133 (Codification Topic 815). This is an 
early, perhaps the first, step in changing the recogni-
tion criteria for assets and liabilities to exclude the test 
that the future benefit (asset) or obligation (liability) 
not arise from an executory contract.
first-in, first-out See FIFO.
fiscal year A period of 12 consecutive months chosen by 
a business as the accounting period for annual reports, 
not necessarily a natural business year or a calendar 
year.
FISH An acronym, conceived by George H. Sorter, for 
first-in, still-here. FISH is the same cost-flow assump-
tion as LIFO. Many readers of accounting statements 
find it easier to think about inventory questions in 
terms of items still on hand. Think of LIFO in con-
nection with cost of goods sold but of FISH in connec-
tion with ending inventory. See LISH.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

776
Glossary
that the proceeds of the sale are too small to cover the 
outstanding balance on the loan at the time of foreclo-
sure. Under the terms of most mortgages, the lender 
becomes an unsecured creditor of the borrower for the 
still-unrecovered balance of the loan.
foreign currency For financial statements prepared in a 
given currency, any other currency.
foreign currency translation Reporting in the currency 
used in financial statements the amounts denominated 
or measured in a different currency.
foreign exchange gain or loss Gain or loss from holding 
net foreign monetary items during a period when the 
exchange rate changes.
foreign private issuer See U.S. SEC registrant for defini-
tion and contrast.
forfeited share A share to which a subscriber has lost title 
because of nonpayment of a call.
Form 10-K See 10-K.
Form 10-Q See 10-Q.
Form 20-F See 20-F.
forward (commodity) contract An agreement to purchase 
or sell a specific commodity or financial instrument for 
a specified price, the forward price, at a specified date. 
Contrast with futures contract. Typically, forward con-
tracts are not traded on organized exchanges (unlike 
over the life of the asset acquired (called the deferral 
method). The APB preferred the deferral method in 
Opinion No. 2 (1962) but accepted the flow-through 
method in Opinion No. 4 (1964); both now in Codifi-
cation Topic 740.
FOB Free on board some location (for example, FOB 
shipping point, FOB destination). The invoice price 
includes delivery at seller’s expense to that location. 
Title to goods usually passes from seller to buyer at 
the FOB location.
folio A page number or other identifying reference used in 
posting to indicate the source of entry.
footing Adding a column of figures.
footnotes A less-preferred word for the more detailed 
information than that provided in the income state-
ment, balance sheet, statement of retained earnings, and 
statement of cash flows. These are an integral part of 
the statements, and the auditor’s report covers them. 
Better to call them notes because they are not foot-
notes in the classic sense.
forecast See financial projection for definition and contrast.
foreclosure Occurs when a lender takes possession of 
property for his or her own use or sale after the bor-
rower fails to make a required payment on a mort-
gage. Assume that the lender sells the property but 
Factory Building
and Equipment
Factory Labor*
Finished Goods
Work in Process
Product Cost
Accounts
Flow of Costs (and Sales Revenue)
Factory Materials
and Supplies
Multipurpose Building
Rent
Telephone*
Utilities
Depreciation of 
Office Equipment
Office Labor
Office Supplies
Commissions
*The credit in the entry to record these items is usually to a payable; for all others, the credit is usually to an
  asset, or to an asset contra account.
**When the firm records sales to customers, it credits the Sales account. The debit is usually to Cash or
   Accounts Receivable.
Salaries for
Salespeople
Depreciation of
Delivery Truck
Assets, Goods,
and Services
General and
Administrative
Expenses
Selling and
Delivery
Expenses
Cost of Goods
Sold
Customers
Income Summary
Sales**
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

777
Glossary
other central corporate expenses, per unit. The sum of 
full costs for all units equals total costs of the firm.
full disclosure The reporting policy requiring that all sig-
nificant or material information appear in the finan-
cial statements. See fair presentation.
fully vested Said of a pension plan when an employee (or 
his or her estate) has rights to all the benefits granted 
by an employer’s pension plan even if the employee 
does not work for this employer at the time of death 
or retirement.
function In governmental accounting, said of a group of 
related activities for accomplishing a service or regu-
latory program for which the governmental unit has 
responsibility; in mathematics, a rule for associating 
a number, called the dependent variable, with another 
number (or numbers), called independent variable(s).
functional classification Income statement reporting form 
that classifies expenses by purpose, that is, cost of 
goods sold, administrative expenses, financing expenses, 
selling expenses. Contrast with natural classification.
functional currency Currency in which an entity carries 
out its principal economic activity.
functional factor See obsolescence.
fund An asset or group of assets set aside for a specific 
purpose. See also fund accounting.
fund accounting The accounting for resources, obligations, 
and capital balances, usually of a not-for-profit or 
governmental entity, which the entity has segregated 
into accounts representing logical groupings based on 
legal, donor, or administrative restrictions or require-
ments. The groupings are “funds.” The accounts of 
each fund are self-balancing, and from them one can 
prepare a balance sheet and an operating statement for 
each fund. See fund and fund balance.
fund balance In governmental accounting, the excess of 
assets of a fund over its liabilities and reserves; the not-
for-profit equivalent of owners’ equity.
funded Said of a pension plan or other obligation when 
the firm has set aside funds for meeting the obliga-
tion when it comes due. The federal law for pension 
plans requires that the firm fund all normal costs when 
it recognizes them as expenses. In addition, the firm 
must fund prior service cost of pension plans over 30 
or over 40 years, depending on the circumstances.
funding Replacing short-term liabilities with long-term 
debt.
funds Generally working capital; current assets less current 
liabilities; sometimes used to refer to cash or to cash 
and marketable securities.
funds provided by operations See cash provided by operations.
funds statement An informal name often used for the 
statement of cash flows.
funny money Said of securities, such as convertible preferred 
stock, convertible bonds, options, and warrants, that 
have aspects of common shares but that did not reduce 
reported earnings per share before the issuance of APB 
Opinion No. 9 in 1966; now Codification Topic 250.
FUTA (Federal Unemployment Tax Act) Provides for 
taxes to be collected at the federal level, to help sub-
sidize the individual states’ administration of their 
unemployment compensation programs.
futures contract), so the parties to the agreement sac-
rifice liquidity but gain flexibility in setting contract 
quantities, qualities, and settlement dates.
forward-exchange contract An agreement to exchange at a 
specified future date currencies of different countries 
at a specified rate called the forward rate.
forward price The price of a commodity for delivery at 
a specified future date; in contrast to the spot price, 
the price of that commodity on the day of the price 
quotation.
franchise A privilege granted or sold, such as to use a name 
or to sell products or services.
fraudulent conveyance A transfer of goods or cash that a 
court finds illegal. Creditors of a bankrupt firm usually 
receive less than the firm owed them. For example, 
a creditor of a bankrupt firm might collect from the 
trustee of the bankrupt firm only $0.60 for every dollar 
the bankrupt firm owed. Creditors, anticipating bank-
ruptcy, sometimes attempt to persuade the firm to pay 
the debt in full before the firm declares bankruptcy, 
reducing the net assets available to other creditors. 
Bankruptcy laws have rules forbidding such transfers 
from a near-bankrupt firm to some of its creditors. Such 
a transfer is called a fraudulent conveyance. Courts 
sometimes ask accountants to judge whether a firm had 
liabilities exceeding assets even before the firm went into 
bankruptcy. When the court can find that economic 
bankruptcy occurred before legal bankruptcy, it will 
declare transfers of assets to creditors after economic 
bankruptcy to be fraudulent conveyances and have the 
assets returned to the trustees (or to a legal entity called 
the bankrupt’s estate) for redistribution to all creditors.
fraudulent financial reporting Intentional or reckless con-
duct that results in materially misleading financial 
statements. See creative accounting.
free cash flow This term has no standard meaning. Some 
financial statement analysts use it to mean cash flow 
from operations + interest expense + income tax 
expense. Others mean the excess of cash flow from 
operations over cash flow for investing. Usage varies so 
much that you should ascertain the meaning intended 
in context by this phrase.
free on board FOB.
freight-in The cost of freight or shipping incurred in 
acquiring inventory, preferably treated as a part of 
the cost of inventory; often shown temporarily in an 
adjunct account that the acquirer closes at the end of 
the period with other purchase accounts to the inven-
tory account.
freight-out The cost of freight or shipping incurred in sell-
ing inventory, treated by the seller as a selling expense 
in the period of sale.
full absorption costing The costing method that assigns all 
types of manufacturing costs (direct material, direct 
labor, fixed and variable overhead) to units produced; 
required by U.S. GAAP; also called absorption cost-
ing. Contrast with variable costing.
full costing, full costs The total cost of producing and selling 
a unit; often used in long-term profitability and pricing 
decisions. Full cost per unit equals full absorption cost 
per unit plus marketing, administrative, interest, and 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

778
Glossary
aspects of their own separate business pursuits, such 
as an office. This partnership has no legal form and is 
not a separate accounting entity.
GDP Implicit Price Deflator (index) A price index issued 
quarterly by the Office of Business Economics of the 
U.S. Department of Commerce. This index attempts 
to trace the price level of all goods and services com-
posing the gross domestic product. Contrast with Con-
sumer Price Index.
gearing United Kingdom: financial leverage.
gearing adjustment A revenue representing part of a hold-
ing gain. Consider a firm that has part of its assets 
financed by noncurrent liabilities and that has expe-
rienced holding gains on its assets during a period. 
All the increase in wealth caused by the holding gains 
belongs to the owners; none typically belongs to the 
lenders. Some British accounting authorities believe 
that published income statements should show part 
of the holding gain in income for the period. The 
part they would report in income is the fraction of 
the gain equal to the fraction that debt composes of 
total financing; for example, if debt equals 40% of 
total equities and the holding gain equals $100 for 
the period, the amount to appear in income for the 
period would be $40. Usage calls that part the gearing 
adjustment.
general debt A governmental unit’s debt legally payable 
from general revenues and backed by the full faith and 
credit of the governmental unit.
general expenses Operating expenses other than those spe-
cifically identified as cost of goods sold, selling, admin-
istrative, and research and development.
general fixed asset (group of accounts) Accounts showing 
a governmental unit’s long-term assets that are not 
accounted for in enterprise, trust, or intragovernmen-
tal service funds.
general fund A nonprofit entity’s assets and liabilities not 
specifically earmarked for other purposes; the primary 
operating fund of a governmental unit.
general journal The formal record in which the firm 
records transactions, or summaries of similar transac-
tions, in journal entry form as they occur. Use of the 
adjective “general” usually implies that the firm also 
uses various special journals, such as a check register 
or sales journal.
general ledger The name for the formal ledger containing 
all the financial statement accounts. It has equal debits 
and credits, as evidenced by the trial balance. Some 
of the accounts in the general ledger may be control 
accounts, supported by details contained in subsidiary 
ledgers.
general partner Partnership member who is personally 
liable for all debts of the partnership; contrast with 
limited partner.
general price index A measure of the aggregate prices of 
a wide range of goods and services in the economy at 
one time relative to the prices during a base period. 
See Consumer Price Index and GDP Implicit Price 
Deflator. Contrast with specific price index.
general price level–adjusted statements See constant-dollar 
accounting.
future value Value at a specified future date of a sum 
increased at a specified interest rate.
futures contract An agreement to purchase or sell a spe-
cific commodity or financial instrument for a specified 
price, at a specific future time or during a specified 
future period. Contrast with forward contract. When 
traded on an organized exchange, the exchange sets 
the minimum contract size and expiration date(s). The 
exchange requires that the holder of the contract settle 
in cash each day the fluctuations in the value of the 
contract. That is, each day, the exchange marks the 
contract to market value, called the “(daily) settlement 
price.” A contract holder who has lost during the day 
must put up more cash, and a holder who has gained 
receives cash.
G
GAAP Generally accepted accounting principles; a singu-
lar noun. In the United Kingdom and elsewhere, this 
means “generally accepted accounting practices.” In 
this book, we use U.S. GAAP for this concept. The 
international analog is IFRS.
GAAS Generally accepted auditing standards; a plural 
noun. Do not confuse with GAS.
gain In financial accounting contexts, the increase in own-
ers’ equity caused by a transaction that is not part of 
a firm’s typical, day-to-day operations and not part of 
owners’ investment or withdrawals. Accounting distin-
guishes the meaning of the term “gain” (or loss) from 
that of related terms. First, gains (and losses) generally 
refer to non-operating, incidental, peripheral, or non-
routine transactions: gain on sale of land in contrast 
to gross margin on sale of inventory. Second, gains 
and losses are net concepts, not gross concepts: gain 
or loss results from subtracting some measure of cost 
from the measure of inflow. Revenues and expenses, 
on the other hand, are gross concepts; their difference 
is a net concept. Gain is nonroutine and net, profit 
or margin is routine and net; revenue from continuing 
operations is routine and gross; revenue from discon-
tinued operations is nonroutine and gross. Loss is net 
but can be either routine (loss on sale of inventory) or 
not (loss on disposal of segment of business).
 
 
In managerial accounting and lay contexts, the dif-
ference between some measure of revenue or receipts 
or proceeds and some measure of costs, such as direct 
costs or variable costs or fully absorbed costs or full 
costs (see cost terminology). Because the word can 
have so many different meanings, careful writers 
should be explicit to designate one.
gain contingency See contingency.
GAS Goods available for sale. Do not confuse with GAAS.
GASB (Governmental Accounting Standards Board) An 
independent body responsible, since 1984, for estab-
lishing accounting standards for state and local gov-
ernment units. It is part of the Financial Accounting 
Foundation, parallel to the FASB, and currently con-
sists of five members.
GbR (Gesellschaft des bürgerlichen Rechtes) Germany: a 
partnership whose members agree to share in specific 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

779
Glossary
interest, such as shareholder wealth maximization for 
a corporation.
goals contrasted with strategies A goal describes an ending 
position, whereas a strategy describes a process of get-
ting from the current position to the goal.
going concern (assumption) For accounting purposes, 
accountants’ assumption that a business will remain 
in operation long enough to carry out all its current 
plans. This assumption partially justifies the acquisi-
tion cost basis rather than a liquidation or exit value 
basis, of accounting.
going public Said of a business when its shares become 
widely traded rather than being closely held by rela-
tively few shareholders; issuing shares to the general 
investing public.
goods Items of merchandise, supplies, raw materials, or 
finished goods. Sometimes the meaning of “goods” is 
extended to include all tangible items, as in the phrase 
“goods and services.”
goods available for sale (GAS) The sum of beginning inven-
tory plus all acquisitions of merchandise or finished 
goods during an accounting period.
goods-in-process Work-in-process.
goodwill The excess of cost of an acquired firm (or operat-
ing unit) over the current fair value of the separately 
identifiable net assets of the acquired unit. Before the 
acquiring firm can recognize goodwill, it must assign 
a fair value to all identifiable assets, even those not 
recorded on the books of the acquired unit. For 
example, assume a firm has developed a patent that 
does not appear on its books because of SFAS No. 2 
(Codification Topic 730). If another company acquires 
the firm, the acquirer will recognize the patent at an 
amount equal to its estimated fair value. The acquirer 
will compute the amount of goodwill only after assign-
ing values to all assets it can identify. Informally, the 
term indicates the value of good customer relations, 
high employee morale, a well-respected business name, 
and so on, all of which the firm or analyst expects to 
result in greater-than-normal earning power.
goodwill method A method of accounting for the admis-
sion of a new partner to a partnership when the new 
partner will receive a portion of capital different from 
the value of the tangible assets contributed as a frac-
tion of tangible assets of the partnership. See bonus 
method for a description and contrast.
governing board Board of directors.
Governmental Accounting Standards Advisory Council A 
group that consults with the GASB on agenda, techni-
cal issues, and the assignment of priorities to projects. 
It comprises more than a dozen members representing 
various areas of expertise.
Governmental Accounting Standards Board GASB.
GPL (general price level) Usually used as an adjective 
modifying the word “accounting” to mean constant-
dollar accounting.
GPLA (general price level–adjusted accounting) Constant-
dollar accounting.
GPP (general purchasing power) Usually used as an 
adjective modifying the word “accounting” to mean 
 constant-dollar accounting.
general price-level changes Changes in the aggregate prices 
of a wide range of goods and services in the economy. 
These price measurements result from using a general 
price index. Contrast with specific price changes.
general purchasing power The command of the dollar 
over a wide range of goods and services in the econ-
omy. The general purchasing power of the dollar is 
inversely related to changes in a general price index. 
See general price index.
general purchasing-power accounting See constant-dollar 
accounting.
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) As previ-
ously defined by the CAP, APB, and now the FASB, 
the conventions, rules, and procedures necessary to 
define accepted accounting practice at a particular 
time; includes both broad guidelines and relatively 
detailed practices and procedures. In the United States, 
the FASB defines U.S. GAAP to include accounting 
pronouncements of the SEC and other government 
agencies as well as a variety of authoritative sources, 
such as this book. In this book, we use U.S. GAAP 
for this concept. SFAS No. 168 (2009) (Codification 
Topic 110) provides a hierarchy of GAAP standards, 
starting with Statements of Financial Accounting stan-
dards, and Interpretation. It explicitly excludes text-
books, such as this one. The international analog is 
IFRS.
generally accepted auditing standards (GAAS) The stan-
dards, as opposed to particular procedures, formerly 
promulgated by the AICPA (in Statements on Audit-
ing Standards), and now promulgated by the PCAOB, 
and that concern “the auditor’s professional quan-
tities” and “the judgment exercised by him in the 
performance of his examination and in his report.” 
Currently, there are ten such standards: three general 
ones (concerned with proficiency, independence, and 
degree of care to be exercised), three standards of field 
work, and four standards of reporting. The first stan-
dard of reporting requires that the auditor’s report 
state whether the firm prepared the financial state-
ments in accordance with generally accepted account-
ing principles. Thus, the typical auditor’s report says 
that the auditor conducted the examination in accor-
dance with generally accepted auditing standards and 
that the firm prepared the statements in accordance 
with generally accepted accounting principles. See 
auditor’s report.
geographic segment A single operation or a group of oper-
ations that are located in a particular geographic area 
and that generate revenue, incur costs, and have assets 
used in or associated with generating such revenue.
GIE (groupement d’intérêt économique) France: a joint 
venture, normally used for exports and research-and-
development pooling.
GmbH (Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung) Ger-
many: a private company with an unlimited number 
of shareholders. Transfer of ownership can take place 
only with the consent of other shareholders. Contrast 
with AG.
goal congruence The idea that all members of an orga-
nization have incentives to perform for a common 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

780
Glossary
H
half-year convention In tax accounting under ACRS, and 
sometimes in financial accounting, an assumption that 
the firm acquired assets subject to depreciation at mid-
year of the year of acquisition. When the firm uses 
this convention, it computes the depreciation charge 
for the year as one-half the charge that it would have 
used if it had acquired the assets at the beginning of 
the year.
hardware The physical equipment or devices forming a 
computer and peripheral equipment.
hash total Used to establish accuracy of data processing; a 
control that takes the sum of data items not normally 
added together (for example, the sum of a list of part 
numbers) and subsequently compares that sum with 
a computer-generated total of the same values. If the 
two sums are identical, then the analyst takes some 
comfort that the two lists are identical.
Hasselback An annual directory of accounting faculty at 
colleges and universities; gives information about the 
faculty’s training and fields of specialization. James 
R. Hasselback, of the University of West Florida, has 
compiled the directory since the 1970s; www.hassel
back.org.
health care benefits obligation At any time, the pres-
ent value of the nonpension benefits promised by an 
employer to employees during their retirement years. 
See other post-employment benefits.
hedge To reduce, perhaps cancel altogether, one risk  the 
entity already bears, by purchasing a security or other 
financial instrument. For example, a farmer growing 
corn runs the risk that corn prices may decline before 
the corn matures and can be brought to market. Such 
a farmer can arrange to sell the corn now for future 
delivery, hedging the risk of corn price changes. A firm 
may have a receivable denominated in euros due in six 
months. It runs the risk that the exchange rate between 
the dollar and the euro will change and the firm will 
receive a smaller number of dollars in the future than it 
would receive from the same number of euros received 
today. Such a firm may hedge its exposure to risk of 
changes in the exchange rate between dollars and euros 
in a variety of ways. See cash-flow hedge and fair-value 
hedge. Do not confuse with hedge accounting.
hedge accounting Firms may, but need not, use hedge 
accounting. If the firm elects hedge accounting and if 
its hedging instrument is highly effective, it will report 
gains and losses on hedging instruments for cash-flow 
hedges in other comprehensive income, rather than in 
net income. For fair-value hedges, the firm using hedge 
accounting will report the hedged assetor liability at 
fair value; it reports the hedging instrument at fair 
value in any event.
held-to-maturity securities Marketable debt securities 
that a firm expects to, and has the ability to, hold 
to maturity; a classification important in SFAS No. 
115 (Codification Topic 320), which generally requires 
the owner to carry marketable securities on the bal-
ance sheet at market value, not at cost. Under SFAS 
graded vesting Said of a pension plan in which not all 
employees currently have fully vested benefits. By law, 
the benefits must vest according to one of several for-
mulas as time passes.
grandfather clause An exemption in new accounting pro-
nouncements exempting transactions that occurred 
before a given date from the new accounting treatment.
gross Not adjusted or reduced by deductions or subtrac-
tions. Contrast with net, and see gain for a description 
of how the difference between net and gross affects 
usage of the terms revenue, gain, expense, and loss.
gross domestic product (GDP) The market value of all 
goods and services produced by capital or labor within 
a country, regardless of who owns the capital or of 
the nationality of the labor; most widely used measure 
of production within a country. Contrast with gross 
national product (GNP), which measures the market 
value of all goods and services produced with capital 
owned by, and labor services supplied by, the resi-
dents of that country regardless of where they work or 
where they own capital. In the United States in recent 
years, the difference between GDP and GNP equals 
about 0.2% of GDP.
gross margin Net sales minus cost of goods sold.
gross margin percentage 100 × (1 – cost of goods sold/net 
sales) = 100 × (gross margin/net sales).
gross national product (GNP) See gross domestic product 
for definition and contrast.
gross price method (of recording purchase or sales dis-
counts) The firm records the purchase (or sale) at the 
invoice price, not deducting the amounts of discounts 
available. Later, it uses a contra account to purchases 
(or sales) to record the amounts of discounts taken. 
Since information on discounts lapsed will not emerge 
from this system, most firms should prefer the net 
price method of recording purchase discounts.
gross profit Gross margin.
gross profit method A method of estimating ending inven-
tory amounts. First, the firm measures cost of goods 
sold as some fraction of sales; then, it uses the inven-
tory equation to value ending inventory.
gross profit ratio Gross margin divided by net sales.
gross sales All sales at invoice prices, not reduced by dis-
counts, allowances, returns, or other adjustments.
group depreciation In calculating depreciation charges, 
a method that combines similar assets rather than 
depreciating them separately. It does not recognize 
gain or loss on retirement of items from the group 
until the firm sells or retires the last item in the group. 
See composite life method.
guarantee A promise to answer for payment of debt or 
performance of some obligation if the person liable 
for the debt or obligation fails to perform. A guaran-
tee is a contingency of the entity making the promise. 
Often, writers use the words “guarantee” and “war-
ranty” to mean the same thing. In precise usage, how-
ever, “guarantee” means some person’s promise to 
perform a contractual obligation such as to pay a sum 
of cash, whereas “warranty” refers to promises about 
pieces of machinery or other products. See warranty.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

781
Glossary
holding company A company that confines its activities 
to owning stock in, and supervising management of, 
other companies. A holding company usually owns a 
controlling interest in—that is, more than 50% of the 
voting stock of—the companies whose stock it holds. 
Contrast with mutual fund. See conglomerate. In Brit-
ish usage, the term refers to any company with con-
trolling interest in another company.
holding gain or loss Difference between end-of-period 
price and beginning-of-period price of an asset held 
during the period. The financial statements ordinarily 
do not separately report realized holding gains and 
losses. Income does not usually report unrealized gains 
at all, except on trading securities or other securities 
accounted for with the fair value option. See lower of 
cost or market. See inventory profit for further refine-
ment, including gains on assets sold during the period.
holding gain or loss net of inflation Increase or decrease in 
the current cost of an asset while it is held; measured 
in units of constant dollars.
horizontal analysis Time-series analysis.
horizontal integration An organization’s extension of 
activity in the same general line of business or its 
expansion into supplementary, complementary, or 
compatible products. Compare vertical integration.
house account An account with a customer who does not 
pay sales commissions. Or, from a sales person’s per-
spective, a customer whose commissions go to another 
person or to the firm itself, the “house.”
human resource accounting A term used to describe a vari-
ety of proposals that seek to report the importance of 
human resources—knowledgeable, trained, and loyal 
employees—in a company’s earning process and total 
assets.
hurdle rate Required rate of return in a discounted cash 
flow analysis.
hybrid security Security, such as a convertible bond, con-
taining elements of both debt and owners’ equity.
hypothecation The pledging of property, without transfer 
of title or possession, to secure a loan.
I
IAA Interamerican Accounting Association.
IASB International Accounting Standards Board.
ICMA (Institute of Certified Management Accountants) 
See CMA and Institute of Management Accountants.
IDEA; Interactive Data Electronic Applications The SEC ’s 
2009 system for facilitating electronic filing and 
retrieval of financial data. Registrants will file SEC-
required data in format suitable for storage and 
retrieval in IDEA. Each data item will have a tag—
think bar code. By querying the database by com-
pany name and tag, the user can retrieve, in machine 
readable form, any particular item of data from the 
database. Users can then do their own time-series and 
cross-section analysis without keying any data.
ideal standard costs Standard costs set equal to those that 
a firm would incur under the best-possible conditions.
No. 115 (Codification Topic 320), the firm may show 
held-to-maturity debt securities at amortized cost. If 
the firm lacks either the expectation or the intent to 
hold the debt security to its maturity, then the firm 
will show that security at market value as a security 
available for sale.
hidden reserve An amount by which a firm has under-
stated owners’ equity, perhaps deliberately. The under-
statement arises from an undervaluation of assets or 
overvaluation of liabilities. By undervaluing assets 
on this period’s balance sheet, the firm can overstate 
net income in some future period by disposing of the 
asset: actual revenues less artificially low cost of assets 
sold yields artificially high net income. No account in 
the ledger has this title.
hierarchy See generally accepted accounting principles.
HIFO (highest-in, first-out) An inventory cost-flow 
assumption used in tax accounting for sales of market-
able securities. The taxpayer sells a share and chooses 
from his portfolio of shares the one with the highest 
cost. This cost-flow assumption might be called spe-
cific identification, with the understanding that the 
taxpayer seeks the highest cost share to deem sold.
hire-purchase agreement (contract) United Kingdom: a 
lease containing a purchase option.
historical cost (amount) Acquisition cost; original cost; a 
sunk cost.
historical 
cost/constant-dollar 
accounting 
Accounting 
based on historical cost valuations measured in con-
stant dollars. The method restates nonmonetary items 
to reflect changes in the general purchasing power of 
the dollar since the time the firm acquired specific 
assets or incurred specific liabilities. The method rec-
ognizes a gain or loss on monetary items as the firm 
holds them over time periods when the general pur-
chasing power of the dollar changes.
historical exchange rate The rate at which one currency 
converts into another at the date a transaction took 
place. Contrast with current exchange rate.
historical market interest rate Implicit interest rate (inter-
nal rate of return) in the cash inflows and outflows at 
the time of original issue of the debt instrument or the 
time of first acquisition of the asset by an investor. The 
amortized cost method of accounting for the financial 
instrument uses this rate throughout the accounting 
for the item.
historical summary A part of the annual report that shows 
items, such as net income, revenues, expenses, asset, 
and equity totals, earnings per share, and the like, for 
five or ten periods including the current one. Usually 
not as much detail appears in the historical summary 
as in comparative statements, which typically report 
as much detail for the two preceding years as for the 
current year. Annual reports almost always contain 
comparative statements but not always a historical 
summary.
holdback Under the terms of a contract, a portion of the 
progress payments that the customer need not pay 
until the contractor has fulfilled the contract or satis-
fied financial obligations to subcontractors.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

782
Glossary
in-process R&D (IPR&D) When one firm acquires another, 
the acquired firm will often have research and develop-
ment activities under way that, following U.S. GAAP, 
it has expensed. The acquiring firm will pay for these 
activities to the extent they have value and recognize 
them as assets. The acquirer will record the in-process 
R&D as an asset even if it does not intend to use it, so 
long as the R&D would have value for an unidentified 
market participant.
in the black (red) Operating at a profit (loss).
incentive compatible compensation Said of a compensation 
plan that induces managers to act for the interests of 
owners while acting also in their own interests. For 
example, consider that a time of rising prices and 
increasing inventories when using a LIFO cost-flow 
assumption implies paying lower income taxes than 
using FIFO. A bonus scheme for managers based on 
accounting net income is not incentive-compatible 
because owners likely benefit more under LIFO, 
whereas managers benefit more if they report using 
FIFO. See LIFO conformity rule and goal congruence.
income Excess of revenues and gains over expenses and 
losses for a period; net income or profit. The term is 
sometimes used with an appropriate modifier to refer 
to the various intermediate amounts shown in a multi-
ple-step income statement or to refer to revenues, as in 
“rental income.” See comprehensive income.
income accounts Revenue and expense accounts.
income before taxes On the income statement, the differ-
ence between all revenues and expenses except income 
tax expense; income from continuing operations before 
subtractions for income taxes. Some would say all 
items of revenue, gains, expenses, and losses except 
income tax expense. Contrast with net income.
income determination See determine.
income distribution account Temporary account sometimes 
debited when the firm declares dividends; closed to 
retained earnings.
income from continuing operations As defined by APB 
Opinion No. 30 (Codification Topic 225), all revenues 
less all expenses except for the following: results of 
operations (including income tax effects) that a firm 
has discontinued or will discontinue; gains or losses, 
including income tax effects, on disposal of segments 
of the business; gains or losses, including income tax 
effects, from extraordinary items; and the cumulative 
effect of accounting changes.
income (gains, losses) from discontinued operations Income, 
net of tax effects, from parts of the business that the firm 
has discontinued during the period or will discontinue 
in the near future. Accountants report such items on 
separate lines of the income statement, after income from 
continuing operations but before extraordinary items.
income (revenue) bond See special revenue debt.
income smoothing A method of timing business transac-
tions or choosing accounting principles so that the 
firm reports smaller variations in income from year 
to year than it otherwise would. Although some man-
agements set income smoothing as an objective, no 
standard-setter does.
IFRS; International Financial Reporting Standard(s) Refers 
broadly to all the pronouncements of the IASB and, 
with numbers after the letters, to specific reporting 
standards issued by the IASB.
iGAAP Some writers’ acronym for international account-
ing standards and principles. We use the term IFRS, 
short for International Financial Reporting Standards, 
for this body of accounting literature.
IIA Institute of Internal Auditors.
IMA Institute of Management Accountants.
impairment (loss) Reduction in market value of an asset. 
When the firm has information indicating that its long-
lived assets, such as plant, identifiable intangibles, and 
goodwill, have declined in market value or will provide 
a smaller future benefit than originally anticipated, for 
items other than goodwill, it tests to see if the decline 
in value is so drastic that the expected future cash flows 
from the asset have declined below carrying value. In 
U.S. GAAP, if then-current carrying value exceeds the 
sum of expected cash flows, an asset impairment has 
occurred. At the time the firm judges that an impair-
ment has occurred, the firm writes down the carrying 
value of the asset to its then-current fair value, which 
is the market value of the asset or, if the firm can-
not assess the market value, the expected net present 
value of the future cash flows. Goodwill has a differ-
ent impairment test. In IFRS, the test for impairment 
compares the recoverable amount to the carrying value.
implicit interest Interest not paid or received. See inter-
est, imputed. All transactions involving the deferred 
payment or receipt of cash involve interest, whether 
explicitly stated or not. The implicit interest on a 
single-payment note equals the difference between the 
amount collected at maturity and the amount lent at 
the start of the loan. One can compute the implicit 
interest rate per year for loans with a single cash inflow 
and a single cash outflow from the following equation:
[
Cash Received at Maturity]
(1/t)
−1
Cash Lent
 
where t is the term of the loan in years; t need not be 
an integer.
imprest fund Petty cash fund.
improvement An expenditure to extend the useful life of 
an asset or to improve its performance (rate of output, 
cost) over that of the original asset; sometimes called 
betterment. The firm capitalizes such expenditures as 
part of the asset’s cost. Contrast with maintenance and 
repair.
imputed cost A cost that does not appear in accounting 
records, such as the interest that a firm could earn 
on cash spent to acquire inventories rather than, say, 
government bonds. Or, consider a firm that owns the 
buildings it occupies. This firm has an imputed cost 
for rent in an amount equal to what it would have 
to pay to use similar buildings owned by another or 
equal to the amount it could collect from someone 
renting the premises from the firm. Opportunity cost.
imputed interest See interest, imputed.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

783
Glossary
fixed in law or contracts are “indexed” when these 
amounts change as a given measure of price changes. 
For example, a so-called escalator clause (COLA—cost 
of living allowance or adjustment) in a labor contract 
might provide that hourly wages will be increased as 
the Consumer Price Index increases. Many economists 
have suggested the indexation of numbers fixed in the 
income tax laws. If, for example, the personal exemp-
tion is $2,500 at the start of the period, if prices rise by 
10% during the period, and if the personal exemption 
is indexed, then the personal exemption would auto-
matically rise to $2,750 (= $2,500 + 0.10 × $2,500) at 
the end of the period.
indirect cost pool Any grouping of individual costs that a 
firm does not identify with a cost objective.
indirect costs Production costs not easily associated with 
the production of specific goods and services; overhead 
costs. Accountants may allocate them on some arbi-
trary basis to specific products or departments.
indirect labor (material) cost An indirect cost for labor 
(material), such as for supervisors (supplies).
indirect method See statement of cash flows.
individual proprietorship Sole proprietorship.
Industry Audit Guides A series of AICPA publications pro-
viding specific accounting and auditing principles for 
specialized situations. Audit guides have been issued 
covering government contractors, state and local gov-
ernment units, investment companies, finance compa-
nies, brokers and dealers in securities, and many other 
subjects.
inescapable cost A cost that the firm or manager cannot 
avoid (see avoidable cost) because of an action. For 
example, if management shuts down two operating 
rooms in a hospital but still must employ security 
guards in unreduced numbers, the security costs are 
“inescapable” with respect to the decision to close the 
operating rooms.
inflation A time of generally rising prices. An increase in 
prices.
inflation accounting Strictly speaking, constant-dollar 
accounting. Some writers incorrectly use the term to 
mean current cost accounting.
information circular Canada: a document, accompanying 
the notice of a shareholders’ meeting, prepared in con-
nection with the solicitation of proxies by or on behalf 
of the management of the corporation. It contains 
information concerning the people making the solici-
tation, election of directors, appointment of auditors, 
and other matters to be acted on at the meeting.
information system A system, sometimes formal and some-
times informal, for collecting, processing, and com-
municating data that are useful for the managerial 
functions of decision making, planning, and control 
and for financial reporting under the attest requirement.
inherent interest rate Implicit interest rate.
initial cash flows Cash flows associated with the beginning 
of an investment project. Often include asset cost, 
freight and installation costs, reduced by cash pro-
ceeds from disposing of existing assets made redun-
dant or unnecessary by the new project, and adjusted 
income statement The statement of revenues, expenses, 
gains, and losses for the period, ending with net income 
for the period. Accountants usually show the earnings-
per-share amount on the income statement; the recon-
ciliation of beginning and ending balances of retained 
earnings may also appear in a combined statement of 
income and retained earnings. See income from con-
tinuing operations, income from discontinued operations, 
extraordinary items, multiple-step, and single-step.
income summary In problem solving, an account that serves as 
a surrogate for the income statement. In using an income 
summary, close all revenue accounts to the Income Sum-
mary as credits and all expense accounts as debits. The 
balance in the account, after you make all these closing 
entries, represents income or loss for the period. Then, 
close the income summary balance to retained earnings.
income tax An annual tax levied by the federal and other 
governments on the taxable income of an entity, which 
often does not equal pretax net income for financial 
reporting.
income tax allocation See deferred income tax (liability) 
and intrastatement.
income tax expense Financial reporting amount of income 
taxes payable plus deferred income taxes arising from 
temporary differences. In the United States, firms 
often use the word “provision” in the account title. 
See “provision” for our reasons not to use the word.
income tax reporting Computation of taxable income, in 
contrast to financial statement pretax income.
income taxes payable The amount the taxpayer pays to 
taxing authority for income taxes. As an account title, 
in capital letters, the balance sheet liability for taxes 
now owed to taxing authorities. In the sense of liabil-
ity, contrast with Deferred Income Taxes.
incremental An adjective used to describe the increase in 
cost, expense, investment, cash flow, revenue, profit, 
and the like if the firm produces or sells one or more 
units or if it undertakes an activity. See differential.
incremental cost See incremental.
incur Said of an obligation of a firm, whether or not that 
obligation is accrued. For example, a firm incurs inter-
est expense on a loan as time passes but accrues that 
interest only on payment dates or when it makes an 
adjusting entry.
indefinite life See finite life for definition and contrast. 
The concept arises in accounting for intangibles; the 
required accounting does not amortize assets with 
indefinite lives, but subjects them to periodic impair-
ment tests. “Indefinite” does not mean “infinite.”
indenture See bond indenture.
independence The mental attitude required of the CPA 
in performing the attest function. It implies that the 
CPA is impartial and that the members of the audit-
ing CPA firm own no stock in the corporation being 
audited.
independent accountant The CPA who performs the attest 
function for a firm.
independent variable See regression analysis.
indexation An attempt by lawmakers or parties to a con-
tract to cope with the effects of inflation. Amounts 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

784
Glossary
FASB has defined “intangible” as “assets (not includ-
ing financial assets) that lack physical substance.” In 
most accounting contexts, the term “intangible assets” 
excludes goodwill, which, although it is intangible, 
gets its own classification.
Interactive Data Electronic Applications See IDEA.
Interamerican Accounting Association (IAA) An orga-
nization devoted to facilitating interaction between 
accounting practitioners in the Americas.
intercompany (intra-entity) elimination See eliminations.
intercompany (intra-entity) profit Profit within an organi-
zation. If one affiliated company sells to another, and 
the goods remain in the second company’s inventory at 
the end of the period, then the first company has not 
yet realized a profit by a sale to an outsider. The profit 
is intercompany profit, and the accountant eliminates 
it from net income when preparing consolidated income 
statements or when the firm uses the equity method.
intercompany (intra-entity) transaction Transaction between 
a parent company and a subsidiary or between subsid-
iaries in a consolidated entity; the accountant must 
eliminate the effects of such a transaction when prepar-
ing consolidated financial statements. See intercompany 
profit.
intercorporate investment Occurs when a given corporation 
owns shares or debt issued by another.
interdepartment monitoring An internal control device. 
The advantage of allocating service department costs 
to production departments stems from the incentives 
that this gives those charged with the costs to control 
the costs incurred in the service department. That pro-
cess of having one group monitor the performance of 
another is interdepartment monitoring.
interest The charge or cost for using cash, usually borrowed 
funds. Interest on one’s own cash used is an opportu-
nity cost, imputed interest. The amount of interest for a 
loan is the total amount paid by a borrower to a lender 
less the amount paid by the lender to the borrower. 
Accounting seeks to allocate that interest over the time 
of the loan so that the interest rate (= interest charge/
amount borrowed) stays constant each period. See 
interest rate for discussion of the quoted amount. See 
effective interest rate and nominal interest rate.
interest costs during construction A firm that self-con-
structs an asset, such as a new factory, will often 
borrow funds to help finance the project. Accounting 
views the interest cost on those borrowings as part of 
the cost of construction, not a period expense. Hence, 
the firm will debit the interest cost, not to expense, but 
to a construction in process account. This will increase 
the cost of the asset and increase subsequent depre-
ciation charges. This process delays the recognition of 
the borrowing costs from immediate interest expense 
to later depreciation charges, which may themselves 
be immediate expenses or accumulated in product cost 
accounts (work-in-process inventory) until the firm 
sells the goods manufactured in the facility. A firm 
capitalizes interest costs on self construction even if 
it does not borrow for the construction, as long as it 
does have some debt. It will not capitalize any more 
interest than the amount of interest expense.
for the income tax effect of gain (loss) on disposal of 
existing assets.
insolvent Unable to pay debts when due; although most 
insolvent companies have liabilities that exceed assets 
in amount, this term applies to a company who is 
unable to pay even though assets exceed liabilities.
installment Partial payment of a debt or partial collection 
of a receivable, usually according to a contract.
installment contracts receivable The name used for 
accounts receivable when the firm uses the installment 
method of recognizing revenue. Its contra account, 
unrealized gross margin, appears on the balance sheet 
as a subtraction from the amount receivable.
installment sales Sales on account when the buyer prom-
ises to pay in several separate payments, called install-
ments. The seller may, but need not, account for 
such sales using the installment method. If the seller 
accounts for installment sales with the sales basis of 
revenue recognition for financial reporting but with the 
installment method for income tax returns, then it will 
have deferred income tax (liability).
installment (sales) method Recognizing revenue and 
expense (or gross margin) from a sales transaction in 
proportion to the fraction of the selling price collected 
during a period; allowed by the IRS for income tax 
reporting but acceptable in U.S. GAAP only when the 
firm cannot estimate cash collections with reasonable 
precision. See realized (and unrealized) gross margin.
Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) The national asso-
ciation of accountants who are engaged in internal 
auditing; administers a comprehensive professional 
examination. Those who pass the exam qualify to be 
designated CIA (Certified Internal Auditor).
Institute of Management Accountants (IMA) Formerly, 
the National Association of Accountants, NAA; a soci-
ety open to those engaged in management accounting; 
oversees the CMA program.
insurance A contract for reimbursement of specific losses; 
purchased with insurance premiums. “Self-insurance” 
is not insurance but is merely the uninsured’s willing-
ness to assume the risk of incurring losses while saving 
the premium.
intangible asset A nonphysical right that gives a firm an 
exclusive or preferred position in the marketplace. 
Examples are copyright, patent, trademark, goodwill, 
organization costs, computer programs, licenses for 
any of the preceding, government licenses (for exam-
ple, broadcasting or the right to sell liquor), leases, 
franchises, mailing lists, exploration permits, import 
and export permits, construction permits, and mar-
keting quotas. (Other items, such as advertising costs, 
are intangibles providing future benefits; neither U.S. 
GAAP nor IFRS treat them as accounting assets.) 
Accountants often define “intangible” using a “for 
example” list, as we have just done because accounting 
has been unable to devise a definition of “intangible” 
that will include items such as those listed above but 
exclude financial assets, such as stock and bond cer-
tificates. Accountants classify these items as tangibles, 
even though they give their holders a preferred posi-
tion in receiving dividends and interest payments. The 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

785
Glossary
to the amounts the firm would have computed if it had 
made the “normal” purchases, equal to or greater than 
sales. The retailer expects to purchase inventory suf-
ficiently large so that when it computes cost of goods 
sold for the year, there will be no dips into old LIFO 
layers and income will not be artificially high. The first 
approach will compute the quarterly income from low 
cost of goods sold using data for the dips that have 
actually occurred by the end of the quarter. The sec-
ond approach will compute quarterly income from 
cost of goods sold assuming that purchases were equal 
to “normal” amounts and that the firm did not dip into 
old LIFO layers. APB Opinion No. 28 and the SEC 
require that interim reports be constructed largely to 
satisfy the second purpose. IFRS rules would require 
the first alternative, but IFRS forbids LIFO, so we 
would need a different example.
internal audit, internal auditor An audit conducted by the 
firm’s own employees, called “internal auditors,” to 
ascertain whether the firm’s internal control proce-
dures work as planned. A firm can contract with out-
side accountants to provide internal audit services, so 
long as the outsiders do not work for the firm that 
audits the financial statements for GAAS reporting. 
Contrast with an external audit conducted by a CPA.
internal controls Policies and procedures designed to pro-
vide management with reasonable assurances that 
employees behave in a way that enables the firm to 
meet its organizational goals. See control system.
internal failure costs Costs incurred when a firm detects 
nonconforming products and services before deliver-
ing them to customers; these include scrap, rework, 
and retesting.
internal rate of return (IRR) The discount rate that equates 
the net present value of a stream of cash outflows and 
inflows to zero.
internal reporting Reporting for management’s use in plan-
ning and control. Contrast with external reporting for 
financial statement users.
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Agency of the U.S. Trea-
sury Department responsible for administering the 
Internal Revenue Code and collecting income and cer-
tain other taxes.
International Accounting Standards (IAS) Standards set 
between 1973 and 2000 by the International Accounting 
Standards Committee (IASC), which was succeeded in 
2001 by the International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB). The IASC’s standards were known as Inter-
national Accounting Standards (IAS) and are still cited 
by this name today even if they have subsequently 
been revised by the IASB.
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) The 
independent body, based in London, that sets Interna-
tional Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and revises 
International Accounting Standards (IAS), which are 
required to be used, or may be used, in more the 100 
countries. It succeeded the International Accounting 
Standards Committee (IASC) in 2001. Since 2002, the 
IASB and the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) have been collaborating on the mutual con-
vergence of their respective standards at a high level 
interest coverage ratio See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
interest factor One plus the interest rate.
interest, imputed The difference between the face amount 
and the present value of a promise. If a borrower 
merely promises to pay a single amount, sometime 
later than the present, then the face amount the bor-
rower will repay at maturity will exceed the present 
value (computed at a fair market interest rate, called 
the “imputed interest rate”) of the promise. See also 
imputed cost.
interest method See effective interest method.
interest payment This entry warns you not to use the 
term “interest payment” until you understand why 
most often it incorrectly describes what you’re talk-
ing about. “Interest” means a charge for using funds. 
Almost everyone in business refers to periodic pay-
ments a borrower makes to a lender (such as cou-
pon payments on a bond) as “interest payments.” 
This term causes confusion because, as Chapter 11 
explains, the amount of interest expense for a period 
almost never equals the amount of the payments for 
that same period. The periodic payment will always 
include some amount to pay interest to the lender, 
but not necessarily all interest accrued since the last 
payment. If the payment exceeds all accrued interest, 
then the payment will discharge some of the princi-
pal amount. Both payment of interest and payment of 
principal serve to reduce debt (the amount owed), so 
one all-purpose term suitable for the payment is debt 
service payment. We urge you not to call these pay-
ments, nor to think of them as “interest payments” 
until you understand why they do not typically equal 
interest expense. You will never be wrong to call them 
debt-service payments.
interest rate A basis used for computing the cost of bor-
rowing funds; usually expressed as a ratio between 
the number of currency units (for example, dollars) 
charged for a period of time and the number of cur-
rency units borrowed for that same period of time. 
When the writers and speakers do not state a period, 
they almost always mean a period of one year. See 
interest, simple interest, compound interest, effective 
(interest) rate, and nominal interest rate.
interest rate swap See swap.
interfund accounts In governmental accounting, the 
accounts that show transactions between funds, espe-
cially interfund receivables and payables.
interim statements Statements issued for periods less 
than the regular, annual accounting period. The SEC 
requires most corporations to issue interim statements 
on a quarterly basis. Many other countries require 
semiannual reports. In preparing interim reports, a 
problem arises that the accountant can resolve only by 
understanding whether interim reports should report 
on the interim period (1) as a self-contained account-
ing period or (2) as an integral part of the year so that 
analysts can make forecasts of annual performance. 
For example, assume that at the end of the first quarter, 
a retailer has dipped into old LIFO layers, depleting its 
inventory, so that it computes LIFO cost of goods sold 
artificially low and net income artificially high, relative 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

786
Glossary
valuing inventories, the firm usually knows beginning 
inventory and net purchases. Some inventory methods 
(for example, some applications of the retail inventory 
method) measure costs of goods sold and use the equa-
tion to find the cost of ending inventory. Most meth-
ods measure cost of goods sold (withdrawals) and use 
the equation to find the ending inventory. In current 
cost (in contrast to historical cost) accounting, addi-
tions (in the equation) include holding gains, whether 
realized or not. Thus, the current cost inventory equa-
tion is as follows: Beginning Inventory (at Current 
Cost) + Purchases (where Current Cost is Historical 
Cost) + Holding Gains (whether Realized or Not) – 
Ending Inventory (at Current Cost) = Cost of Goods 
Sold (Current Cost).
inventory holding gains See inventory profit.
inventory layer See LIFO inventory layer.
inventory method A vague term, best avoided. In order 
to specify the accounting for inventory, one needs to 
make four choices: a cost basis (such as historical cost 
or lower of cost or market or fair value), an inclusion 
rule for manufactured inventories (such as absorption 
costing or direct costing), a cost-flow assumption (such 
as FIFO or LIFO or weighted average or, avoiding an 
assumption—specific identification), and the time for 
making computations (periodic inventory—one per 
period, or perpetual inventory). Imprecise usage often 
refers to “FIFO basis,” “periodic basis,” “absorp-
tion costing basis,” and other combinations. Strictly 
speaking, “inventory basis” refers to the cost basis.
inventory profit A term with several possible meanings. 
Consider the data in the accompanying illustration. 
The firm uses a FIFO cost-flow assumption and derives 
its historical cost data. The assumed current cost data 
resemble those that the FASB suggested in SFAS No. 
89 (Codification Topic 255). The term “income from 
continuing operations” refers to revenues less expenses 
based on current, rather than historical, costs. To that 
subtotal, add realized holding gains to arrive at real-
ized (conventional) income. To that, add unrealized 
holding gains to arrive at economic income. The term 
“inventory profit” often refers (for example, in some 
SEC releases) to the realized holding gain, $110 in the 
illustration. The amount of inventory profit will usu-
ally be material when the firm uses FIFO and when 
prices rise. Other analysts, including us, prefer to use 
the term “inventory profit” to refer to the total hold-
ing gain, $300 (= $110 + $190, both realized and 
unrealized), but writers use this meaning less often. 
In periods of rising prices and increasing inventories, 
the realized holding gains under a FIFO cost-flow 
assumption will exceed those under LIFO. In the 
illustration, for example, assume under LIFO that the 
historical cost of goods sold is $4,800, that historical 
LIFO cost of beginning inventory is $600, and that his-
torical LIFO cost of ending inventory is $800. Then 
income from continuing operations, based on current 
costs, remains $350 (= $5,200 – $4,850), realized hold-
ing gains are $50 (= $4,850 – $4,800), realized income 
is $400 (= $350 + $50), the unrealized holding gain for 
the year is $250 [= ($1,550 – $800) – ($1,100 – $600)], 
of quality. See www.iasb.org. Developments concern-
ing IFRS may be monitored on the Deloitte Web site, 
www.iasplus.com, recommended by the renowned 
expert on international accounting, Professor Stephen 
A. Zeff of Rice University.
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) 
The body that set International Accounting Standards 
(IAS) between 1973 and 2000, which was succeeded in 
2001 by the International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB).
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) A fed-
eration, based in New York, of virtually all national 
professional accounting bodies around the world. Its 
committees develop standards in auditing, education, 
ethics and public sector financial reporting. See www
.ifac.com.
International Financial Reporting Interpretations Com-
mittee (IFRIC) This committee, based in London, is 
the interpretive body of the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB). Its recommended interpreta-
tions of International Accounting Standards (IAS) and 
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 
must be approved by the IASB before they become 
official.
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Stan-
dards set by the International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB). Some of the standards previously 
issued by the International Accounting Standards 
Committee (IASC), even if revised by the IASB since 
2001, are still referred to as International Accounting 
Standards (IAS).
International Organization of Securities Commissions 
IOSCO.
interperiod tax allocation See deferred income tax (liability).
interpolation The estimation of an unknown number 
intermediate between two (or more) known numbers.
interpretations See FASB Interpretation FIN.
intrastatement 
tax 
allocation 
See 
tax 
allocation: 
intrastatement.
intrinsic rewards Rewards that come from within the indi-
vidual, such as the satisfaction from studying hard, 
providing help to someone in need, or doing a good 
job. Contrast with extrinsic rewards.
intrinsic value of stock option At any time, the excess of the 
market price over the exercise price of a stock option.
inventoriable costs Costs incurred that the firm adds to the 
cost of manufactured products; product costs (assets) 
as opposed to period expenses.
inventory As a noun, the balance in an asset account, such 
as raw materials, supplies, work-in-process, and fin-
ished goods; as a verb, to calculate the cost of goods 
on hand at a given time or to count items on hand 
physically. Items held for sale or for production of 
items produced for sale.
inventory equation Beginning Inventory + Net Additions 
– Withdrawals = Ending Inventory. Ordinarily, addi-
tions are net purchases, and withdrawals are cost of 
goods sold. Notice that ending inventory, appearing 
on the balance sheet, and cost of goods sold, appear-
ing on the income statement, must add to a fixed sum. 
The larger is one; the smaller must be the other. In 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

787
Glossary
investment in securities See investment.
investment center A responsibility center, with control over 
revenues, costs, and assets.
investment credit A reduction in income tax liability some-
times granted by the federal government to firms that 
buy new equipment. This item is a credit in that the 
taxpayer deducts it from the tax bill, not from pretax 
income. The tax credit has been a given percentage of 
the purchase price of the assets purchased. The gov-
ernment has changed the actual rules and rates over 
the years. As of 2009, there is no investment credit. 
See flow-through method and carryforward.
investment decision The decision whether to undertake an 
action involving production of goods or services; con-
trast with financing decision.
investment tax credit Investment credit.
investment turnover ratio A term that means the same 
thing as total assets turnover ratio.
investments A balance sheet heading for tangible assets 
held for periods longer than the operating cycle and 
not used in revenue production (assets not meeting 
the definitions of current assets or property, plant, and 
equipment or land or goodwill or other intangibles).
investor See investee for definition and contrast.
invoice A document showing the details of a sale or pur-
chase transaction.
IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commis-
sions) The name, since 1983, of a confederation of regu-
lators of securities and futures markets. Members come 
from more than 80 countries. The IOSCO encourages 
the IASB to eliminate accounting alternatives and to 
ensure that accounting standards are detailed and com-
plete, with adequate disclosure requirements, and that 
financial statements are user-friendly.
I.O.U. “I owe you.” An informal document acknowledg-
ing a debt, setting out the amount of the debt and 
signed by the debtor.
IRR Internal rate of return.
IRS Internal Revenue Service.
isoprofit line On a graph showing feasible production pos-
sibilities of two products that require the use of the 
same, limited resources, a line showing all feasible 
production possibility combinations with the same 
profit or, perhaps, contribution margin.
issue A corporation’s exchange of its stock (or bonds) for 
cash or other assets. Terminology says the corpora-
tion, the “issuer,” “issues,” not “sells,” that stock (or 
bonds). Also used in the context of withdrawing sup-
plies or materials from inventory for use in operations 
and of drawing a check.
issued shares Those shares of authorized capital stock that 
a corporation has distributed to the shareholders. See 
issue. Shares of treasury stock are legally issued but 
are not outstanding for the purpose of voting, dividend 
declarations, and earnings-per-share calculations.
J
JIT See just-in-time inventory.
job cost sheet A schedule showing actual or budgeted 
inputs for an order.
and economic income is $650 (= $350 + $50 + $250). 
The cost-flow assumption has only one real effect on 
this series of calculations: the split of the total hold-
ing gain into realized and unrealized portions. Thus, 
economic income does not depend on the cost-flow 
assumption. Holding gains total $300 in the illustra-
tion. The choice of cost-flow assumption determines 
the portion reported as realized.
Inventory Profit Illustration
(Historical) 
Acquisition 
Cost 
Assuming 
FIFO
Current 
Cost
ASSUMED DATA
Inventory, 1/1  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  900
$1,100
Inventory, 12/31  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 1,160
1,550
Cost of Goods Sold for the Year . . . . . . . .
 4,740
4,850
Sales for the Year  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,200
$5,200
INCOME STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$5,200
$5,200
Cost of Goods Sold  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 4,740
 4,850
(1)  Income from Continuing Operations  . .
$  350
Realized Holding Gains  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
   110a
(2)  Realized Income = Conventional Net 
Income (under FIFO)  . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  460
$  460
Unrealized Holding Gain. . . . . . . . . . . . .
   190b
(3) Economic Income. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
$  650
aRealized holding gain during a period is current cost of goods sold 
less historical cost of goods sold; for the year the realized holding gain 
under FIFO is $110 = $4,850 – $4,740. Some refer to this as “inventory 
profit.”
bThe total unrealized holding gain at any time is current cost of 
inventory on hand at that time less historical cost of that inventory. The 
unrealized holding gain during a period is the unrealized holding gain at 
the end of the period less the unrealized holding gain prior to this year. 
The unrealized holding gain at the beginning of the year in this example 
is: $200 = $1,100 – $900. Unrealized holding gain during the year = 
($1,550 – $1,160) – ($1,100 – $900) = $390 – $200 = $190.
inventory turnover (ratio) Number of times the firm sells 
the average inventory during a period; cost of goods 
sold for a period divided by average inventory for the 
period. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
invested capital Contributed capital.
investee A company in which another entity, the “inves-
tor,” owns stock.
investing activities Acquiring and selling securities or pro-
ductive assets expected to produce revenue over sev-
eral periods.
investment An expenditure to acquire property or other 
assets in order to produce revenue; the asset so 
acquired; hence a current expenditure made in antici-
pation of future income; said of other companies’ secu-
rities held for the long term and appearing in a separate 
section of the balance sheet; in this context, contrast 
with marketable securities.
investment in affiliate Investment in a company in which 
the investor has significant influence or control.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

788
Glossary
K
k Two to the tenth power (210 or 1,024). The one-letter 
abbreviation derives from the first letter of the prefix 
“kilo-” (which means 1,000 in decimal notation).
Kaizen costing A management concept that seeks continu-
ous improvements, likely occurring in small incremen-
tal amounts, by refinements of all components of a 
production process.
KG (Kommanditgesellschaft) Germany: similar to a gen-
eral partnership (OHG) except that some of its mem-
bers may limit their liability. One of the partners must 
be a general partner with unlimited liability.
kiting A term with slightly different meanings in banking 
and auditing contexts. In both, however, it refers to the 
wrongful practice of taking advantage of the float, the 
time that elapses between the deposit of a check in one 
bank and its collection at another. In the banking con-
text, an individual deposits in Bank A a check written 
on Bank B. He (or she) then writes checks against the 
deposit created in Bank A. Several days later, he depos-
its in Bank B a check written on Bank A, to cover the 
original check written on Bank B. Still later, he depos-
its in Bank A a check written on Bank B. The process 
of covering the deposit in Bank A with a check written 
on Bank B and vice versa continues until the person 
can arrange an actual deposit of cash. In the auditing 
context, kiting refers to a form of window dressing in 
which the firm makes the amount of the account Cash 
in Bank appear larger than it actually is by depositing 
in Bank A a check written on Bank B without record-
ing the check written on Bank B in the check register 
until after the close of the accounting period.
know-how Technical or business information that is of the 
type defined under trade secret but that a firm does 
not maintain as a secret. The rules of accounting for 
this asset are the same as for other intangibles.
L
labor efficiency variance Measures labor productivity by 
multiplying the standard labor price times the differ-
ence between the standard labor hours and the actual 
labor hours.
labor price (or wage) variance Measures the difference 
between the actual and standard labor prices (wage 
rates).
labor variances The price (or rate) and quantity (or usage) 
variances for direct labor inputs in a standard costing 
system.
laid-down cost Canada and the United Kingdom: the sum 
of all direct costs incurred for procurement of goods 
up to the time of physical receipt, such as invoice cost 
plus customs and excise duties, freight and cartage.
land An asset shown at acquisition cost plus the cost of 
any nondepreciable improvements; in accounting, 
implies use as a plant or office site rather than as a 
natural resource, such as timberland or farmland.
lapping (accounts receivable) The theft, by an employee, 
of cash sent in by a customer to discharge the latter’s 
payable. The employee conceals the theft from the 
job development credit The name used for the investment 
credit in the 1971 tax law, since repealed, on this 
subject.
job (order) costing Accumulation of costs for a particu-
lar identifiable batch of product, known as a job, as it 
moves through production.
jobs Customized products.
joint cost Cost of simultaneously producing or otherwise 
acquiring two or more products, called joint products, 
that a firm must, by the nature of the process, produce 
or acquire together, such as the cost of beef and hides 
of cattle or cocoa butter and cocoa powder from cocoa 
beans. Generally, accounting allocates the joint costs 
of production to the individual products in propor-
tion to their respective sales value (or, sometimes and 
usually not preferred, their respective physical quanti-
ties) at the split-off point. Such allocations should not 
affect decision making; that is, good decisions do not 
depend on any specific allocation or whether the firm 
allocated the joint costs at all. Other examples include 
central corporate expenses and overhead of a depart-
ment when it manufactures several products. See com-
mon cost and sterilized allocation.
joint cost allocation See joint cost.
joint process A process that converts a common input into 
several outputs.
joint product One of two or more outputs with significant 
value that a firm must produce or acquire simultane-
ously. See by-product and joint cost.
joint venture Two or more firms invest in a project or com-
pany or division, sharing risks and rewards of owner-
ship and management.
journal The place where the firm records transactions as 
they occur; the book of original entry. Typically, a 
computerized database.
journal entry A dated journal recording, showing the 
accounts affected, of equal debits and credits, with an 
explanation of the transaction, if necessary.
journal voucher A voucher documenting (and sometimes 
authorizing) a transaction, leading to an entry in the 
journal.
journalize To make an entry in a journal.
judgment(al) sampling A method of choosing a sample in 
which the analyst subjectively selects items for exami-
nation, in contrast to selecting them by statistical 
methods. Compare random sampling.
junk bond A low-rated bond that lacks the merit and char-
acteristics of an investment-grade bond. It offers high 
yields, typically in excess of 15% per year, but also 
possesses high risk of default. Sometimes writers, less 
pejoratively, call these high-yield bonds. No clear line 
separates junk from nonjunk bonds.
just-in-time inventory (production) (JIT) In managing 
inventory for manufacturing, a system in which a 
firm purchases or manufactures each component just 
before the firm uses it. Contrast with systems in which 
firms acquire or manufacture many parts in advance 
of needs. JIT systems have much smaller carrying 
costs for inventory, ideally none, but run higher risks 
of incurring stockout costs. As fuel costs have soared, 
JIT has become less cost effective.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

789
Glossary
to an increase in rate of return larger than the increase 
in explicit financing costs—the increased rate of return 
on owners’ equity (see ratio and Exhibit 7.12) when an 
investment earns a return larger than the after-tax inter-
est rate paid for debt financing. Because the interest 
charges on debt usually do not change, any incremental 
income benefits owners and none benefits debtors. When 
writers use the term “leverage” without a qualifying 
adjective, the term usually refers to financial leverage, 
the use of long-term debt in securing funds for the entity.
leveraged lease A special form of lease involving three par-
ties: a lender, a lessor, and a lessee. The lender, such as a 
bank or insurance company, lends a portion, say, 80%, 
of the cash required for acquiring the asset. The lessor 
puts up the remainder, 20%, of the cash required. The 
lessor acquires the asset with the cash, using the asset 
as security for the loan, and leases it to the lessee on a 
noncancellable basis. The lessee makes periodic lease 
payments to the lessor, who in turn makes payments 
on the loan to the lender. Typically, the lessor has no 
obligation for the debt to the lender other than trans-
ferring a portion of the receipts from the lessee. If the 
lessee should default on the required lease payments, 
then the lender can repossess the leased asset. The les-
sor usually has the right to benefit from the tax deduc-
tions for depreciation on the asset, for interest expense 
on the loan from the lender, and for any investment 
credit. The lease is leveraged in the sense that the les-
sor, who takes most of the risks and enjoys most of 
the rewards of ownership, usually borrows most of the 
funds needed to acquire the asset. See leverage.
liability (definition and recognition) An obligation to pay a 
definite (or reasonably definite) amount at a definite 
(or reasonably definite) time in return for a past or 
current benefit (that is, the obligation arises from a 
transaction that is not an executory contract); a prob-
able future sacrifice of economic benefits arising from 
present obligations of a particular entity to transfer 
assets or to provide services to other entities in the 
future as a result of past transactions or events. SFAC 
No. 6 says that “probable” refers to that which we can 
reasonably expect or believe but that is neither certain 
nor proved. A liability has three essential characteris-
tics: (1) the obligation to transfer assets or services has 
a specified or knowable date, (2) the entity has little or 
no discretion to avoid the transfer, and (3) the event 
causing the obligation has already happened, that is, 
it is not executory. Accounting does not recognize 
many obligations to pay definite amounts at definite 
times because it views the mutual obligations of the 
parties as executory, a mere exchange of promises.
lien The right of person A to satisfy a claim against per-
son B by holding B’s property as security or by seizing 
B’s property.
life annuity A contingent annuity in which payments 
cease at the death of a specified person(s), usually the 
annuitant(s).
LIFO (last-in, first-out) An inventory flow assumption in 
which the cost of goods sold equals the cost of the 
most recently acquired units and a firm computes the 
ending inventory cost from the costs of the oldest units. 
first customer by using cash received from a second 
customer. The employee conceals the theft from the 
second customer by using cash received from a third 
customer, and so on. The process continues until the 
thief returns the funds or can make the theft perma-
nent by creating a fictitious expense or receivable 
write-off or until someone discovers the fraud.
lapse To expire; said of, for example, an insurance policy; 
discounts that the seller makes available for prompt 
payment and that the purchaser does not take are said 
to “lapse.”
last-in, first-out See LIFO.
layer See LIFO inventory layer.
lead time The time that elapses between placing an order 
and receiving the goods or services ordered.
learning curve A mathematical expression of the phenom-
enon that incremental unit costs to produce decrease 
as managers and labor gain experience from practice.
lease A contract calling for the lessee (user) to pay the lessor 
(owner) for the right to use an asset. A cancelable lease 
allows the lessee to cancel at any time. A noncancellable 
lease requires payments from the lessee for the life of the 
lease and usually shares many of the economic charac-
teristics of debt financing. Some long-term noncancellable 
leases meet the usual criteria for classifying them as lia-
bilities, and U.S. GAAP requires the firm to show them 
as liabilities. Rules of lease accounting change often and 
are in flux as we write this. See SFAS No. 13 (Codifica-
tion Topic 840), financing lease, and operating lease.
leasehold The asset representing the right of the lessee to use 
leased property. See lease and leasehold improvement.
leasehold improvement An improvement to leased prop-
erty. The firm should amortize it over the service life 
or the life of the lease, whichever is shorter.
least and latest rule Paying the least amount of taxes as 
late as possible within the law to minimize the pres-
ent value of tax payments for a given set of opera-
tions. Sensible taxpayers will follow this rule. When a 
taxpayer knows that tax rates will increase later, the 
taxpayer may reduce the present value of the tax bur-
den by paying lower taxes sooner. Each set of circum-
stances requires its own computations.
ledger A book of accounts; book of final entry. See general 
ledger and subsidiary ledger. Contrast with journal.
legal capital The amount of contributed capital that, 
according to state law, the firm must keep perma-
nently in the firm as protection for creditors.
legal entity See entity.
lender See loan.
lessee See lease.
lessor See lease.
letter stock Privately placed common shares; so called 
because the SEC requires the purchaser to sign a let-
ter of intent not to resell the shares.
leverage More than proportional result from extra effort or 
financing. Some measure of output increases faster than 
the measure of input. “Operating leverage” refers to the 
tendency of net income to rise at a faster rate than sales 
in the presence of fixed costs. A doubling of sales, for 
example, usually implies a more than doubling of net 
income. “Financial leverage” (or “capital leverage”) refers 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

790
Glossary
liquidating dividend A dividend that a firm declares in the 
winding up of a business to distribute its assets to the 
shareholders. Usually the recipient treats this as a return 
of investment, not as a return on investment or revenue.
liquidation Payment of a debt; sale of assets in closing 
down a business or a segment thereof.
liquidation value per share The amount each share of stock 
will receive if the board dissolves a corporation; for 
preferred stock with a liquidation preference, a stated 
amount per share.
liquidity Refers to the availability of cash, or near-cash 
resources, for meeting a firm’s obligations.
LISH An acronym, conceived by George H. Sorter, for 
last-in, still-here. LISH is the same cost-flow assump-
tion as FIFO. Many readers of accounting statements 
find it easier to think about inventory questions in 
terms of items still on hand. Think of FIFO in con-
nection with cost of goods sold but of LISH in connec-
tion with ending inventory. See FISH.
list price The published or nominally quoted price for goods.
list price method See trade-in transaction.
loan An arrangement in which the owner of an asset, 
called the lender, allows someone else, called the bor-
rower, the use of the asset for a period of time, which 
the agreement setting up the loan usually specifies. 
The borrower promises to return the asset to the 
lender and, often, to make a payment for the use of 
the asset. This term is generally used when the asset is 
cash and the payment for its use is interest.
LOCOM Lower of cost or market.
long-lived (term) asset An asset whose benefits the firm 
expects to receive over several years; a noncurrent asset, 
usually includes investments, plant assets, and intangibles.
long run; long term A term denoting a time or time peri-
ods in the future. How far in the future depends on 
context. For some securities traders, “long-term” can 
mean anything beyond the next hour or two. For most 
managers, it means the period of time long enough to 
allow change in total productive capacity. For govern-
ment policy makers, it can mean anything beyond 
the next decade or two. For geologists, it can mean 
millions of years. In contrast to the short run. Use a 
hyphen when the phrase is an adjective, but no hyphen 
when it is a noun.
long term See long run.
long-term (construction) contract accounting The percent-
age-of-completion method of revenue recognition; some-
times used to mean the completed contract method.
long-term debt ratio Long-term debt divided by total 
assets. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
long-term liability (debt) Noncurrent liability.
long-term liquidity (solvency) risk The risk that a firm will 
not have sufficient cash to pay its debts sometime in 
the long run.
loophole Imprecise term meaning a technicality allowing 
a taxpayer (or financial statements) to circumvent the 
intent, without violating the letter, of the law (or U.S. 
GAAP).
loss Excess of cost over net proceeds for a single transac-
tion; negative income for a period; a cost expiration 
that produced no revenue. See gain for a discussion of 
In periods of rising prices and increasing inventories, 
LIFO leads to higher reported expenses and therefore 
lower reported income and lower balance sheet inven-
tories than does FIFO. IFRS does not allow LIFO. 
Contrast with FIFO. See FISH and inventory profit.
LIFO conformity rule The IRS rule requiring that compa-
nies that use a LIFO cost-flow assumption for income 
taxes must also use LIFO in computing income 
reported in financial statements and forbidding the 
disclosure of pro forma results from using any other 
cost-flow assumption. The SEC requires firms using 
LIFO to disclose balance sheet inventory amounts val-
ued at replacement cost or current cost, which is effec-
tively FIFO or average cost.
LIFO, dollar-value method See dollar-value LIFO method.
LIFO inventory layer A portion of LIFO inventory cost 
on the balance sheet. The ending inventory in physical 
quantity will usually exceed the beginning inventory. 
The LIFO cost-flow assumption assigns to this increase 
in physical quantities a cost computed from the prices 
of the earliest purchases during the year. The LIFO 
inventory then consists of layers, sometimes called 
“slices,” which typically consist of relatively small 
amounts of physical quantities from each of the past 
years when purchases in physical units exceeded sales 
in units. Each layer carries the prices from near the 
beginning of the period when the firm acquired it. The 
earliest layers will typically (in periods of rising prices) 
have prices much less than current prices. If inventory 
quantities should decline in a subsequent period—a 
“dip into old LIFO layers”—the latest layers enter cost 
of goods sold first.
LIFO liquidation A firm using LIFO uses more inventory 
than it acquired during a period, hence uses some of the 
inventory in its LIFO layers, the most recent ones first.
LIFO reserve Unrealized holding gain in ending inventory; 
current or FIFO historical cost of ending inventory 
less LIFO historical cost. A better term for this con-
cept is “excess of current cost over LIFO historical 
cost.” See reserve.
limited liability The legal concept that shareholders of 
corporations are not personally liable for debts of the 
company.
limited partner A partnership member who is not person-
ally liable for debts of the partnership. Every partner-
ship must have at least one general partner, who is 
fully liable.
line-of-business reporting See segment reporting.
line of credit An agreement with a bank or set of banks 
for short-term borrowings on demand.
linear programming A mathematical tool for finding 
profit-maximizing (or cost-minimizing) combinations 
of products to produce when a firm has several prod-
ucts that it can produce but faces linear constraints on 
the resources available in the production processes or 
on maximum and minimum production requirements.
liquid Said of a business with a substantial amount (the 
amount is unspecified) of working capital, especially 
quick assets.
liquid assets Cash, current marketable securities, and 
sometimes, current receivables.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

791
Glossary
 
 
A taxpayer may not use the lower-of-cost-or- 
market basis for inventory on tax returns in combina-
tion with a LIFO cost-flow assumption. In the context 
of inventory, once the firm writes down the asset, it 
establishes a new original cost basis and ignores sub-
sequent increases in market value in the accounts.
 
 
The firm may apply lower of cost or market to 
individual items of inventory or to groups (usually 
called pools) of items. The smaller the group, the 
more conservative the resulting valuation.
 
 
Omit hyphens when you use the term as a noun, 
but use them when you use the term as an adjectival 
phrase.
 
 
IFRS specifies that, in the context of inventories, 
“market” means net realizable value.
Ltd.; Limited United Kingdom: a private limited corpo-
ration. The name of a private limited company must 
include the word “Limited” or its abbreviation “Ltd.”
lump-sum acquisition Basket purchase.
M
MACRS Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System. 
See Accelerated Cost Recovery System. Since 1986, 
MACRS has been the accelerated depreciation method 
required for U.S. income tax purposes.
maintenance Expenditures undertaken to preserve an 
asset’s service potential for its originally intended life. 
These expenditures are period expenses or product 
costs. Contrast with improvement, and see repair.
majority, active investments A firm owns more than 50% 
of another firm, giving it majority ownership, typi-
cally because it wishes to control some aspects of the 
other firm’s operations, giving it an active, not passive, 
motive.
make money; making money Users of these words can 
mean any of the following: earn income; earn other 
comprehensive income; save opportunity costs; earn rev-
enues; earn gross margin; sell for cash; generate cash 
flow from operations; and maybe others, as well, not to 
mention counterfeiting. You can see that you should 
avoid these words in clear communications. See money.
make-or-buy decision A managerial decision about 
whether the firm should produce a product internally 
or purchase it from others. Proper make-or-buy deci-
sions in the short run result only when a firm considers 
incremental costs in the analysis.
maker (of note) (of check) One who signs a note to bor-
row; one who signs a check; in the latter context, syn-
onymous with “drawer.” See draft.
management Executive authority that operates a business.
management accounting See managerial accounting.
Management Accounting Publication of the IMA.
management audit An audit conducted to ascertain whether 
a firm or one of its operating units properly carries out 
its objectives, policies, and procedures; generally applies 
only to activities for which accountants can specify 
qualitative standards. See audit and internal audit.
management by exception A principle of management in 
which managers focus attention on performance only 
if it differs significantly from that expected.
related and contrasting terms and how to distinguish 
loss from expense.
loss contingency accounting See contingency. In U.S. GAAP 
the term “loss contingency accounting” refers to the 
process the accountant uses to evaluate a contingency 
as to whether the item meets the tests to become a 
balance sheet liability and, if it does, the subsequent 
accounting. Once the item meets the tests to be a liabil-
ity, it no longer is a contingency (which means an item 
disclosed in notes, but not yet a liability) and becomes a 
liability. Hence the term “loss contingency accounting” 
might confuse the unwary, as the process removes the 
“contingency” and results in debiting a loss and credit-
ing a liability, which should not have the word “con-
tingency” or the word “contingent” in its account title. 
IFRS refers to this process as “provision accounting.”
lower of cost or market (LOCOM) A basis for valuation of 
inventory and, formerly in the United States, of mar-
ketable securities. This basis sets inventory value at the 
lower of acquisition cost or current replacement cost 
(market), subject to the following constraints. First, 
the market value of an item used in the computation 
cannot exceed its net realizable value—an amount 
equal to selling price less reasonable costs to complete 
production and to sell the item. Second, the market 
value of an item used in the computation cannot be 
less than the net realizable value minus the normal 
profit ordinarily realized on disposition of completed 
items of this type. The basis chooses the lower-of-
cost-or-market valuation as the lower of acquisition 
cost or replacement cost (market) subject to the upper 
and lower bounds on replacement cost established in 
the first two steps. Thus,
 
Market Value =  Midvalue of (Replacement Cost, Net 
Realizable Value, Net Realizable Value 
Less Normal Profit Margin)
 
Lower of Cost 
 
or Market 
= Minimum (Acquisition Cost, Market Value) 
 
Valuation
 
The accompanying exhibit illustrates the calculation 
of the lower-of-cost-or-market valuation for four 
inventory items. Notice that each of the four possible 
outcomes occurs once in measuring lower of cost or 
market. Item 1 uses acquisition cost; item 2 uses net 
realizable value; item 3 uses replacement cost; and item 
4 uses net realizable value less normal profit margin.
Item
1
2
3
4
CALCULATION OF MARKET VALUE
(a) Replacement Cost . . . . . . . . . . .
$92
$96
$92
$96
(b) Net Realizable Value  . . . . . . . . .
 95
 95
 95
 95
(c) Net Realizable Value
Less Normal Profit Margin
[= (b) – $9]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 86
 86
 86
 86
(d) Market = Midvalue [(a),
(b), (c)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 92
 95
 92
 95
CALCULATION OF LOWER OF COST OR MARKET
(e) Acquisition Cost . . . . . . . . . . . .
 90
 97
 96
 90
(f) Market [= (d)]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
 92
 95
 92
 95
(g) Lower of Cost or Market = 
Minimum [(e), (f)]  . . . . . . . . . .
 90
 95
 92
 90
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

792
Glossary
mark to market As a verb, to record an item in the books 
at current fair value. When used as an adjective, such 
as mark-to-market accounting, hyphenate the phrase.
markdown See markup for definition and contrast.
markdown cancellation See markup for definition and 
contrast.
market-based transfer price A transfer price based on 
external market data rather than internal company 
data.
market multiple The ratio of the market price of a share of 
stock to the earnings per share of that security.
market (interest) rate The rate of interest a company must 
pay to borrow funds currently. See effective rate.
market price See fair value.
market value Fair market value.
marketable securities; marketable debt securities; market-
able equity securities Other companies’ bonds and 
stocks a company holds that it can readily sell on 
stock exchanges or over-the-counter markets and that 
the company plans to sell as cash is needed; classified 
as current assets and as part of “cash” in preparing 
the statement of cash flows. If the firm holds these 
same securities for long-term purposes, it will classify 
them as noncurrent assets. SFAS No. 115 (Codification 
Topic 320) requires that all marketable equity and all 
debt securities (except those debt securities the holder 
has the ability and intent to hold to maturity) appear 
at market value on the balance sheet. The firm reports 
changes in market value in income for trading securi-
ties but debits holding losses (or credits holding gains) 
directly to owners’ equity accounts for securities avail-
able for sale unless the firm has elected the fair value 
option.
marketing costs Costs incurred to sell; includes locating 
customers, persuading them to buy, delivering the 
goods or services, and collecting the sales proceeds.
markon See markup for definition and contrast.
markup The difference between the original selling price of 
items acquired for inventory and the cost. Precise usage 
calls this “markon,” although many businesspeople use 
the term “markup.” Because of confusion of this use 
of “markup” with its precise definition (see below), 
terminology sometimes uses “original markup.” If the 
originally established retail price increases, the precise 
term for the amount of price increase is “markup,” 
although terminology sometimes uses “additional 
markup.” If a firm reduces selling price, terminology 
uses the terms “markdown” and “markup cancella-
tion.” “Markup cancellation” refers to reduction in 
price following “additional markups” and can, by 
definition, be no more than the amount of the addi-
tional markup; “cancellation of additional markup,” 
although not used, is descriptive. “Markdown” refers 
to price reductions from the original retail price. A 
price increase after a markdown is a “markdown can-
cellation.” If original cost is $12 and original selling 
price is $20, then markon (original markup) is $8; if 
the firm later increases the price to $24, the $4 increase 
is markup (additional markup); if the firm later lowers 
the price to $21, the $3 reduction is markup cancel-
lation; if the firm further lowers the price to $17, the 
management by objective (MBO) A management approach 
designed to focus on the definition and attainment of 
overall and individual objectives with the participation 
of all levels of management.
management discussion and analysis See management’s dis-
cussion and analysis.
management information system (MIS) A system designed 
to provide all levels of management with timely and 
reliable information required for planning, control, 
and evaluation of performance.
management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A) A discus-
sion of management’s views of the company’s per-
formance; required by the SEC to be included in the 
10-K and in the annual report to shareholders. The 
information typically contains discussion of such 
items as liquidity, results of operations, segments, and 
the effects of inflation.
managerial (management) accounting Reporting designed 
to enhance the ability of management to do its job of 
decision making, planning, and control. Contrast with 
financial accounting.
managers Business executives with decision-making 
authority who are agents of the shareholders and are 
responsible for safeguarding and properly using the 
firm’s resources.
mandatorily redeemable preferred share See redeemable 
(preferred shares).
manufacturing cost Cost of producing goods, usually in a 
factory.
manufacturing expense An imprecise, and generally incor-
rect, alternative title for manufacturing overhead. The 
term is generally incorrect because these costs are usu-
ally product costs, not expenses.
manufacturing firm A firm that converts raw materials 
and labor into finished goods, or intermediate goods, 
which can be parts of finished goods assembled by 
others. A firm that assembles parts into goods nearer 
to becoming finished goods.
manufacturing overhead General manufacturing costs that 
are not directly associated with identifiable units of 
product and that the firm incurs in providing a capac-
ity to carry on productive activities. Accounting treats 
fixed manufacturing overhead cost as a product cost 
under full absorption costing but as an expense of the 
period under variable costing, which none of the IRS, 
U.S. GAAP, and IFRS allow.
margin Revenue less specified expenses. See contribution 
margin, gross margin, and current margin.
margin of safety Excess of actual, or budgeted, sales over 
breakeven sales; usually expressed in dollars but may 
be expressed in units of product.
marginal cost The incremental cost or differential cost of 
the last unit added to production or the first unit sub-
tracted from production. See cost terminology and dif-
ferential for contrast.
marginal costing Variable costing.
marginal revenue The increment in revenue from the sale 
of one additional unit of product.
marginal tax rate The amount, expressed as a percentage, 
by which income taxes increase when taxable income 
increases by one dollar. Contrast with average tax rate.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

793
Glossary
merchandise costs Costs incurred to sell a product, such 
as commissions and advertising. Some use this term to 
refer to the cost of merchandise acquired.
merchandise firm; merchandising business As opposed to 
a manufacturing business or service business, one that 
purchases (rather than manufactures) finished goods 
for resale.
merchandise turnover Inventory turnover for merchandise. 
See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
merger The joining of two or more businesses into a single 
economic entity. See holding company.
minority, active investment Minority investment where the 
investor holds sufficient shares to be able to exercise 
significant influence over the other firm’s operating, or 
investing, or financial decisions.
minority interest (income statement and balance sheet) See 
noncontrolling interest.
minority investment A holding of less than 50% of the vot-
ing shares in another corporation; accounted for with 
the equity method when the investor owns sufficient 
shares that it can exercise “significant influence” and 
as marketable securities otherwise. See mutual fund. 
Generally, a holding of at least 20% but less than 50% 
of the voting stock in another corporation.
minority, passive investment A holding of less than 50% 
of the voting shares in another corporation when the 
investor owns insufficient shares to enable it to exer-
cise significant influence.
minutes book A record of all actions authorized at corpo-
rate board of directors or shareholders’ meetings.
MIS Management information system.
mix variance One of the manufacturing variances. Many 
standard cost systems specify combinations of 
inputs—for example, labor of a certain skill and 
materials of a certain quality grade. Sometimes com-
binations of inputs used differ from those contem-
plated by the standard. The mix variance attempts 
to report the cost difference caused by those changes 
in the combination of inputs. Can be a sales mix 
variance.
mixed cost A semifixed or a semivariable cost.
model See business model.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) 
Name used for the Accelerated Cost Recovery System, 
originally passed by Congress in 1981 and amended 
by Congress in 1986.
modified cash basis The cash basis of accounting with 
long-term assets accounted for using the accrual basis 
of accounting. Most users of the term “cash basis of 
accounting” actually mean “modified cash basis.”
monetary amount See attribute measured for the discussion 
of this concept as a measuring unit.
monetary assets and liabilities See monetary items.
monetary gain or loss The firm’s gain or loss in general pur-
chasing power as a result of its holding monetary assets 
or liabilities during a period when the general purchas-
ing power of the dollar changes; explicitly reported in 
constant-dollar accounting. During periods of inflation, 
holders of net monetary assets lose, and holders of net 
monetary liabilities gain, general purchasing power. 
During periods of deflation, holders of net monetary 
$4 reduction comprises $1 markup cancellation and $3 
markdown; if the firm later increases the price to $22, 
the $5 increase comprises $3 of markdown cancella-
tion and $2 of markup (additional markup). Accoun-
tants track markup cancellations and markdowns 
separately because they deduct the former (but not the 
latter) in computing the selling prices of goods avail-
able for sale for the denominator of the cost percent-
age used in the conventional retail inventory method.
markup cancellation See markup for definition and 
contrast.
markup percentage Markup divided by (acquisition cost 
plus markup).
master budget A budget projecting all financial statements 
and their components.
matching convention The concept of recognizing cost 
expirations (expenses) in the same accounting period 
during which the firm recognizes related revenues; 
combining or simultaneously recognizing the revenues 
and expenses that jointly result from the same transac-
tions or other events.
material As an adjective, it means relatively important, 
capable of influencing a decision (see materiality); as 
a noun, raw material.
materiality The concept that accounting should disclose 
separately only those events that are relatively impor-
tant (no operable definition yet exists) for the busi-
ness or for understanding its statements. SFAC No. 
2 suggests that accounting information is material if 
“the judgment of a reasonable person relying on the 
information would have been changed or influenced 
by the omission or misstatement.” The SEC’s SAB 
99 provides the current rule on materiality, based on 
SFAC No. 2.
materials efficiency variance Measures materials waste by 
multiplying the standard materials price times the dif-
ference between the standard materials quantity used 
and the actual materials quantity used.
materials price variance Measures the difference between 
the actual and standard materials prices. Measures the 
effect of price differences by multiplying the quantity 
purchased times the difference between the actual 
price paid and the standard price.
materials variances Price and quantity variances for direct 
materials in standard costing systems; difference 
between actual cost and standard cost.
matrix A rectangular array of numbers or mathematical 
symbols.
maturity The date at which an obligation, such as the 
principal of a bond or a note, becomes due.
maturity value The amount expected to be collected when 
a loan reaches maturity. Depending on the context, 
the amount may be principal or principal and interest.
MBO Management by objective.
MD&A Management’s discussion and analysis section of 
the annual report.
measuring unit See attribute measured for definition and 
contrast.
merchandise Finished goods bought by a retailer or whole-
saler for resale; contrast with finished goods of a man-
ufacturing business.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

794
Glossary
 
 
Another prevalent misunderstanding involving 
the word “money” results from the accounting for 
reserves, itself a term careful writers avoid for rea-
sons explained in its definition in this glossary. You 
will often read something like, “Groupon (or some 
other company) set aside money in case customers 
asked for refunds. It didn’t set aside enough money.” 
The lay reader does not typically understand that the 
company, such as Groupon, estimated a liability for 
returns by debiting an expense account and crediting 
a liability account, sometimes labeled, confusingly, a 
reserve, for the amount of estimated returns. See the 
allowance method, as this accounting is the allowance 
method used for returns. The journal entry described 
above reduces income, but the company has not set 
aside any cash in other funds. If the company were 
to have set up a fund, it would have credited cash 
and debited an asset such as Funds Segregated to Pay 
for Returns. Companies rarely set up such special 
funds. There is no way the reader uninformed about 
reserves and “money” can understand that “setting 
aside money” does not mean setting aside cash. The 
Wall Street Journal reported, confusingly, “. . . it . . . 
had failed to set aside enough money for customer 
refunds.” The company has set aside zero cash or 
other funds; it had created an estimated liability that 
turned out to be too small.
money purchase plan A pension plan in which the employer 
contributes a specified amount of cash each year to 
each employee’s pension fund; sometimes called a 
defined-contribution plan; contrast with defined-benefit 
plan. The plan does not specify the benefits ultimately 
received by the employee, since these benefits depend 
on the rate of return on the cash invested. ERISA 
makes money purchase plans relatively more attrac-
tive than they had been. Most newly formed compa-
nies since the 1980s have used defined contribution 
plans, and, since the late 1990s, many industrial firms, 
where defined-benefit plans were most common, have 
eliminated their defined-benefit plans.
mortality table Data of life expectancies or probabilities 
of death for persons of specified age and sex.
mortgage A claim given by the borrower (mortgagor) to 
the lender (mortgagee) against the borrower’s prop-
erty in return for a loan.
moving average An average computed on observations 
over time. As a new observation becomes available, 
analysts drop the oldest one so that they always com-
pute the average for the same number of observations 
and use only the most recent ones.
moving average method Weighted-average inventory 
method.
multiple deliverable contract Same as multiple element 
contract.
multiple element contract The seller makes a single sale of 
a combination of goods and services, which the seller 
must disaggregate for revenue recognition. For exam-
ple, consider that Xerox sells a copier, toner, paper, a 
service contract, and emergency repair services for a 
single price.
assets gain, and holders of net monetary liabilities 
lose, general purchasing power.
monetary items Amounts fixed in terms of currency (such 
as dollars or euros) by statute or contract; cash, 
accounts receivable, accounts payable, and debt. The 
distinction between monetary and nonmonetary items 
is important for constant-dollar accounting and for 
foreign exchange gain or loss computations. In the for-
eign exchange context, account amounts denominated 
in the firm’s own currency are not monetary items, 
whereas amounts denominated in any other currency 
are monetary.
monetary-nonmonetary method Foreign currency transla-
tion method that translates all monetary items at the 
current exchange rate and translates all nonmonetary 
items at the historical rate. Contrast with all-current 
method.
money A word seldom used with precision in accounting, 
at least in part because economists have not yet agreed 
on its definition. Economists use the term to refer to 
both a medium of exchange and a store of value. 
See cash and monetary items. Consider a different 
set of issues concerning the phrase, “making money.” 
Lay terminology uses this to mean “earning income” 
whether, as a result, the firm increased its cash bal-
ances or other net assets. The user does not typically 
mean that the firm has increased cash equal to the 
amount of net income, although the unaware listeners 
often think the phrase means this. Given that usage 
equates “making money” with “earning income,” in 
this sense “money” has a credit balance not a debit 
balance. Since cash typically has a debit balance, the 
phrase “making money” is even more troublesome. 
Consider the following language from the U.S. stat-
utes on forfeitures required of some who commit ille-
gal acts: “. . . the amount of money acquired through 
illegal transaction . . . . “ Does the law mean the cash 
left over after the lawbreaker has completed the illegal 
transactions the income earned from the transactions 
or something else?
 
 
Focus on the following four sets of questions and 
see how much difficulty you have in answering the 
questions associated with 3 and 4.
 
1.  I took a cab and it cost $10; I spent money. Did the 
cabbie earn money? If so, how much?
 
2.  I asked Jerry to give me a ride and he did, so I 
didn’t spend $10. Did I earn money? If so, how 
much?
 
3.  I decided to walk, so I didn’t spend $10. Did I earn 
money? If so, how much?
 
4.  I canceled the trip, so I didn’t spend $10. Did I 
earn money? If so, how much?
 
Now, you can better appreciate why careful writers 
avoid using the word.
 
 
“Money” sometimes refers to debits and sometimes 
to credits; “making money” sometimes means earning 
accounting income and sometimes avoiding a cost, 
not reported in accounting, so careful writing about 
accounting avoids the word.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

795
Glossary
assets. See also reserve recognition accounting and per-
centage depletion.
negative confirmation See confirmation.
negative goodwill See goodwill. When a firm acquires 
another company, and the fair value of the net assets 
acquired exceeds the purchase price, U.S. GAAP 
requires that the acquiring company recognize a gain 
from a bargain purchase.
negotiable Legally capable of being transferred by endorse-
ment. Usually said of checks and notes and sometimes 
of stocks and bearer bonds, which U.S. law no longer 
allow.
negotiated transfer price A transfer price set jointly by the 
buying and the selling divisions.
net Reduced by all relevant deductions.
net assets Total assets minus total liabilities; equals the 
amount of owners’ equity. Often, we find it useful to 
split the balance sheet into two parts: owners’ equity 
and all the rest. The “rest” is total assets less total lia-
bilities. To take an example, consider one definition of 
revenue: the increase in owners’ equity accompanying 
the net assets increase caused by selling goods or ren-
dering services. An alternative, more cumbersome way 
to say the same thing is: the increase in owners’ equity 
accompanying the assets’ increase or the liabilities’ 
decrease, or both, caused by selling goods or rendering 
services. Consider the definition of goodwill: the excess 
of purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net 
assets acquired in a purchase transaction. Without the 
phrase “net assets,” the definition might be as follows: 
the excess of purchase price over the fair value of iden-
tifiable assets reduced by the fair value of identifiable 
liabilities acquired in a purchase transaction.
net bank position From a firm’s point of view, cash in a 
specific bank less loans payable to that bank.
net book value Book value. Carrying value.
net current asset value (per share) Working capital divided 
by the number of common shares outstanding. Some 
analysts think that when a common share trades in the 
market for an amount less than net current asset value, 
the shares are undervalued and investors should pur-
chase them. We find this view naive because it ignores, 
generally, the efficiency of capital markets and, spe-
cifically, unrecorded obligations, such as for executory 
contracts and contingencies, not currently reported as 
liabilities in the balance sheet under U.S. GAAP.
net current assets Working Capital = Current Assets – 
Current Liabilities.
net defined benefit liability (asset) IFRS term for the excess 
of liabilities over assets (or excess of assets over liabili-
ties) for all a firm’s defined benefit pension plans.
net income The excess of all revenues and gains for a 
period over all expenses and losses of the period. The 
FASB is proposing to discontinue use of this term and 
substitute earnings. See comprehensive income.
net loss The excess of all expenses and losses for a period over 
all revenues and gains of the period; negative net income.
net markup In the context of retail inventory methods, 
markups less markup cancellations; a figure that usu-
ally ignores markdowns and markdown cancellations.
multiple-step Said of an income statement that shows vari-
ous subtotals of expenses and losses subtracted from 
revenues to show intermediate items such as operating 
income, income of the enterprise (operating income 
plus interest income), income to investors (income of 
the enterprise less income taxes), net income to share-
holders (income to investors less interest charges), and 
income retained (net income to shareholders less divi-
dends). See entity theory.
municipal bond A bond issued by a village, town, or city, 
or an operating unit of one of them, such as a library 
or a hockey arena. Interest on such bonds is gener-
ally exempt from federal income taxes and from some 
state income taxes. Because bonds issued by state and 
county governments often have these characteristics, 
terminology often calls such bonds “municipals” as 
well. These are also sometimes called tax-exempts.
mutual fund An investment company that issues its own 
stock to the public and uses the proceeds to invest in 
securities of other companies. A mutual fund usually 
owns less than 5% or 10% of the stock of any one 
company and accounts for its investments using cur-
rent market values. Contrast with holding company.
mutually exclusive (investment) projects Competing invest-
ment projects in which accepting one project eliminates 
the possibility of undertaking the remaining projects.
mutually unexecuted contract Executory contract.
N
NAARS National Automated Accounting Research System.
NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers 
Automated Quotation System) A computerized system 
to provide brokers and dealers with price quotations 
for securities traded over-the-counter as well as for 
some NYSE securities.
National Association of Accountants (NAA) Former name 
for the Institute of Management Accountants (IMA).
National Automated Accounting Research System (NAARS) 
A computer-based information-retrieval system con-
taining, among other things, the complete text of most 
public corporate annual reports and Forms 10-K. Users 
may access the system through the AICPA.
natural business year A 12-month period chosen as the 
reporting period so that the end of the period coin-
cides with a low point in activity or inventories. See 
ratio and Exhibit 7.12 for a discussion of analyses 
of financial statements of companies using a natural 
business year.
natural classification Income statement reporting form that 
classifies expenses by nature of items acquired, that is, 
materials, wages, salaries, insurance, and taxes, as well 
as depreciation. Contrast with functional classification.
natural resources Timberland, oil and gas wells, ore depos-
its, and other products of nature that have economic 
value. Terminology uses the term depletion to refer to 
the process of amortizing the cost of natural resources. 
Natural resources are nonrenewable (for example, 
oil, coal, gas, ore deposits) or renewable (timberland, 
sod fields); terminology often calls the former wasting 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

796
Glossary
net worth A misleading term with the same meaning as 
owners’ equity. Avoid using this term; accounting 
valuations at historical cost do not show economic 
worth.
network analysis A project planning and scheduling 
method, usually displayed in a diagram, that enables 
management to identify the interrelated sequences that 
it must accomplish to complete the project.
new product development time The period between a firm’s 
first consideration of a product and delivery of it to 
the customer.
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) A public market in 
which those who own seats (a seat is the right to par-
ticipate) trade various corporate securities for them-
selves and for their customers.
next-in, first-out See NIFO.
NIFO (next-in, first-out) A cost-flow assumption, one not 
allowed by U.S. GAAP. In making decisions, many 
managers consider replacement costs (rather than his-
torical costs) and refer to them as NIFO costs.
no par Said of stock without a par method.
nominal accounts Temporary accounts, such as revenue 
and expense accounts; contrast with balance sheet 
accounts. The firm closes all nominal accounts at the 
end of each accounting period to retained earnings.
nominal amount (value) An amount stated in dollars, in 
contrast to an amount stated in constant dollars. Con-
trast with real amount (value).
nominal dollars The measuring unit giving no consider-
ation to differences in the general purchasing power of 
the dollar over time. The face amount of currency or 
coin, a bond, an invoice, or a receivable is a nominal-
dollar amount. When the analyst adjusts that amount 
for changes in general purchasing power, it becomes a 
constant-dollar amount.
nominal interest rate A rate specified on a debt instru-
ment; usually differs from the market or effective rate; 
also, a rate of interest quoted for a year. If the interest 
compounds more often than annually, then the effec-
tive interest rate exceeds the nominal rate.
noncancellable See lease.
nonconsolidated subsidiary An intercorporate investment in 
which the parent owns more than 50% of the shares of 
the subsidiary but accounts for the investment with the 
cost method. This might happen when the firm owns 
another firm located in a country, such as Venezuela 
as this book goes to press, where the owner cannot 
easily remove cash and other assets from the country.
noncontributory Said of a pension plan in which only the 
employer makes payments to a pension fund. Contrast 
with contributory.
noncontrollable cost A cost that a particular manager can-
not control.
noncontrolling interest A balance sheet account on con-
solidated statements showing the equity in a less-than-
100%-owned subsidiary company; equity allocable 
to those who are not part of the controlling (major-
ity) interest; classified as shareholders’ equity on the 
consolidated balance sheet. The income statement 
must subtract the noncontrolling interest in the cur-
rent period’s income of the less-than-100%-owned 
net of tax method A nonsanctioned method for deal-
ing with the problem of income tax allocation. The 
method subtracts deferred tax items from specific 
asset amounts rather than showing them as a deferred 
credit or liability.
net of tax reporting Reporting, such as for income from 
discontinued operations, extraordinary items, and prior-
period adjustments, in which the firm adjusts the amounts 
presented in the financial statements for all income tax 
effects. For example, if an extraordinary loss amounted 
to $10,000, and the marginal tax rate was 40%, then 
the extraordinary item would appear “net of taxes” 
as a $6,000 loss. Hence, not all a firm’s income taxes 
necessarily appear on one line of the income statement. 
The reporting allocates the total taxes among income 
from continuing operations, income from discontinued 
operations, extraordinary items, cumulative effects of 
accounting changes, and prior-period adjustments.
net operating profit Income from continuing operations.
net present value Discounted or present value of all cash 
inflows and outflows of a project or of an investment 
at a given discount rate.
net price method (of recording purchase or sales discounts) 
Method that records a purchase (or sale) at its invoice 
price less all discounts made available, under the 
assumption that the firm will take nearly all discounts 
offered. The purchaser debits, to an expense account, 
discounts lapsed through failure to pay promptly. For 
purchases, management usually prefers to know about 
the amount of discounts lost because of inefficient 
operations, not the amounts taken, so that most man-
agers prefer the net price method to the gross price 
method.
net realizable (sales) value Current selling price less reason-
able costs to complete production and to sell the item. 
Also, a method for allocating joint costs in proportion 
to realizable values of the joint products. For example, 
joint products A and B together cost $100; A sells for 
$60, whereas B sells for $90. Then a firm would allo-
cate to A ($60/$150) × $100 = 0.40 × $100 = $40 of 
cost, while it would allocate to B ($90/$150) × $100 = 
$60 of cost. This cost allocation should not, however 
affect any decision making.
net sales Sales (at gross invoice amount) less returns, allow-
ances, freight paid for customers, and discounts taken.
net settlement Many derivative contracts obligate both 
counterparties to do something. (Most exchange 
traded derivatives only require only one party to do 
something.) “Net settlement” means that the contract 
provides that, when the derivative contract settles, 
one of the counterparties pays the other the fair value 
of the contract. For example, at the maturity of the 
derivative A owes B 9% of $100,000 and B owes A 
6% of $110,000. Rather than A writing B a check for 
$9,000 while B writes A check for $6,600, net settle-
ment allows A to write B a check for $2,400 (+ $9,000 
– $6,600).
net working capital Working capital; the term “net” is 
redundant in accounting. Financial analysts some-
times mean current assets when they speak of working 
capital, so for them the “net” is not redundant.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

797
Glossary
rate by the actual number of units of the base activity 
(such as actual direct labor hours worked or actual 
machine hours used during the period) to apply over-
head to production.
normal spoilage Costs incurred because of ordinary 
amounts of spoilage. Accounting prorates such costs 
to units produced as product costs. Contrast with 
abnormal spoilage.
normal standard cost, normal standards The cost a firm 
expects to incur under reasonably efficient operating 
conditions with adequate provision for an average 
amount of rework, spoilage, and the like.
normal volume The level of production that will, over 
a time span, usually one year, satisfy purchasers’ 
demands and provide for reasonable inventory levels.
not-for-profit Said of an entity that uses the excess of 
receipts over expenditures (or revenues over expenses) 
to achieve its stated goals, rather than distribute the 
excess to owners. Examples include private universi-
ties, some private hospitals, the Girl Scouts, and the 
United Way.
note (payable and receivable) An unconditional written 
promise by the maker (borrower) to pay a certain 
amount on demand or at a certain future time. The 
borrower has the payable and the lender, the receivable.
note receivable discounted A note assigned by the holder to 
another. The new holder of the note typically pays the 
old holder an amount less than the face value of the 
note, hence the word “discounted.” If the old holder 
assigns the note to the new holder with recourse, the 
old holder has a contingent liability until the maker of 
the note pays the debt. See factoring.
notes The preferred word, not “footnotes,” for referring 
to the detailed information included by management 
as an integral part of the financial statements and cov-
ered by the auditor’s report.
notional amounts A number of currency units, bushels, 
shares, or other units specified in a derivative contract. 
The notional amount of a derivative typically exceeds 
fair value of a derivative contract; for example, a swap 
contract on a $100 million borrowing might have a 
fair value under $1 million.
NOW (negotiable order of withdrawal) account Negotiable 
order of withdrawal. A savings account whose owner 
can draw an order to pay, much like a check but tech-
nically not a check, and give it to others, who can 
redeem the order at the savings institution.
number of days sales in inventory (or receivables) Days of 
average inventory on hand (or average collection period 
for receivables). See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
NV (naamloze vennootschap) Netherlands: a public limited 
liability company.
NYSE New York Stock Exchange.
O
OASDI Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.
objective See reporting objectives and objectivity.
objective function In linear programming, the name of the 
profit (or cost) criterion the analyst wants to maximize 
(or minimize).
subsidiary to arrive at net income for the period. Pre-
vious terminology referred to noncontrolling interest 
as the minority interest.
noncurrent Of a liability, due in more than one year (or 
more than one operating cycle); of an asset, the firm 
will enjoy the future benefit in more than one year (or 
more than one operating cycle).
nonexpendable fund A governmental fund whose principal, 
and sometimes earnings, the entity may not spend.
nonfinancial assets See financial assets for contrast.
noninterest-bearing note A note that does not specify 
explicit interest. The face value of such a note will 
exceed its present value at any time before matu-
rity value so long as interest rates are positive. APB 
Opinion No. 21 (Codification Topic 835) requires that 
firms report the present value, not face value, of long-
term noninterest-bearing notes as the asset or liabil-
ity amount in financial statements. For this purpose, 
the firm uses the historical interest rate. See interest, 
imputed.
nonmanufacturing costs All costs incurred other than those 
necessary to produce goods. Typically, only manufac-
turing firms use this designation.
nonmonetary items All items that are not monetary. See 
monetary items.
non-operating In the income statement context, said of rev-
enues and expenses arising from transactions inciden-
tal to the company’s main line(s) of business; in the 
statement of cash flows context, said of all financing 
and investing sources or uses of cash in contrast to 
cash provided by operations. See operations.
nonprofit corporation An incorporated entity, such as a 
hospital, with owners who do not share in the earn-
ings. It usually emphasizes providing services rather 
than maximizing income.
nonreciprocal transfer Transfer of assets or services from 
an entity without receiving something of equal value 
in return.
nonrecurring Said of an event that is not expected to 
happen often for a given firm. APB Opinion No. 30 
(Codification Topic 225) requires firms to disclose sep-
arately the effects of such events as part of ordinary 
items unless the event is also unusual. See extraordi-
nary item.
nonregistrant U.S. SEC registrant for definition and 
contrast.
nonvalue-added activity An activity that causes costs with-
out increasing a product’s or service’s value to the 
customer.
normal cost Former name for service cost in accounting 
for pensions and other postemployment benefits.
normal costing Method of charging costs to products using 
actual direct materials, actual direct labor, and prede-
termined factory overhead rates.
normal costing system Costing based on actual material 
and labor costs but using predetermined overhead rates 
per unit of some activity basis (such as direct labor 
hours or machine hours) to apply overhead to pro-
duction. Management decides the rate to charge to 
production for overhead at the start of the period. At 
the end of the period the accountant multiplies this 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

798
Glossary
variable interest entity. Accountants would probably 
classify a loss from an earthquake as an extraordinary 
item.
off-balance-sheet risk A contract that exposes an entity to 
the possibility of loss but that does not appear in the 
financial statements. For example, a forward-exchange 
contract that does not allow for net settlement gener-
ally does not appear on the balance sheet because it 
is an executory contract. The contract may reduce or 
increase the entity’s exposure to foreign-exchange risk 
(the chance of loss due to unfavorable changes in the 
foreign-exchange rate). It may also expose the entity 
to credit risk (the chance of loss that occurs when the 
counterparty to the contract cannot fulfill the contract 
terms).
OHG (Offene Handelsgesellschaft) Germany: a general 
partnership. The partners have unlimited liability.
Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) 
The technical name for Social Security under the Fed-
eral Insurance Contributions Act (FICA).
on consignment Said of goods delivered by the owner (the 
consignor) to another (the consignee) to be sold by the 
consignee. The arrangement entitles the owner either 
to the return of the property or to payment of a speci-
fied amount. The goods are assets of the consignor. 
Such arrangements provide the consignor with bet-
ter protection than an outright sale on account to the 
consignee in case the consignee becomes bankrupt. In 
event of bankruptcy, the ordinary seller, holding an 
account receivable, has no special claim to the return 
of the goods, whereas a consignor can reclaim the 
goods without going through bankruptcy proceed-
ings, from which the consignor might recover only a 
fraction of the amounts owed to it. Some consignors 
believe their total proceeds of sale will be greater if 
they give the goods to the consignee, who later sells 
the goods and takes a commission, rather than have 
the consignee buy the goods from the consignor and 
incur costs  of holding the asset until time of eventual 
sale to a third party.
on (open) account Said of a purchase (or sale) when the 
seller expects payment sometime after delivery and 
the purchaser does not give a note evidencing the 
debt. The purchaser has generally signed an agree-
ment sometime in the past promising to pay for such 
purchases according to an agreed time schedule. When 
the firm sells (purchases) on open account, it debits 
(credits) Accounts Receivable (Payable).
on-time performance The firm delivers the product or ser-
vice at the time scheduled for delivery.
one-line consolidation Said of an intercorporate invest-
ment accounted for with the equity method. With this 
method, the income and balance sheet total assets and 
equities amounts are identical to those that would 
appear if the parent consolidated the investee firm, 
even though the income from the investment appears 
on a single line of the income statement and the net 
investment appears on a single line in the Assets sec-
tion of the balance sheet.
one-write system A system of bookkeeping that produces 
several records, including original documents, in one 
objectivity Having existence independent of the observer. 
Formerly, the reporting policy implying that the firm 
will not give formal recognition to an event in finan-
cial statements until the firm can measure the mag-
nitude of the events with reasonable accuracy and 
check that amount with independent verification. The 
FASB has said SFAC No. 2, par. 158, “Accounting 
terminology will be improved if verifiability, which 
reflects what accountants do, replaces objectivity in 
the accountant’s lexicon.”
obsolescence An asset’s market value decrease caused by 
physical deterioration or by improved alternatives 
becoming available that will be more cost-effective. 
The decline in market value does not necessarily relate 
to physical changes in the asset itself. For example, 
computers become obsolete long before they wear 
out. The former is said to result from “physical fac-
tors,” whereas the latter is said to result from “func-
tional factors.” See partial obsolescence.
Occupational Safety and Health Act OSHA.
off-balance-sheet financing A description often used for 
an obligation that meets all the tests to be classi-
fied a liability except that the obligation arises from 
an executory contract and, hence, is not a liability. 
Consider the following example. Miller Corporation 
desires to acquire land costing $25 million, on which 
it will build a shopping center. It could borrow the 
$25 million from its bank, paying interest at 12%, and 
buy the land outright from the seller. If so, both an 
asset and a liability will appear on the balance sheet. 
Instead, it borrows $5 million and purchases for $5 
million from the seller an option to buy the land from 
the seller at any time within the next six years for a 
price of $20 million. The option costs Miller Corpora-
tion $5 million immediately and provides for continu-
ing “option” payments of $2.4 million per year, which 
precisely equal Miller Corporation’s borrowing rate 
multiplied by the remaining purchase price of the land: 
$2.4 million = 0.12 × $20 million. Although Miller 
Corporation need not continue payments and can let 
the option lapse at any time, it also has an obligation 
to begin developing on the site immediately. Because 
Miller Corporation has invested a substantial sum in 
the option, will invest more, and will begin immedi-
ately developing the land, Miller Corporation will 
almost certainly exercise its option before expiration. 
The seller of the land can take the option contract to 
the bank and borrow $20 million, paying interest at 
Miller Corporation’s borrowing rate, 12% per year. 
The continuing option payments from Miller Corpo-
ration will be sufficient to enable the seller to make its 
payments to the bank. Generally accepted accounting 
principles view Miller Corporation as having acquired 
an option for $5 million rather than having acquired 
land costing $25 million in return for $25 million of 
debt. The firm will likely be able to structure this trans-
action so that it need not recognize debt on the bal-
ance sheet until it borrows more funds to exercise the 
option.
 
 
The FASB has curtailed the use of such financ-
ings with FIN 46R (Codification Topic 810). See also 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

799
Glossary
historical costs; a measure of operating efficiency that 
does not depend on the cost-flow assumption for inven-
tory; sometimes called current (gross) margin. See 
inventory profit for illustrative computations.
operating profit (loss) Earnings (losses) before discontinued 
items, changes in accounting principles, extraordinary 
items, financial costs and revenues, and, typically, 
income taxes.
operating segment The FASB defines this as a component 
of a business
 
■  That engages in activities from which it can earn 
revenues and incur expenses,
 
■  Whose operating results the chief decision makers 
of the firm regularly review to consider resource 
allocation decisions and to make performance 
assessments, and
 
■  For which discrete, that is separate from other 
components, financial information is available.
operational control See control system.
operational measures of time Indicators of the speed and 
reliability with which organizations supply products 
and services to customer. Companies generally use 
two operational measures of time: customer response 
time and on-time performance.
operations A word not precisely defined in accounting. 
Generally, analysts distinguish operating activities 
(producing and selling goods or services) from financ-
ing activities (raising funds) and investing activities. 
Acquiring goods on account and then paying for 
them one month later, though generally classified 
as an operating activity, has the characteristics of a 
financing activity. Or consider the transaction of sell-
ing plant assets for a price in excess of carrying value. 
On the income statement, the gain appears as part of 
income from operations (“continuing operations” or 
“discontinued” operations, depending on the circum-
stances), but the statement of cash flows reports all the 
funds received as a non-operating source of cash, “dis-
position of noncurrent assets.” In income tax account-
ing, an “operating loss” results whenever deductions 
exceed taxable revenues.
opinion The auditor’s report containing an attestation or 
lack thereof; also, APB Opinion.
opinion paragraph Section of auditor’s report, generally 
following the scope paragraph and giving the auditor’s 
conclusion that the financial statements are (rarely, are 
not) in accordance with U.S. GAAP and present fairly 
the financial position, changes in financial position, and 
the results of operations. The paragraph also includes 
the auditor’s opinion about the adequacy, or not, of 
the internal control processes.
opportunity cost The present value of the income (or costs) 
that a firm could earn (or save) from using an asset in 
its best alternative use to the one under consideration.
opportunity cost of capital Cost of capital.
option The legal right to buy or sell something during a 
specified period at a specified price, called the exercise 
price. If the right exists during a specified time inter-
val, it is known as an “American option.” If it exists 
for only one specific day, it is known as a “European 
operation by the use of reproductive paper and equip-
ment that provides for the proper alignment of the 
documents.
OPEB Other post-employment benefits.
open account Any account with a nonzero debit or credit 
balance. See on (open) account.
operating accounts Revenue, expense, and production cost 
accounts. Contrast with balance sheet accounts.
operating activities For purposes of the statement of 
cash flows, all transactions and events that are nei-
ther financing activities nor investing activities. See 
operations.
operating (asset, liability, revenue, expense) An adjective 
used to refer to asset, liability, revenue, and expense 
items relating to the company’s main line(s) of busi-
ness. See operations. Contrast with financial asset and 
peripheral.
operating budget A formal budget for the operating cycle 
or for a year. Typically, this excludes investing and 
financing activities.
operating cash flow Cash flow from operations. Financial 
statement analysts sometimes use this term to mean 
cash flow from operations, capital expenditures, divi-
dends. This usage leads to such ambiguity that the 
reader should always confirm the definition that 
the writer uses before drawing inferences from the 
reported data.
operating cycle Earnings cycle.
operating expenses Expenses incurred in the course of 
ordinary activities of an entity; frequently, a classifica-
tion including only selling, general, and administrative 
expenses, thereby excluding cost of goods sold, interest, 
and income tax expenses. See operations.
operating lease A lease accounted for by the lessee with-
out showing an asset for the lease rights (leasehold) or 
a liability for the lease payment obligations. The lessee 
reports only rental payments or rent incurred during 
the period as expenses of the period. The asset remains 
on the lessor’s books, where rental collections appear 
as revenues. Contrast with capital lease.
operating leverage Usually said of a firm with a large 
proportion of fixed costs in its total costs. Con-
sider a book publisher or a railroad: such a firm has 
large costs to produce the first unit of service; then, 
the incremental costs of producing another book or 
transporting another freight car are much less than 
the average cost, so the gross margin on the sale of 
the subsequent units is relatively large. Contrast this 
situation with that, for example, of a grocery store, 
where the contribution margin can be smaller than 5% 
of the selling price. For firms with equal profitability, 
however defined, we say that the one with the larger 
percentage increase in income from a given percentage 
increase in dollar sales has the larger operating lever-
age. See leverage for contrast of this term with “finan-
cial leverage.” See cost terminology for definitions of 
terms involving the word “cost.”
operating margin Revenues from sales minus cost of goods 
sold and operating expenses.
operating margin based on current costs Operating mar-
gin where cost of goods sold is based on current, not 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

800
Glossary
output Physical quantity or monetary measurement of 
goods and services produced.
outside director; independent director A corporate board of 
directors member who is not a company officer and 
does not participate in the corporation’s day-to-day 
management.
outstanding Unpaid or uncollected; when said of stock, 
refers to the shares issued less treasury stock; when 
said of checks, refers to a check issued that did not 
clear the drawer’s bank prior to the bank statement 
date.
over-and-short Title for an expense account used to 
account for small differences between the book bal-
ance of cash and the sum of actual cash and vouchers 
or receipts in petty cash or change funds.
overapplied (overabsorbed) overhead Costs applied, or 
charged, to product and exceeding actual overhead 
costs during the period; a credit balance in an overhead 
account after overhead is assigned to product.
overdraft A check written on a checking account that con-
tains funds less than the amount of the check.
overhead costs Any cost not directly associated with the 
production or sale of identifiable goods and services; 
sometimes called burden or indirect costs and, in the 
United Kingdom, oncosts; frequently limited to man-
ufacturing overhead. See central corporate expenses 
and manufacturing overhead.
overhead rate Standard, or other predetermined rate, at 
which a firm applies overhead costs to products or to 
services.
over-the-counter Said of a security traded in a negotiated 
transaction, as on NASDAQ, rather than in an auc-
tioned one on an organized stock exchange, such as 
the New York Stock Exchange.
owners’ equity Proprietorship; assets minus liabilities; paid-
in capital plus retained earnings of a corporation; part-
ners’ capital accounts in a partnership; owner’s capital 
account in a sole proprietorship.
P
paid-in capital Sum of balances in capital stock and capital 
contributed in excess of par (or stated) value accounts; 
same as contributed capital (minus donated capital).
paid-in surplus See surplus.
P&L Profit-and-loss statement; income statement.
paper profit A gain not yet realized through a transaction; 
an unrealized holding gain.
par See at par and face amount.
par (nominal or stated) value Face amount of a security.
par value method In accounting for treasury stock, method 
that debits a common stock account with the par method 
of the shares required and allocates the remaining deb-
its between the Additional Paid-in Capital and Retained 
Earnings accounts. Contrast with cost method.
parent (company) Company owning more than 50% of 
the voting shares of another company, called the 
subsidiary.
Pareto chart A graph of a skewed statistical distribution. 
In many business settings, a relatively small percent-
age of the potential population causes a relatively large 
option.” Do not confuse employee stock options with 
put and call options, traded in various public markets.
ordinary annuity An annuity in arrears.
ordinary income For income tax purposes, reportable 
income not qualifying as capital gains.
organization costs The costs incurred in planning and 
establishing an entity; example of an intangible asset. 
The firm must treat these costs as expenses of the 
period, even though the expenditures clearly provide 
future benefits and meet the test to be assets.
organization goals Broad objectives for an organization 
established by management.
original cost Acquisition cost; in public utility account-
ing, the acquisition cost of the entity first devoting the 
asset to public use. See aboriginal cost.
original entry Entry in a journal.
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Act) The federal 
law that governs working conditions in commerce and 
industry.
other comprehensive income (OCI) According to the FASB, 
comprehensive income items that are not themselves 
part of earnings. See comprehensive income. To define 
other comprehensive income does not convey its 
essence. To understand other comprehensive income, 
you need to understand how it differs from earnings 
(or net income), the amount reported in the earnings 
(income) statement or statement of profit and loss. The 
term earnings (or net income) refers to the sum of all 
components of comprehensive income minus the com-
ponents of other comprehensive income. OCI includes 
items, such as unrealized gains and losses on securities 
available for sale, some foreign currency transactions, 
and cash flow hedges that affect a firm’s owners’ equity, 
but which standard setters decide the firm should 
report separately from net income. Historically, the 
standard setters have classified as OCI some items 
that management cannot directly control.
 
 
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require firms to pres-
ent OCI in a combined statement of income and OCI 
or in separate, but equal, statements, equal in type 
size and prominence.
other post-employment benefits During their working years, 
employees earn rights, promised by employers, for 
pensions, health care, and other benefits the employees 
collect after retirement. Accounting for these divides 
them into pension plans and other post-employment 
benefits. The accounting rules for these two, although 
not identical, result from similar principles.
outlay The amount of an expenditure.
outlier Said of an observation (or data point) that appears 
to differ significantly in some regard from other 
observations (or data points) of supposedly the same 
phenomenon; in a regression analysis, often used to 
describe an observation that falls far from the fitted 
regression equation (in two dimensions, line).
out-of-pocket Said of an expenditure usually paid for with 
cash; an incremental cost.
out-of-stock cost The estimated decrease in future profit as 
a result of losing customers because a firm has insuffi-
cient quantities of inventory currently on hand to meet 
customers’ demands.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

801
Glossary
patent A right granted for up to 20 years by the federal 
government to exclude others from manufacturing, 
using, or selling a claimed design, product, or plant 
(for example, a new breed of rose) or from using a 
claimed process or method of manufacture; an asset if 
the firm acquires it by purchase. If the firm develops 
it internally, current U.S. GAAP requires the firm to 
expense the development costs when incurred, but to 
capitalize legal costs and filing fees.
pay-as-you-go Said of an income tax scheme in which 
the taxpayer makes periodic payments of income 
taxes during the period when it earns the income to 
be taxed; in contrast to a scheme in which the tax-
payer owes no payments until the end of, or after, the 
period when it earned the income being taxed (called 
PAYE—pay-as-you-earn—in the United Kingdom). 
The phrase is sometimes used to describe an unfunded 
pension plan, or retirement benefit plan, in which the 
firm makes payments to pension plan beneficiaries 
from general corporate funds, not from cash previ-
ously contributed to a fund. Under this method, the 
firm debits expense as it makes payments, not as it 
incurs the obligations. This is not acceptable as a 
method of accounting for pension plans, under SFAS 
No. 87 (Codification Topic 715), or as a method of 
funding, under ERISA. Many firms fund other post-
employment benefits, which are primarily retiree 
health insurance plans, this way.
payable Unpaid but not necessarily due or past due.
payback period Amount of time that must elapse before 
the undiscounted cash inflows from a project equal 
the cash outflows.
payback reciprocal One divided by the payback period. 
This number approximates the internal rate of return 
on a project when the project life exceeds twice the 
payback period and the cash inflows are identical in 
every period after the initial period.
PAYE (pay-as-you-earn) See pay-as-you-go for contrast.
payee The person or entity who receives a cash payment or 
who will receive the stated amount of cash on a check. 
See draft.
payout ratio Common share dividends declared for a year 
divided by net income to common stock for the year; 
a term used by financial analysts. Contrast with divi-
dend yield.
payroll taxes Taxes levied because the taxpayer pays sala-
ries or wages; for example, FICA and unemployment 
compensation insurance taxes. Typically, the employer 
pays a portion and withholds part of the employee’s 
wages for the portion paid by the employee.
PCAOB Public Company Accounting Oversight Board.
P/E ratio Price-earnings ratio.
Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) A fed-
eral corporation established under ERISA to guar-
antee basic pension benefits in covered pension plans 
by administering terminated pension plans, paying 
benefits to those who have vested benefits from those 
plans, and placing liens on corporate assets for certain 
unfunded pension liabilities.
pension fund Fund, the assets of which the trustee will 
pay to retired ex-employees, usually as a life annuity; 
percentage of the business activity. For example, some 
businesses find that the top 20% of the customers buy 
80% of the goods sold. Or, the top 10% of products 
account for 60% of the revenues or 70% of the profits. 
The statistical distribution known as the Pareto distri-
bution has this property of skewness, so a graph of a 
phenomenon with such skewness has come to be known 
as a Pareto chart, even if the underlying data do not 
actually fit the Pareto distribution well. Practitioners of 
total quality management find that in many businesses 
a small number of processes account for a large frac-
tion of the quality problems, so they advocate charting 
potential problems and actual occurrences of problems 
to identify the relatively small number of sources of 
trouble. They call such a chart a Pareto chart.
partial obsolescence One cause of decline in market value of 
an asset. As technology improves, the economic value of 
existing assets declines. In many cases, however, it will 
not pay a firm to replace the existing asset with a new 
one, even though it would acquire the new type rather 
than the old if it did make a new acquisition currently. In 
these cases, the accountant should theoretically recognize 
a loss from partial obsolescence from the firm’s own-
ing an old, out-of-date asset, but U.S. GAAP does not 
permit recognition of partial obsolescence until the sum 
of future cash flows from the asset total less than car-
rying value; see impairment. The firm will carry the old 
asset at cost less accumulated depreciation until the firm 
retires it from service so long as the un-discounted future 
cash flows from the asset exceed its carrying value. Thus 
management that uses an asset subject to partial obsoles-
cence reports results inferior to those reported by a simi-
lar management that uses a new asset. See obsolescence.
partially executory contract Executory contract in which 
one or both parties have done something other than 
merely promise.
partially funded Said of a pension plan in which the firm 
has not funded all earned benefits. See funded for 
funding requirements.
partially vested Said of a pension plan in which not all 
employee benefits have vested. See graded vesting.
participating dividend Dividend paid to preferred share-
holders in addition to the minimum preferred divi-
dends when the preferred shares contract provides for 
such sharing in earnings. Usually the contract specifies 
that dividends on common shares must reach a speci-
fied level before the preferred shares receive the par-
ticipating dividend.
participating preferred stock Preferred shares with rights 
to participating dividends.
participative budgeting Using input from lower- and 
 middle- management employees in setting goals.
partner’s drawing A payment made to a partner and deb-
ited against his or her share of income or capital. The 
name of a temporary account, closed to the partner’s 
capital account, to record the debits when the partner 
receives such payments.
partnership; partner Contractual arrangement between 
individuals, called “partners,” to share resources and 
operations in a jointly run business. See general and 
limited partner and Uniform Partnership Act.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

802
Glossary
periodic inventory In recording inventory, a method that 
uses data on beginning inventory, additions to invento-
ries, and ending inventory to find the cost of withdraw-
als from inventory. Contrast with perpetual inventory.
periodic procedures The process of making adjusting entries 
and closing entries and preparing the financial state-
ments, usually by use of trial balances and work sheets.
permanent account An account that appears on the bal-
ance sheet. Contrast with temporary account.
permanent difference Difference between reported income 
and taxable income that will never reverse and, hence, 
requires no entry in the deferred income tax (liability) 
account; for example, nontaxable state and munici-
pal bond interest that will appear on the financial 
statements. Contrast with temporary difference. See 
deferred income tax liability.
permanent file The file of working papers that are prepared 
by a public accountant and that contain the informa-
tion required for reference in successive professional 
engagements for a particular organization, as distin-
guished from working papers applicable only to a par-
ticular engagement.
perpetual annuity Perpetuity.
perpetual inventory Inventory quantity and dollar amount 
records that the firm changes and makes current with 
each physical addition to or withdrawal from the stock 
of goods; an inventory so recorded. The records will 
show the physical quantities and, frequently, the dol-
lar valuations that should be on hand at any time. 
Because the firm explicitly computes cost of goods 
sold, it can use the inventory equation to compute an 
amount for what ending inventory should be. It can 
then compare the computed amount of ending inven-
tory with a physical count of the actual amount, 
either using cycle counts throughout the year (inven-
tory counts for only one or a few inventory items), or 
a complete inventory count of ending inventory as a 
control device to measure the amount of shrinkages. 
Contrast with periodic inventory.
perpetuity An annuity whose payments continue forever. 
The present value of a perpetuity in arrears is p/r, 
where p is the periodic payment and r is the interest 
rate per period. If a perpetuity promises $100 each 
year, in arrears, forever and the interest rate is 8% 
per year, then the perpetuity has a value of $1,250 = 
$100/0.08.
perpetuity growth model See perpetuity. A perpetuity whose 
cash flows grow at the rate g per period and thus has 
present value of 1/(r – g). Some call this the Gordon 
Growth Model because Myron Gordon wrote about 
applications of this formula and its variants in the 1950s. 
John Burr Williams wrote about them in the 1930s.
personal account Drawing account.
PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) A 
method of network analysis in which the analyst makes 
three time estimates for each activity—the optimistic 
time, the most likely time, and the pessimistic time—
and gives an expected completion date for the project 
within a probability range.
petty cash fund Currency and coins maintained for expen-
ditures that the firm makes with cash on hand.
generally held by an independent trustee and thus not 
an asset of the employer.
pension plan Details or provisions of employer’s contract 
with employees for paying retirement annuities or 
other benefits. See funded, vested, service cost, prior 
service cost, money purchase plan, and defined-benefit 
plan.
per books An expression used to refer to the carrying value 
of an item at a specific time.
percent Any number, expressed as a decimal, multiplied 
by 100.
percentage depletion (allowance) Deductible expense 
allowed in some cases by the federal income tax reg-
ulations; computed as a percentage of gross income 
from a natural resource independent of the unamor-
tized cost of the asset. Because the amount of the total 
deductions for tax purposes usually exceeds the cost 
of the asset subject to depletion, many people think the 
deduction is an unfair tax advantage or loophole.
percentage-of-completion method Recognizing revenues and 
expenses on a job, order, or contract (1) in proportion 
to the costs incurred for the period divided by total 
costs expected to be incurred for the job, or order, or 
contract (cost to cost) or (2) in proportion to engi-
neers’ or architects’ estimates of the incremental degree 
of completion of the job, order, or contract during the 
period. Contrast with completed contract method.
percentage-of-sales procedure Refer to the allowance 
method for uncollectibles. When the firm uses this 
procedure, it estimates the debit to Bad Debt Expense 
or the Revenue Contra account, an amount equal to 
a specified percentage of sales for the period. Peri-
odically, the firm will perform an aging-of-accounts-
receivable procedure to decide if the balance in the 
Allowance for Uncollectibles account needs increase 
or decreasing, with offsetting debits or credits to an 
income statement account.
percentage statement A statement containing, in addi-
tion to (or instead of) dollar amounts, ratios of dollar 
amounts to some base. In a percentage income state-
ment, the base is usually either net sales or total rev-
enues, and in a percentage balance sheet, the base is 
usually total assets. Often referred to as a “common-
size(d) financial statement.”
period Accounting period.
period cost An inferior term for period expense (because 
in most contexts, the word “cost” means an asset not 
an expense—a common exception being cost of goods 
sold ).
period expense (charge) Expenditure, usually based on the 
passage of time, charged to operations of the account-
ing period rather than capitalized as an asset. Contrast 
with product cost.
periodic cash flows Cash flows that occur during the life 
of an investment project. Often include receipts from 
sales, expenditures for fixed and variable production 
costs, and savings of fixed and variable production 
costs, to name a few. They do not include non-cash 
items, such as financial accounting depreciation charges 
or allocated items of overhead not requiring differen-
tial cash expenditures.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

803
Glossary
sometimes has a bad connotation for accountants 
because plugging can occur in a slightly different con-
text. During the process of preparing a preclosing trial 
balance (or balance sheet), often the sum of the debits 
does not equal the sum of the credits. Because almost 
all real businesses now use computerized account-
ing systems, it is impossible not to have debits equal 
credits. This problem arises more for students than 
in reality. Rather than find the error, some students 
are tempted to force equality by changing one of the 
amounts, with a plugged debit or credit to an account 
such as Other Expenses. No harm results from this 
procedure if the amount of the error is small com-
pared with asset totals, since spending much time to 
correct a small error will not be cost-effective. Still, 
most accounting teachers rightly disallow this use of 
plugging because exercises and problems set for stu-
dents provide enough information not to require it.
point of sale The time, or the location, at which a sale 
occurs. A point of sale system refers to a system 
located at the point where a sale occurs, although the 
system also keeps track of the time each sale occurs.
pooling-of-interests method Accounting for a business 
combination by adding together the carrying value of 
the assets and equities of the combined firms; gener-
ally leads to a higher reported net income for the com-
bined firms than results when the firm accounts for 
the business combination as a purchase because the 
market values of the merged assets generally exceed 
their carrying values. U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not 
allow this method, although they previously did, so 
financial statements still reflect the effects of pooling 
accounting. Called uniting-of-interests method by the 
IASB. Contrast with purchase method.
population The entire set of numbers or items from which 
the analyst samples or performs some other analysis.
positive confirmation See confirmation.
post; posting (process) To record entries in an account to a 
ledger, usually as transfers from a journal. Computer-
ized accounting systems do not necessarily do steps the 
way one does them by hand, but one needs to under-
stand the how a record-keeping system operated by 
hand operates in order to understand common termi-
nology heard in accounting contexts.
post-closing trial balance Trial balance taken after the 
accountant has closed all temporary accounts.
post-statement events Events that have material impact 
and that occur between the end of the accounting 
period and the formal publication of the financial 
statements. Even though the events occur after the end 
of the period being reported on, the firm must disclose 
such events in notes if the auditor is to give a clean 
opinion.
potentially dilutive A security that its holder may con-
vert into, or exchange for, common stock and thereby 
reduce reported earnings per share; options, warrants, 
convertible bonds, and convertible preferred stock.
PPB Program budgeting. The second “P” stands for 
“plan.”
practical capacity Maximum level at which a plant or 
department can operate efficiently.
physical factor See obsolescence.
physical units method A method of allocating a joint cost 
to the joint products based on a physical measure of 
the joint products; for example, allocating the cost 
of a cow to sirloin steak and to hamburger, based on 
the weight of the meat. This method usually provides 
nonsensical (see sterilized allocation) results unless the 
physical units of the joint products tend to have the 
same value.
physical verification Verification, by an auditor, performed 
by actually inspecting items in inventory, plant assets, 
and the like, in contrast to merely checking the writ-
ten records. The auditor may use statistical sampling 
procedures.
planning and control process General name for the man-
agement techniques comprising the setting of organi-
zational goals and strategic plans, capital budgeting, 
operations budgeting, comparison of plans with actual 
results, performance evaluation and corrective action, 
and revisions of goals, plans, and budgets.
plant Plant assets.
plant asset turnover Fixed asset turnover.
plant assets Assets used in the revenue-production process. 
Plant assets include buildings, machinery, equipment, 
land, and natural resources. The phrase “property, 
plant, and equipment” (though often appearing on bal-
ance sheets) is therefore a redundancy. In this context, 
“plant” used alone means buildings.
plantwide allocation method A method for allocating over-
head costs to product. First, use one cost pool for the 
entire plant. Then, allocate all costs from that pool to 
products using a single overhead allocation rate, or 
one set of rates, for all the products of the plant, inde-
pendent of the number of departments in the plant.
PLC (public limited company) United Kingdom: a pub-
licly held corporation. Contrast with Ltd.
pledging The borrower assigns assets as security or collat-
eral for repayment of a loan.
pledging of receivables The process of using expected col-
lections on accounts receivable as collateral for a loan. 
The borrower remains responsible for collecting the 
receivable but promises to use the proceeds for repay-
ing the debt.
plow back To retain assets generated by earnings for con-
tinued investment in the business.
plug Process for finding an unknown amount. For any 
account, Beginning Balance + Additions – Deduc-
tions = Ending Balance; if you know any three of 
the four items, you can find the fourth with simple 
arithmetic, called “plugging.” In making a journal 
entry, often you know all debits and all but one of the 
credits (or vice versa). Because double entry bookkeep-
ing requires equal debits and credits, you can com-
pute the unknown quantity by subtracting the sum of 
the known credits from the sum of all the debits (or 
vice versa), also called plugging. Accountants often 
call the unknown the plug. For example, in amortiz-
ing a discount on bonds payable with the straight-line 
depreciation method, interest expense is a plug: Inter-
est Expense = Interest Payable + Discount Amortiza-
tion. See trade-in transaction for an example. The term 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

804
Glossary
present value (of future [net] cash flows) Value today (or 
at some specific date) of an amount or amounts to be 
paid or received later (or at other, different dates), dis-
counted at some interest or discount rate; an amount 
that, if invested today at the specified rate, will grow 
to the amount to be paid or received in the future.
pretax (income) Said of the number on an income state-
ment (financial reporting) from which is subtracted 
income tax expense to derive net income or earnings. 
Do no confuse with taxable income, the number on 
a tax return to which the tax formula is applied to 
derive taxes payable.
prevention costs Costs incurred to prevent defects in the 
products or services a firm produces, including pro-
curement inspection, processing control (inspection), 
design, quality training, and machine inspection.
price The quantity of one good or service, usually cash, 
asked in return for a unit of another good or service. 
See fair value.
price–earnings (P/E) ratio At a given time, the market 
value of a company’s common share, per share, divided 
by the earnings per common share for the past year. 
The analyst usually bases the denominator on income 
from continuing operations or on some estimate of the 
number if the analyst thinks the current figure for that 
amount does not represent a usual situation—such as 
when the number is negative or, if positive, close to 
zero. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
price index A series of numbers, one for each period, that 
purports to represent some average of prices for a 
series of periods, relative to a base period.
price level The number from a price index series for a 
given period or date.
price level–adjusted statements Financial statements 
expressed in terms of dollars of uniform purchasing 
power. The statements restate nonmonetary items to 
reflect changes in general price levels since the time the 
firm acquired specific assets and incurred liabilities. The 
statements recognize a gain or loss on monetary items 
as the firm holds them over time periods when the gen-
eral price level changes. Conventional financial state-
ments show historical costs or fair values and ignore 
differences in purchasing power in different periods.
price variance In accounting for standard costs, an amount 
equal to (Actual Cost Per Unit – Standard Cost Per 
Unit) times actual quantity.
primary beneficiary U.S. GAAP uses this term in describ-
ing who should consolidate a variable interest entity 
(VIE). This usage is unrelated to insurance policies. 
U.S. GAAP provides no technical definition of this 
term but relies on common understanding.
prime cost Sum of direct materials plus direct labor costs 
assigned to product.
prime rate The loan rate charged by commercial banks 
to their creditworthy customers. Some customers pay 
even less than the prime rate and others, more. The 
Federal Reserve Bulletin is the authoritative source of 
information about historical prime rates.
principal; principal (face) value An amount on which inter-
est accrues, either as expense (for the borrower) or as 
revenue (for the lender); the face amount of a loan; 
precision The degree of accuracy for an estimate derived 
from a sampling process, usually expressed as a range 
of values around the estimate. The analyst might 
express a sample estimate in the following terms: 
“Based on the sample, we are 95% sure [confidence 
level] that the true population value is within the range 
of X to Y [precision].” See confidence level.
preclosing trial balance Trial balance taken at the end of the 
period before closing entries; in this sense, an adjusted 
trial balance; sometimes taken before adjusting entries 
and then synonymous with unadjusted trial balance.
predatory prices Setting prices below some measure of cost 
in an effort to drive out competitors with the hope of 
recouping losses later by charging monopoly prices. 
Illegal in the United States if the prices set are below 
long-run variable costs.
predetermined (factory) overhead rate Rate used in apply-
ing overhead costs to products or departments devel-
oped at the start of a period. Compute the rate as 
estimated overhead cost divided by the estimated 
number of units of the overhead allocation base (or 
denominator volume) activity. See normal costing.
preemptive right The privilege of a shareholder to main-
tain a proportionate share of ownership by purchas-
ing a proportionate share of any new stock issues. 
Most state corporation laws allow corporations to pay 
shareholders to waive their preemptive rights or state 
that preemptive rights exist only if the corporation 
charter explicitly grants them. In practice, then, pre-
emptive rights are the exception rather than the rule.
preference as to assets The rights of preferred sharehold-
ers to receive certain payments before common share-
holders receive payments in case the board dissolves 
the corporation.
preferred shares (stock) Capital stock with a claim to 
income or assets after holders of bonds but before com-
mon shares. Dividends on preferred shares are income 
distributions, not expenses. See cumulative preferred 
shares.
premium For shares, the excess of issue (or market) price 
over par method. For debt, the excess of carrying value 
over face value of the debt instrument. For a different 
context, see insurance.
premium on capital stock Alternative but inferior title for 
capital contributed in excess of par (or stated) value or 
additional paid-in capital.
prepaid assets Prepayments.
prepaid expense An expenditure that leads to a deferred 
charge or prepayment. Strictly speaking, this is a con-
tradiction in terms because an expense is a gone asset, 
and this title refers to past expenditures, such as for 
rent or insurance premiums, that still have future ben-
efits and thus are assets. We try to avoid this term and 
use “prepayment” instead.
prepaid income An inferior alternative title for advances 
from customers. Do not call an item revenue or income 
until the firm earns it by delivering goods or rendering 
services.
prepayments Deferred charges; assets representing expen-
ditures for future benefits. Rent and insurance premi-
ums paid in advance are usually current prepayments.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

805
Glossary
production cost account A temporary account for accumu-
lating manufacturing costs during a period.
production cycle efficiency Measures the efficiency of the 
production cycle by computing the ratio of the time 
spent processing a unit divided by the production cycle 
time. The higher the percentage, the less the time and 
costs spent on nonvalue-added activities, such as mov-
ing and storage.
production cycle time The total time to produce a unit. 
Includes processing, moving, storing, and inspecting.
production department A department producing salable 
goods or services; contrast with service department.
production method (depreciation) One form of straight-line 
depreciation. The firm assigns to the depreciable asset 
(for example, a truck) a depreciable life measured not 
in elapsed time but in units of output (for example, 
miles) or perhaps in units of time of expected use. 
Then the depreciation charge for a period is a portion 
of depreciable cost equal to a fraction computed as 
the actual output produced during the period divided 
by the expected total output to be produced over the 
life of the asset. This method is sometimes called the 
units-of-production (or output) method.
production method (revenue recognition) Percentage-of-
completion method for recognizing revenue.
production volume variance Standard fixed overhead rate 
per unit of normal capacity (or base activity) times 
(units of base activity budgeted or planned for a 
period minus actual units of base activity worked or 
assigned to product during the period); often called a 
volume variance.
productive capacity One attribute measured for assets. 
The current cost of long-term assets means the cost of 
reproducing the productive capacity (for example, the 
ability to manufacture one million units a year), not 
the cost of reproducing the actual physical assets cur-
rently used (see reproduction cost). Replacement cost 
of productive capacity will be the same as reproduc-
tion cost of assets only in the unusual case when no 
technological improvement in production processes 
has occurred and the relative prices of goods and ser-
vices used in production have remained approximately 
the same as when the firm acquired the currently used 
goods and services.
product-level activities Work that supports a particular 
product or service line. Examples include design work, 
supervision, and advertising that are specific to each 
type of product or service.
profit Excess of revenues over expenses for a transaction; 
sometimes used synonymously with net income for 
the period, especially under IFRS. “Profit” is a credit 
balance. Many writers and top accountants mislead-
ingly use terminology such as “distribute profits.” 
This usage confuses because the firm paying a divi-
dend distributes cash or other assets, with a credit to 
the retained earnings (retained profits) account. Care-
ful users do not say “distribute profits,” but even top 
standard setters sometimes do: “. . . no accounting 
standard can or should seek to define what element of 
profits can be distributed.” The lay reader will think 
that the company distributes some amorphous thing 
also, the absent owner (principal) who hires the man-
ager (agent) in a “principal–agent” relationship.
principle See generally accepted accounting principles.
prior-period adjustment A debit or credit that is made 
directly to retained earnings (and that does not affect 
income for the period) to adjust earnings as calculated 
for prior periods. Such adjustments are now rare. The-
ory suggests that accounting should correct for errors 
in accounting estimates (such as the depreciable life or 
salvage value of an asset) by adjusting retained earn-
ings so that statements for future periods will show 
correct amounts. But U.S. GAAP requires that cor-
rections of such estimates flow through current, and 
perhaps future, income statements. See accounting 
changes and accounting errors.
prior service cost Present value at a given time of a pension 
plan’s retroactive benefits. “Unrecognized prior service 
cost” refers to that portion of prior service cost not 
yet debited to expense. See funded. Contrast with nor-
mal cost.
pro forma income See pro forma statements.
pro forma statements Hypothetical statements; financial 
statements as they would appear if some event, such 
as a merger or increased production and sales, had 
occurred or were to occur; sometimes spelled as one 
word, “proforma.” The phrase “pro forma income” 
has come to disrepute, as some companies have pub-
lished pro forma income statements that include their 
good news as recurring income and omit the bad news 
as nonrecurring income. They have attempted to focus 
the investment community on their own presentation 
of this good news, de-emphasizing U.S. GAAP net 
income. The SEC and others have attempted to make 
these disclosures less misleading.
probable In many of its definitions, the FASB uses the 
term “probable.” See, for example, asset, firm com-
mitment, liability. A survey of practicing accountants 
revealed that the average of the probabilities that those 
surveyed had in mind when they used the term “prob-
able” was 85%. Some accountants think that any event 
whose outcome is greater than 50% should be called 
probable. The FASB uses the phrase “more likely 
than not” when it means greater than 50%. The IASB 
defines “probable” to mean more likely than not.
proceeds The funds received from the disposition of assets 
or from the issue of securities.
process costing A method of cost accounting based on 
average costs (total cost divided by the equivalent units 
of work done in a period); typically used for assembly 
lines or for products that the firm produces in a series 
of steps that are more continuous than discrete.
product Goods or services produced.
product cost Any manufacturing cost that the firm can—
or, in some contexts, should—debit to an inventory 
account. See flow of costs, for example. Contrast with 
period expenses.
product life cycle Time span between initial concept (typi-
cally starting with research and development) of a good 
or service and the time when the firm ceases to support 
customers who have purchased the good or service.
production cost Manufacturing cost.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

806
Glossary
transaction where the firm receives the cash, a collec-
tion of a payment made by a counterparty.
progressive tax Tax for which the rate increases as the 
taxed base, such as income, increases. Contrast with 
regressive tax.
project financing arrangement As defined by SFAS No. 47 
(Codification Topic 440), the financing of an investment 
project in which the lender looks principally to the cash 
flows and earnings of the project as the source of funds 
for repayment and to the assets of the project as collat-
eral for the loan. The general credit of the project entity 
usually does not affect the terms of the financing either 
because the borrowing entity is a corporation without 
other assets or because the financing provides that the 
lender has no direct recourse to the entity’s owners.
projected benefit obligation (PBO) The actuarial present 
value at a given date of all pension benefits attributed 
by a defined-benefit pension formula to employee ser-
vice rendered before that date. The analyst measures 
the obligation using assumptions as to future compen-
sation levels if the formula incorporates future com-
pensation, as happens, for example, when the plan 
bases the eventual pension benefit on wages of the 
last several years of employees’ work lives. Contrast 
to accumulated benefit obligation, where the analyst 
measures the obligation using employee compensation 
levels at the time of the measurement date.
projected financial statement Pro forma financial statement.
projection See financial projection for definition and 
contrast.
promissory note An unconditional written promise to pay 
a specified sum of cash on demand or at a specified 
date.
proof of journal The process of checking the arithmetic 
accuracy of journal entries by testing for the equal-
ity of all debits and all credits since the last previous 
proof.
property dividend A dividend in kind.
property, plant, and equipment See plant assets.
proportionate consolidation A presentation of the finan-
cial statements of any investor-investment relationship, 
whereby the investor’s pro rata share of each asset, 
liability, income item, and expense item appears in the 
financial statements of the investor under the various 
balance sheet and income statement headings. Allowed 
by IFRS but not by U.S. GAAP.
proprietary accounts See budgetary accounts for defini-
tion and contrast in the context of governmental 
accounting.
proprietorship Assets minus liabilities of an entity; equals 
contributed capital plus retained earnings. See sole pro-
prietor for another context.
proprietorship theory The corporation view that empha-
sizes the form of the accounting equation that says 
Assets – Liabilities = Owners’ equity; contrast with 
entity theory. The major implication of a choice 
between these theories deals with the treatment of 
subsidiaries. For example, the proprietorship theory 
views noncontrolling interest as a liability with indeter-
minate term. The proprietorship theory implies using 
a single-step income statement.
called “profits,” rather than think the company dis-
tributes cash or other assets generated by activities 
that result in reported profits.
profit and loss account United Kingdom: retained earnings.
profit-and-loss sharing ratio The fraction of net income or 
loss allocable to a partner in a partnership; need not 
be the same fraction as the partner’s share of capital.
profit-and-loss statement Income statement.
profit center A responsibility center for which a firm accu-
mulates both revenues and expenses. Contrast with 
cost center and investment center.
profit margin; profit margin for ROA ratio; profit margin 
for ROCE ratio Sales minus all expenses.
profit margin percentage Profit margin divided by net 
sales. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
profit maximization The doctrine that the firm should 
account for a given set of operations so as to make 
reported net income as large as possible; contrast with 
conservatism. The concept of profit maximization in 
accounting differs from the profit-maximizing concept 
in economics, which states that the firm should man-
age operations to maximize the present value of the 
firm’s wealth, generally by equating marginal costs 
and marginal revenues.
profit plan The income statement portion of a master 
budget.
profit-sharing plan A defined-contribution plan in which the 
employer contributes amounts based on net income.
profit variance analysis Analysis of the causes of the dif-
ference between budgeted profit in the master budget 
and the profits earned.
profit-volume analysis (equation) Analysis of effects, on 
profits, caused by changes in volume or contribution 
margin per unit or fixed costs. See breakeven chart.
profit-volume graph See breakeven chart.
profit-volume ratio Net income divided by net sales in 
dollars.
profitability A nontechnical term meaning the potential 
for, or actual earning of, net income.
profitability accounting Responsibility accounting.
program budgeting (PPB) Specification and analysis of 
inputs, outputs, costs, and alternatives that link plans 
to budgets.
programmed cost A fixed cost not essential for carrying 
out operations. For example, a firm can control costs 
for research and development and advertising designed 
to generate new business, but once it commits to incur 
them, they become fixed costs. These costs are some-
times called managed costs or discretionary costs. 
Contrast with capacity costs.
progress payments When a firm undertakes to construct 
for a customer, and the construction takes more than 
a few months, the firm will often contract with the 
customer to make cash payments as construction pro-
ceeds. The firm receives the cash, often called a “prog-
ress payment,” debiting cash and crediting an account 
such as Advances from Customers. The customer 
credits cash and debits an account such as Advances 
to Suppliers. The firm receiving the cash often refers 
to these collections as “progress collections.” We pre-
fer not to use the word payment to refer to part of a 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

807
Glossary
PuPU Acronym for purchasing power unit; conceived by 
John C. Burton, former chief accountant of the SEC. 
Those who think that constant-dollar accounting is not 
particularly useful poke fun at it by calling it “PuPU 
accounting.”
purchase The acquisition of goods and services in exchange 
for some asset. See purchase method for the context of 
acquisition of another company or division.
purchase allowance A reduction in sales invoice price usu-
ally granted because the purchaser received goods not 
exactly as ordered. The purchaser does not return the 
goods but agrees to keep them for a price lower than 
originally agreed upon.
purchase discount A reduction in purchase invoice price 
granted for prompt payment. See sales discount and 
terms of sale.
purchase investigation Due diligence.
purchase method Accounting for a business combination 
by recognizing the acquired company’s identifiable 
assets and liabilities at their fair value, and recogniz-
ing the goodwill (if any) and noncontrolling interest  (if 
any) of the business combination.
purchase order Document issued by a buyer authorizing 
a seller to deliver goods, with the buyer to make pay-
ment later.
purchasing power gain or loss Monetary gain or loss.
push-down accounting An accounting method used in some 
purchase transactions. Assume that Company A pur-
chases substantially all the common shares of Com-
pany B but that Company B must still issue its own 
financial statements. The question arises, shall Com-
pany B change the basis for its assets and equities on 
its own books to the same updated amounts at which 
they appear on Company A’s consolidated financial 
statements? Company B uses push-down accounting 
when it shows the new asset and equity bases reflecting 
Company A’s purchase, because the method “pushes 
down” the new bases from Company A (where U.S. 
GAAP requires them) to Company B (where the new 
bases would not appear in historical cost accounting). 
Since 1983, the SEC has required push-down account-
ing under many circumstances.
put (option) An option to sell shares of a publicly traded 
corporation (or other items) at a fixed price during a 
fixed time span. Contrast with call.
Q
qualified report (opinion) Auditor’s report containing a 
statement that the auditor was unable to complete a 
satisfactory examination of all things considered rele-
vant or that the auditor has doubts about the financial 
impact of some material item reported in the financial 
statements. See except for and subject to.
qualifying special-purpose entity See special purpose entity.
quality In modern usage, a product or service has quality 
to the extent it conforms to specifications or provides 
customers the characteristics promised them.
quality of earnings A phrase with no single, agreed-upon 
meaning. Some who use the phrase use it with different 
prorate To allocate in proportion to some base; for exam-
ple, to allocate service department costs in proportion 
to hours of service used by the benefited department 
or to allocate manufacturing variances to product sold 
and to product added to ending inventory.
prorating variances See prorate.
prospectus Formal written document describing securities 
a firm will issue. See proxy.
protest fee Fee charged by banks or other financial agen-
cies when the bank cannot collect items (such as 
checks) presented for collection.
provision Part of an account title. Often the firm must rec-
ognize an expense even though it cannot be sure of 
the exact amount. The entry for the estimated expense, 
such as for income taxes or expected costs under war-
ranty, is as follows:
Retained Earnings (Expense) (Asset Decrease 
 
or Liability Increase) (Estimated)  . . . . . . . . 
X
 
 
Liability Increase (Estimated)  . . . . . . . . 
 
X
 
American terminology often uses “provision” in the 
expense account title of the above entry. Thus, Provi-
sion for Income Taxes means the estimate of income 
tax expense. (IFRS terminology uses “provision” in 
the title for the estimated liability of the above entry, 
so that Provision for Income Taxes is a balance sheet 
account. IFRS terminology also uses the word for an 
asset contra account.)
provision accounting  See loss contingency accounting.
provision for bad debts See provision. In the U.S., this 
term refers to Bad Debt Expense. In Europe, the term 
refers to the asset contra account, such as Allowance 
for Uncollectibles.
provision for uncollectible accounts See provision. This 
term has the same meaning as provision for bad debts.
proxy Written authorization given by one person to 
another so that the second person can act for the first, 
such as to vote shares of stock; of particular signifi-
cance to accountants because the SEC presumes that 
management distributes financial information along 
with its proxy solicitations.
public accountant Generally, this term is synonymous with 
certified public accountant or Chartered Accountant. 
Some jurisdictions, however, license individuals who 
are not CPAs as public accountants.
public accounting That portion of accounting primarily 
involving the attest function, culminating in the audi-
tor’s report.
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board PCAOB 
A board established by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
2002 that regulates the auditing profession and sets 
standards for audits of public companies. The SEC 
appoints its members and approves its budget. The 
PCAOB directly invoices publicly traded companies 
and their auditors to fund its operations.
publicly traded An adjectival phrase describing firms 
whose securities trade in active markets or the securi-
ties themselves.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

808
Glossary
best light, independent of the ability of the firm to 
generate similar earnings in the future.
 
 
In the business cycle aspect, management’s action 
often has no impact on the stability and recurrence of 
earnings Compare a company that sells consumer prod-
ucts and likely has sales repeating every week with a 
construction company that builds to order. Companies 
in noncyclical businesses, such as some public utilities, 
likely have more stable earnings than ones in cyclical 
businesses, such as steel. Some use “quality of earnings” 
to refer to the stability and recurrence of basic revenue-
generating activities. Those who use the phrase this way 
rarely associate earnings quality with accounting issues.
quality of financial position Because of the linkage between 
the income statement with the change in retained earn-
ings between the beginning and ending balance sheet, 
the factors that imply a high (or low) quality of earn-
ings also affect the balance sheet. Users of this phrase 
have in mind the same accounting issues as they have 
in mind when they use the phrase “quality of earn-
ings.” In the recent past, many firms held subprime 
mortgages overvalued, in aggregate, by $1 trillion or 
more, suggesting a low quality of financial position.
quantitative performance measure A measure of output 
based on an objectively observable quantity, such as 
units produced or direct costs incurred, rather than 
on an unobservable quantity or a quantity observable 
only nonobjectively, like quality of service provided.
quantity discount A reduction in purchase price as quan-
tity purchased increases. The Robinson-Patman Act 
constrains the amount of the discount. Do not confuse 
with purchase discount.
quantity variance Efficiency variance; in standard cost sys-
tems, the standard price per unit times (standard quan-
tity that should be used minus actual quantity used).
quasi-reorganization A reorganization in which no new 
company emerges or no court has intervened, as 
would happen in bankruptcy. The primary purpose is 
to rid the balance sheet of a deficit (negative retained 
earnings) and give the firm a “fresh start.”
quick assets Assets readily convertible into cash; includes 
cash, current marketable securities (that is, not held as 
investments), and current receivables.
quick ratio Sum of (cash, current marketable securities, 
and current receivables) divided by current liabili-
ties; often called the acid test ratio. The analyst may 
exclude some nonliquid receivables from the numera-
tor. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
R
R2 The proportion of the statistical variance of a depen-
dent variable explained by the equation fit to indepen-
dent variable(s) in a regression analysis.
R&D See research and development.
Railroad Accounting Principles Board (RAPB) A board 
brought into existence by the Staggers Rail Act of 
1980 to advise the Interstate Commerce Commission 
on accounting matters affecting railroads. The RAPB 
was the only cost-accounting body authorized by the 
meanings on different occasions. Quality of earnings 
has an accounting aspect and a business cycle aspect.
 
 
In its accounting aspect, managers have choices in 
measuring and reporting earnings. This discretion can 
involve any of the following: selecting accounting prin-
ciples or standards when U.S. GAAP allows a choice; 
making estimates in the application of accounting 
principles; and timing transactions to allow recogniz-
ing nonrecurring items in earnings. In some instances 
the range of choices has a large impact on reported 
earnings and in others, small.
 
(1)  Some use the phrase “quality of earnings” to 
mean the degree to which management can affect 
reported income by its choices of accounting esti-
mates even though the choices recur every period. 
These users judge, for example, insurance compa-
nies to have low-quality earnings. Insurance com-
pany management must re-estimate its liabilities 
for future payments to the insured each period, 
thereby having an opportunity to report periodic 
earnings within a wide range.
 
(2)  Others use the phrase to mean the degree to which 
management actually takes advantage of its flex-
ibility. For them, an insurance company that does 
not vary its methods and estimating techniques, 
even though it has the opportunity to do so, has 
high-quality earnings.
 
(3)  Some have in mind the proximity in time between 
revenue recognition and cash collection. For them, 
the smaller the time delay, the higher will be the 
quality.
 
(4)  Still others use the phrase to mean the degree to 
which managers who have a choice among the 
items with large influence on earnings choose 
the ones that result in income measures that are 
more likely to recur. For them, the more likely an 
item of earnings is to recur, the higher will be its 
quality.
 
Often these last two groups trade off with each other. 
Consider a dealer leasing a car on a long-term lease, 
receiving monthly collections. The dealer who uses 
sales-type lease accounting scores low on proximity 
of revenue recognition (all at the time of signing the 
lease) to cash collection but highlights the nonrepeti-
tive nature of the transaction. The leasing dealer who 
uses operating lease accounting has perfectly matching 
revenue recognition and cash collection, but the recur-
ring nature of the revenue gives a misleading picture 
of a repetitive transaction. The phrase “item of earn-
ings” in (4) is ambiguous. The writer could mean the 
underlying economic event (which occurs when the 
lease for the car is signed) or the revenue recognition 
(which occurs every time the dealer using operating 
lease accounting receives cash). Hence, you should try 
to understand what other speakers and writers mean 
by “quality of earnings” when you interpret what they 
say and write. Some who refer to “earnings quality” 
suspect that managers will usually make choices that 
enhance current earnings and present the firm in the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

809
Glossary
raw materials inventory See raw material; see inventory.
reacquired stock Treasury shares.
real accounts Balance sheet accounts, as opposed to nomi-
nal accounts. See permanent accounts.
real amount (value) An amount stated in constant dollars. 
For example, if the firm sells an investment costing 
$100 for $130 after a period of 10% general inflation, 
the nominal amount of gain is $30 (= $130 – $100) 
but the real amount of gain is C$20 (= $130 – 1.10 
× $100), where “C$” denotes constant dollars of pur-
chasing power on the date of sale.
real estate Land and its improvements, such as landscaping 
and roads, but not buildings.
real interest rate Interest rate reflecting the productivity 
of capital, not including a premium for inflation antici-
pated over the life of the loan.
realizable value Fair value or, sometimes, net realizable 
(sales) value.
realization (convention) The accounting practice of delay-
ing the recognition of gains and losses from changes in 
the market price of assets until the firm sells the assets. 
However, the firm recognizes unrealized losses on 
inventory (or marketable securities classified as trading 
securities) prior to sale when the firm uses the lower 
of cost or market valuation basis for inventory (or the 
fair value basis for marketable securities) or when it 
recognizes impairments.
realize (v. recognize) To convert into funds; when applied 
to a gain or loss, implies that an arm’s length trans-
action has taken place. Contrast with recognize; the 
firm may recognize a loss (as, for example, on market-
able equity securities) in the financial statements even 
though it has not yet realized the loss via a transaction.
realized gain (or loss) on marketable equity securities 
An income statement account title for the difference 
between the proceeds of disposition and the acquisi-
tion cost of marketable equity securities.
realized gross margin Gross margin in a transaction with a 
counterparty outside the firm.
realized holding gain See inventory profit for definition and 
an example.
rearrangement costs Costs of reinstalling assets, perhaps 
in a different location. The firm should capitalize them 
as part of the assets cost, just as is done with origi-
nal installation cost. The firm will expense these costs 
if they merely maintain the asset’s future benefits at 
their originally intended level before the relocation.
recapitalization Reorganization.
recapture Name for one kind of tax payment. Various 
provisions of the income tax rules require a refund by 
the taxpayer (recapture by the government) of various 
tax advantages under certain conditions. For exam-
ple, the taxpayer must repay tax savings provided by 
accelerated depreciation if the taxpayer prematurely 
retires the item providing the tax savings.
receipt Acquisition of cash. Written acknowledgment that 
the signer has received a good or service or cash.
receivable Any collectible, whether or not it is currently 
due.
receivable turnover See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
government during the decade of the 1980s (because 
Congress ceased funding the CASB during the 1980s). 
The RAPB incorporated the pronouncements of the 
CASB and became the government’s authority on cost 
accounting principles, until the Congress re-instated 
the CASB. Refer to CASB.
random number sampling For choosing a sample, a method 
in which the analyst selects items from the population 
by using a random number table or generator.
random sampling For choosing a sample, a method in 
which all items in the population have an equal chance 
of being selected. Compare judgment(al) sampling and 
stratified sampling.
RAPB Railroad Accounting Principles Board.
rate of return on assets (ROA) Return on assets. See ratio 
and Exhibit 7.12.
rate of return on common stock equity (ROCE) See ratio 
and Exhibit 7.12.
rate of return on shareholders’ (owners’) equity See ratio.
rate of return (on total capital) See ratio and return on assets.
rate variance Price variance, usually for direct labor costs.
ratio The number resulting when one number divides 
another. Analysts generally use ratios to assess aspects 
of profitability, solvency, and liquidity. The commonly 
used financial ratios fall into three categories: (1) those 
that summarize some aspect of operations for a period, 
usually a year; (2) those that summarize some aspect 
of financial position at a given moment—the moment 
for which a balance sheet reports; and (3) those that 
relate some aspect of operations to some aspect of 
financial position. Exhibit 7.12, in Chapter 7, defines 
many commonly used financial ratios.
 
 
For all ratios that require an average balance dur-
ing the period, the analyst often derives the average 
as one half the sum of the beginning and the ending 
balances. Sophisticated analysts recognize, however, 
that particularly when companies use a fiscal year dif-
ferent from the calendar year, this averaging of begin-
ning and ending balances may mislead. Consider, for 
example, the rate of return on assets of Sears, Roebuck 
& Company, whose fiscal year ends on January 31. 
Sears chooses a January 31 closing date at least in part 
because inventories are at a low level and are therefore 
easy to count—it has sold the Christmas merchandise, 
and the Easter merchandise has not yet all arrived. 
Furthermore, by January 31, Sears has collected for 
most Christmas sales, so receivable amounts are not 
unusually large. Thus at January 31, the amount of 
total assets is lower than at many other times during 
the year. Consequently, the denominator of the rate 
of return on assets, total assets, for Sears more likely 
represents the smallest amount of total assets on hand 
during the year rather than the average amount. The 
return on assets rate for Sears and other companies 
that choose a fiscal year-end to coincide with low 
points in the inventory cycle is likely to exceed the 
ratio measured with a more accurate estimate of the 
average amounts of total assets.
raw material Goods purchased for use in manufacturing 
a product.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

810
Glossary
shares. Such redemption is an event not certain 
to occur. U.S. GAAP requires the issuer to clas-
sify the security as neither liability nor sharehold-
ers’ equity, but to show the amounts in between. 
IFRS requires classification as a liability.
redemption Retirement by the issuer, usually by a pur-
chase or call, of stocks or bonds.
redemption premium Call premium.
redemption value The price a corporation will pay to retire 
bonds or preferred stock if it calls them before maturity.
refinancing An adjustment in the capital structure of a cor-
poration, involving changes in the nature and amounts 
of the various classes of debt and, in some cases, 
capital as well as other components of shareholders’ 
equity. Asset carrying values in the accounts remain 
unchanged.
refunding bond issue Said of a bond issue whose proceeds 
the firm uses to retire bonds already outstanding.
register A collection of consecutive entries, or other infor-
mation, in chronological order, such as a check reg-
ister or an insurance register that lists all insurance 
policies owned.
registered bond A bond for which the issuer will pay the 
principal and interest, if registered as to interest, to the 
owner listed on the books of the issuer.
registrant See U.S. SEC registrant.
registrar An agent, usually a bank or trust company, 
appointed by a corporation to keep track of the names 
of shareholders and distributions to them.
registration statement Required by the Securities Act of 
1933, statement of most companies that want to have 
owners of their securities trade the securities in public 
markets. The statement discloses financial data and 
other items of interest to potential investors.
regression analysis A method of cost estimation based on 
statistical techniques for fitting a line (or its equivalent 
in higher mathematical dimensions) to an observed 
series of data points, usually by minimizing the sum of 
squared deviations of the observed data from the fit-
ted line. Common usage calls the cost that the analysis 
explains the dependent variable; it calls the variable(s) 
we use to estimate cost behavior the independent 
variable(s). If we use more than one independent vari-
able, the term for the analysis is “multiple regression 
analysis.” See R2, standard error, and t-value.
regressive tax Tax for which the rate decreases as the 
taxed base, such as income, increases. Contrast with 
progressive tax.
Regulation S-K The SEC ’s standardization of nonfinan-
cial statement disclosure requirements for documents 
filed with the SEC.
Regulation S-T The SEC ’s regulations specifying formats 
for electronic filing. See XBRL.
Regulation S-X The SEC ’s principal accounting regula-
tion, which specifies the form and content of financial 
reports to the SEC.
rehabilitation The improving of a used asset via an exten-
sive repair. Ordinary repairs and maintenance restore 
or maintain expected service potential of an asset, 
and the firm treats them as expenses. A rehabilitation 
reciprocal holdings Company A owns stock of Company 
B, and Company B owns stock of Company A; or 
Company B owns stock of Company C, which owns 
stock of Company A.
recognize To enter a transaction in the accounts; contrast 
with realize.
reconciliation A calculation that shows how one balance 
or figure derives from another, such as a reconciliation 
of retained earnings or a bank reconciliation schedule. 
See articulate.
record date The date at which the firm pays dividends on 
payment date to those who own the stock.
recourse The rights of the lender if a borrower does not 
repay as promised. A recourse loan gives the lender 
the right to take any of the borrower’s assets not 
exempted from such taking by the contract. See also 
note receivable discounted.
recoverable amount Under IFRS, the larger of (1) fair 
value less cost to sell and (2) value in use, defined as 
the present value of future cash flows of the assetin its 
current use by the firm. Used in measuring the amount 
of an impairment loss.
recovery of unrealized loss on trading securities An income 
statement account title for the gain during the current 
period on trading securities.
recurring Occurring again; occurring repetitively; in 
accounting, an adjective often used in describing rev-
enue or earnings. In some contexts, the term “recur-
ring revenue” is ambiguous. Consider a construction 
contractor who accounts for a single long-term proj-
ect with the installment method, with revenue recog-
nized at the time of each cash collection from the 
customer. The recognized revenue is recurring, but the 
transaction leading to the revenue is not. See quality 
of earnings.
redeemable (preferred shares) Preferred shares that carry 
one of three types of redemption rights or obligations:
 
■  Redemption right of the issuer: The issuing firm 
has the right but not the obligation—the option—
to redeem the preferred stock under certain condi-
tions Same as callable preferred stock. U.S. GAAP 
and IFRS require the issuer to classify as a com-
ponent of shareholders’ equity.
 
■  Redemption obligation of the issuer at specified 
time or upon a specified event certain to occur: 
Often called “mandatorily redeemable preferred 
stock.” This preferred stock has attributes of 
both long-term debt and shareholders’ equity. 
The specified redemption time is analogous to 
the maturity date of long-term debt. An example 
of an event certain to occur that would trigger 
redemption is the death of the preferred share-
holder. U.S. GAAP and IFRS require the issuer 
to classify as a liability.
 
■  Redemption obligation of the issuer conditional 
on a specified event not certain to occur: Some 
preferred shares give the holder the option, but not 
the obligation, to force the issuer to redeem. The 
owner of the preferred stock has a put option, the 
right to require the issuing firm to repurchase the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

811
Glossary
repairs and maintenance is one of degree and not of 
kind. A repair is treated as an expense of the period 
when incurred. Because the firm treats repairs and 
maintenance similarly in this regard, the distinction is 
not important. A repair helps to maintain capacity at 
the levels planned when the firm acquired the asset. 
Contrast with improvement.
replacement cost For an asset, the current fair market 
value to purchase another, similar asset (with the same 
future benefit or service potential). Current cost. See 
reproduction cost and productive capacity. See also dis-
tributable income and inventory profit.
replacement cost method of depreciation Method in which 
the analyst augments the original-cost depreciation 
charge with an amount based on a portion of the dif-
ference between the current replacement cost of the 
asset and its original cost.
replacement system of depreciation See retirement method 
of depreciation for definition and contrast.
report Financial statement; auditor’s report.
report form Balance sheet form that typically shows assets 
minus liabilities as one total. Then, below that total 
appears the components of owners’ equity summing to 
the same total. Often, the top section shows current 
assets less current liabilities before noncurrent assets 
less noncurrent liabilities. Contrast with account form.
reporting objectives (policies) The general purposes for 
which the firm prepares financial statements. The 
FASB has discussed these in SFAC No. 1.
reporting unit A segment or a component of a segment 
that is a business with separate financial informa-
tion that management regularly reviews. Pertinent for 
impairment considerations involving goodwill. IFRS 
refers to the same concept as a cash-generating unit.
representative item sampling Sampling in which the ana-
lyst believes the sample selected is typical of the entire 
population from which it comes. Compare specific 
item sampling.
reproduction cost The cost necessary to acquire an asset-
similar in all physical respects to another asset for 
which the analyst requires a current value. See replace-
ment cost and productive capacity for contrast.
required rate of return (RRR) Cost of capital.
requisition A formal written order or request, such as for 
withdrawal of supplies from the storeroom.
resale value Exit value; net realizable value.
research and development (R&D) A form of economic 
activity with special accounting rules. Firms engage 
in research in hopes of discovering new knowledge 
that will create a new product, process, or service or 
of improving a present product, process, or service. 
Development translates research findings or other 
knowledge into a new or improved product, pro-
cess, or service. SFAS No. 2 (Codification Topic 730) 
requires that firms expense costs of such activities as 
incurred on the grounds that the future benefits are 
too uncertain to warrant capitalization as an asset. 
This treatment seems questionable to us because we 
wonder why firms would continue to undertake R&D 
if there was no expectation of future benefit; if future 
benefits exist, then R&D costs should be assets that 
improves the asset beyond its current service poten-
tial, enhancing the service potential to a significantly 
higher level than before the rehabilitation. Once reha-
bilitated, the asset may be better, but need not be, 
than it was when new. The firm will capitalize expen-
ditures for rehabilitation, like those for betterments 
and improvements.
reinvestment rate In a capital budgeting context, the rate 
at which the firm invests cash inflows from a project 
occurring before the project’s completion. Once the 
analyst assumes such a rate, no project can ever have 
multiple internal rates of return. See Descartes’s Rule 
of Signs.
relative performance evaluation Setting performance tar-
gets and, sometimes, compensation in relation to the 
performance of others, perhaps in different firms or 
divisions, who face a similar environment.
relative sales value method See net realizable (sales) value.
relevance; relevant According to SFAC No. 2, the financial 
reporting objective stating that accounting informa-
tion is appropriate or helpful for the purposes to be 
served by that information.
relevant cost Cost used by an analyst in making a deci-
sion. Incremental cost; opportunity cost.
relevant cost analysis Identifies the costs (or revenues) rel-
evant to the decision to be made. A cost or revenue 
is relevant only if an amount differs between alterna-
tives. Also called differential cost analysis.
relevant range Activity levels over which costs are linear 
or for which flexible budget estimates and breakeven 
charts will remain valid.
reliability According to SFAC No. 2, the financial report-
ing objective stating that accounting information “rep-
resents what it purports to represent.”
remit earnings An expression likely to confuse a reader 
without a firm understanding of accounting basics. 
A firm generates net assets by earning income and 
retains net assets if it does not declare dividends in 
the amount of net income. When a firm declares divi-
dends and pays the cash (or other net assets), some 
writers would say the firm remits earnings. We think 
the student learns better by conceiving earnings as a 
credit balance. When a firm pays dividends it sends 
net assets, things with debit balances, not something 
with a credit balance, to the recipient. When writers 
say firms remit earnings, they mean the firms send 
assets (or net assets) that previous earnings have gen-
erated and reduce retained earnings.
remittance advice Information on a check stub, or on a 
document attached to a check by the drawer, that tells 
the payee why a payment is being made.
rent A charge for use of land, buildings, or other assets.
reorganization In the capital structure of a corporation, a 
major change that leads to changes in the rights, inter-
ests, and implied ownership of the various security 
owners; usually results from a merger or an agreement 
by senior security holders to take action to forestall 
bankruptcy.
repair An expenditure to restore an asset’s service poten-
tial after damage or after prolonged use. In the sec-
ond sense, after prolonged use, the difference between 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

812
Glossary
in dispelling confusion about the term “reserves.” 
The federal income tax return for corporations uses 
the title Reserve for Bad Debts to mean Allowance 
for Uncollectible Accounts and speaks of the Reserve 
Method in referring to the allowance method for esti-
mating revenue or income reductions from estimated 
uncollectibles. See Accounting Terminology Bulletin, 
one of which in the 1940s suggested that accountants 
not use the word.
reserve recognition accounting (RRA) One form of account-
ing for natural resources. In exploration for natu-
ral resources, the problem arises of how to treat the 
expenditures for exploration, both before the firm 
knows the outcome of the efforts and after it knows 
the outcome. Suppose that the firm spends $10 mil-
lion to drill 10 holes ($1 million each) and that nine 
of them are dry whereas one is a gusher containing oil 
with a net realizable value of $40 million. Dry hole, or 
successful efforts, accounting would expense $9 million 
and capitalize $1 million, which the firm will deplete 
as it lifts the oil from the ground. Full costing would 
expense nothing but would capitalize the $10 million 
of drilling costs that the firm will deplete as it lifts the 
oil from the single productive well. Reserve recogni-
tion accounting would capitalize $40 million, which the 
firm will deplete as it lifts the oil, with a $30 million 
credit to income or contributed capital. The balance 
sheet shows the net realizable value of proven oil and 
gas reserves. The income statement has three sorts of 
items: (1) current income resulting from production or 
“lifting profit,” which is the revenue from sales of oil 
and gas less the expense based on the current valua-
tion amount at which these items have appeared on 
the balance sheet; (2) profit or loss from exploration 
efforts in which the current value of new discoveries 
is revenue and all the exploration cost is expense; and 
(3) gain or loss on changes in current value during the 
year, which accountants in other contexts call a hold-
ing gain or loss.
reset bond A bond, typically a junk bond, that specifies that 
periodically the issuer will reset the coupon rate so that 
the bond sells at par in the market. Investment bankers 
created this type of instrument to help ensure the pur-
chasers of such bonds of getting a fair rate of return, 
given the riskiness of the issuer. If the issuer gets into 
financial trouble, its bonds will trade for less than 
par in the market. The issuer of a reset bond prom-
ises to raise the interest rate and preserve the value of 
the bond. Ironically, the reset feature has often had 
just the opposite effect. The default risk of many issu-
ers of reset bonds has deteriorated so much that the 
bonds have dropped to less than 50% of par. To raise 
the value to par, the issuer would have to raise the 
interest rate to more than 25% per year. That rate is 
so large that issuers have declared bankruptcy rather 
than attempt to make the new large interest payments; 
this then reduces the market value of the bonds rather 
than increases them.
residual income In an external reporting context, a term that 
refers to net income to common shares (= net income 
less preferred stock dividends). In managerial accounting, 
appear, like other assets, at historical cost. IFRS 
allows capitalization of costs once the projects reach 
the development stage. U.S. GAAP requires capital-
ization of software development costs once the proj-
ects reach the development stage.
reserve The worst word in accounting because almost 
everyone not trained in accounting, and some who 
are, misunderstand it. The common confusion is that 
reserves represent a pool of cash or other assets avail-
able when the firm needs them. Wrong. Cash always 
has a debit balance. Reserves always have a credit bal-
ance. When properly used in accounting, “reserves” 
refer to an account that appropriates retained earnings 
and restricts dividend declarations. Appropriating 
retained earnings is itself a poor and vanishing prac-
tice, so the word should seldom appear in accounting. 
In addition, “reserve” was used in the past to indicate 
an asset contra account (for example, reserve for depre-
ciation) or an estimated liability (for example, reserve 
for warranty costs). In any case, reserve accounts 
have credit balances and are not pools of funds, as the 
unwary reader might infer. If a company has set aside 
a pool of cash (or marketable securities) to serve some 
specific purpose such as paying for a new factory, then 
it will call that cash a fund. No other word in account-
ing causes so much misunderstanding by nonexperts as 
well as by “experts” who should know better. A lead-
ing unabridged dictionary defines “reserve” as “cash, 
or assets readily convertible into cash, held aside, as 
by a corporation, bank, state or national government, 
etc. to meet expected or unexpected demands.” This 
definition is absolutely wrong in accounting. Reserves 
are not funds. For example, the firm creates a con-
tingency fund of $10,000 by depositing cash in a fund 
and makes the following entry:
Contingency Fund (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . . 10,000
 
Cash (Asset Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
 
The following entry may accompany the previ-
ous entry, if the firm wants to appropriate retained 
earnings:
Retained Earnings (Shareholders’ Equity 
  Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10,000
 
Reserve for Contingencies 
   (Liability Increase)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
 
The transaction leading to the first entry has eco-
nomic significance. The second entry has little eco-
nomic impact for most firms. The problem with the 
word “reserve” arises because the firm can make the 
second entry without the first—a company can cre-
ate a reserve, that is, appropriate retained earnings, 
without creating a fund. The problem results, at 
least in part, from the fact that in common usage, 
“reserve” means a pool of assets, as in the phrase “oil 
reserves.” The Internal Revenue Service does not help 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

813
Glossary
retained earnings, appropriated An account set up by cred-
iting it and debiting retained earnings; used to indicate 
that a portion of retained earnings is not available 
for dividends. The practice of appropriating retained 
earnings is misleading unless the firm marks all capi-
tal with its use, which is not practicable, nor sensible, 
since capital is fungible—all the equities jointly fund 
all the assets. The use of formal retained earnings 
appropriations is declining.
retained earnings statement A reconciliation of the begin-
ning and the ending balances in the retained earnings 
account; required by generally accepted accounting 
principles whenever the firm presents comparative bal-
ance sheets and an income statement. This reconcilia-
tion can appear in a separate statement, in a combined 
statement of income and retained earnings, or in the 
balance sheet.
retirement method of depreciation A method in which the 
firm records no entry for depreciation expense until it 
retires an asset from service. Then, it makes an entry 
debiting depreciation expense and crediting the asset 
account for the cost of the asset retired. If the retired 
asset has a salvage value, the firm reduces the amount 
of the debit to depreciation expense by the amount 
of salvage value with a corresponding debit to cash, 
receivables, or salvaged materials. The replacement 
system of depreciation is similar, except that the debit 
to depreciation expense equals the cost of the new 
asset less the salvage value, if any, of the old asset. 
Some public utilities used these methods. For exam-
ple, if the firm acquired 10 telephone poles in Year 1 
for $60 each and replaces them in Year 10 for $100 
each when the salvage value of the old poles is $5 
each, the accounting would be as follows:
RETIREMENT METHOD
Plant Assets (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600 
 
Cash (Asset Decrease) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
To acquire assets in Year 1.
Retained Earnings (Depreciation Expense)
 
(Shareholders’ Equity Decrease)  . . . . . . . . 
550 
Salvage Receivable (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . 
50 
 
Plant Assets (Asset Decrease). . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
To record retirement and depreciation in Year 10. 
 
Plant Assets (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1,000 
 
Cash (Asset Decrease) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
To record acquisition of new assets in Year 10.
REPLACEMENT METHOD
Plant Assets (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
600 
 
Cash (Asset Decrease) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
600
To acquire assets in Year 1.
Depreciation Expense (Shareholders’ Equity 
 
Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
950 
Salvage Receivable (Asset Increase)  . . . . . . . . 
50 
 
Cash (Asset Decrease) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
1,000
To record depreciation on old asset in amount 
quantified by net cost of replacement asset in 
Year 10.
this term refers to the excess of income for a division 
or segment of a company over the product of the cost 
of capital for the company multiplied by the average 
amount of capital invested in the division during the 
period over which the division earned the income.
residual security A potentially dilutive security. Options, 
warrants, convertible bonds, and convertible preferred 
stock.
residual value At any time, the estimated or actual net 
realizable value (that is, proceeds less removal costs) of 
an asset, usually a depreciable plant asset. In the con-
text of depreciation accounting, this term is equivalent 
to salvage value and is preferred to scrap value because 
the firm need not scrap the asset. It is sometimes used 
to mean net carrying value. In the context of a non-
cancellable lease, it is the estimated value of the leased 
asset at the end of the lease period. See lease.
resources supplied Expenditures made for an activity.
resources used Cost driver rate times cost driver volume.
responsibility accounting Accounting for a business by 
considering various units as separate entities, or profit 
centers or revenue centers, or cost centers, or investment 
centers, giving management of each unit responsibility 
for the unit’s revenues and expenses. See transfer price.
responsibility center An organization part or segment that 
top management holds accountable for a specified set of 
activities. Also called accountability center. See cost cen-
ter, investment center, profit center, and revenue center.
restricted assets Governmental resources restricted by 
legal or contractual requirements for specific purpose.
restricted retained earnings That part of retained earnings 
not legally available for dividends. See retained earn-
ings, appropriated. Bond indentures and other loan 
contracts can curtail the legal ability of the corpora-
tion to declare dividends without formally requiring 
a retained earnings appropriation, but the firm must 
disclose such restrictions.
restructuring (liability, provisions) The FASB Codifica-
tion, quoting IFRS, defines this as “a program that 
is planned and controlled by management, and mate-
rially changes either the scope of the business under-
taken by an entity, or the manner in which that 
business is conducted.” The liability or, in IFRS, the 
provision reports the amounts the business expects to 
pay as a result of the plan. U.S. GAAP and IFRS dif-
fer in details as to when the firm recognizes a liability 
(U.S. GAAP) or provision (IFRS); see discussion in 
Chapter 8.
retail inventory method Ascertaining cost amounts of 
ending inventory as follows (assuming FIFO): Cost 
of Ending Inventory = (Selling Price of Goods Avail-
able for Sale – Sales) × Cost Percentage. The analyst 
then computes cost of goods sold from the inventory 
equation; costs of beginning inventory, purchases, and 
ending inventory are all known. (When the firm uses 
LIFO, the method resembles the dollar-value LIFO 
method.) See markup.
retail terminology See markup.
retained earnings Net income over the life of a corpora-
tion less all dividends (including capitalization through 
stock dividends); owners’ equity less contributed capital.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

814
Glossary
assets the firm will receive. Do not confuse with receipt 
of funds, which may occur before, when, or after rev-
enue is recognized. Contrast with gain and income. See 
also holding gain. Some writers use the term “gross 
income” synonymously with revenue; avoid such usage.
revenue center Within a firm, a responsibility center that 
has control only over revenues generated. Contrast 
with cost center. See profit center or investment center.
revenue expenditure A term sometimes used to mean an 
expense, in contrast to a capital expenditure to acquire 
an asset or to discharge a liability. Avoid using this 
term; use period expense instead.
revenue measurement  See revenue recognition. When the 
firm recognized revenue, it must record an amount. 
This term refers to the computation of the amount. 
While U.S. GAAP and IFRS contain a variety of 
details for these computations, for most purposes, one 
can think of the amount as the expected present value 
of the cash receipts from the customer.
revenue received in advance An inferior term for advances 
from customers.
revenue recognition Standard setters prescribe when a firm 
can recognize revenue. The general criteria require that 
the firm have delivered a product or service to the cus-
tomer, have received cash or a financial asset capable 
of reasonably precise measurement, and be able to 
measure with reasonable precision the remaining costs 
(such as for warranties, technical services, and soft-
ware upgrades) to complete the transaction.
reversal (reversing) entry An entry in which all debits 
and credits are the credits and debits, respectively, of 
another entry, and in the same amounts. The accoun-
tant usually records a reversal entry on the first day 
of an accounting period to reverse a previous adjusting 
entry, usually an accrual. The purpose of such entries 
is to make the bookkeeper’s tasks easier. Suppose that 
the firm pays salaries every other Friday, with pay-
checks compensating employees for the two weeks just 
ended. Total salaries accrue at the rate of $5,000 per 
five-day workweek. The bookkeeper is accustomed to 
making the following entry every other Friday:
(1) Retained Earnings (Salary Expense)
 
 (Shareholders’ Equity Decrease). . . . . . . 10,000
 
 Cash (Asset Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
 
 To record salary expense and salary 
payments.
 
If the firm delivers paychecks to employees on Fri-
day, November 25, then the adjusting entry made on 
November 30 (or perhaps later) to record accrued 
salaries for November 28, 29, and 30 would be as 
follows:
(2) Retained Earnings (Salary Expense)
   (Shareholders’ Equity Decrease). . . . . . . 
3,000
 
 Salaries Payable (Liability Increase). . . . 
 
3,000
 
 To charge November operations with all 
salaries earned in November.
 
The retirement method is like FIFO in that it records 
the cost of the first assets as depreciation and puts the 
cost of the second assets on the balance sheet. The 
replacement method is like LIFO in that it records the 
cost of the second assets as depreciation expense and 
leaves the cost of the first assets on the balance sheet.
retirement plan Pension plan.
retroactive benefits In initiating or amending a defined-
benefit pension plan, benefits that the benefit formula 
attributes to employee services rendered in periods 
prior to the initiation or amendment. See prior service 
costs.
return A schedule of information required by govern-
mental bodies, such as the tax return required by the 
Internal Revenue Service; also the physical return of 
merchandise. See also return on assets and return on 
investment.
return and risk Modern financial economics shows that 
under most realistic circumstances, if an investor wants 
to earn a higher rate of return on investment, then the 
investor must bear more risk. Conversely, an investor 
who bears more risk expects to earn a higher return 
on investment as compensation for that risk bearing.
return on assets (ROA) Net income plus after-tax interest 
charges plus noncontrolling interest in income divided 
by average total assets; perhaps the single most use-
ful ratio for assessing management’s overall operating 
performance. Most financial economists would sub-
tract average noninterest-bearing liabilities from the 
denominator. Economists realize that when liabilities 
do not provide for explicit interest charges, the credi-
tor adjusts the terms of contract, such as setting a 
higher selling price or lower discount, to those who 
do not pay cash immediately. (To take an extreme 
example, consider how much higher salary a worker 
who receives a salary once per year, rather than once 
per month, would demand.) This ratio requires in the 
numerator the income amount before the firm accrues 
any charges to suppliers of funds. We cannot measure 
the interest charges implicit in the noninterest-bear-
ing liabilities because they cause items such as cost of 
goods sold and salary expense to be somewhat larger, 
since the interest is implicit. Subtracting their amounts 
from the denominator adjusts for their implicit cost. 
Such subtraction assumes that assets financed with 
noninterest-bearing liabilities have the same rate of 
return as all the other assets.
return on equity (ROE) Net income for a period divided 
by Average Owners’ Equity for the period.
return on investment (ROI), return on capital Income 
(before distributions to suppliers of capital) for a 
period; as a rate, this amount divided by average total 
assets. The analyst should add back interest, net of tax 
effects, to net income for the numerator. See ratio.
revenue The owners’ equity increase accompanying the net 
assets increase caused by selling goods or rendering 
services; in short, a service rendered; sales of products, 
merchandise, and services and earnings from interest, 
dividends, rents, and the like. Conceptually (in contrast 
to specific guidance in accounting standards) measure 
revenue as the expected net present value of the net 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

815
Glossary
contain the rights, and the owner of the warrants may 
sell them. See also preemptive right.
risk A measure of the variability of the return on invest-
ment. For a given expected amount of return, most 
people prefer less risk to more risk. Therefore, in 
rational markets, investments with more risk usu-
ally promise, or investors expect to receive, a higher 
rate of return than investments with lower risk. Most 
people use “risk” and “uncertainty” as synonyms. In 
technical language, however, these terms have differ-
ent meanings. We use “risk” when we know the prob-
abilities attached to the various outcomes, such as the 
probabilities of heads or tails in the flip of a fair coin. 
“Uncertainty” refers to an event for which we can 
only estimate the probabilities of the outcomes, such 
as winning or losing a lawsuit.
risk-adjusted discount rate Rate used in discounting cash 
flows for projects more or less risky than the firm’s 
average. In a capital budgeting context, a decision ana-
lyst compares projects by comparing their net present 
values for a given interest rate, usually the cost of capi-
tal. If the analyst considers a given project’s outcome 
to be much more or much less risky than the normal 
undertakings of the company, then the analyst will 
use a larger interest rate (if the project is riskier) or a 
smaller interest rate (if less risky) in discounting, and 
the rate used is risk-adjusted.
risk-free rate An interest rate reflecting only the pure inter-
est rate plus an amount to compensate for inflation 
anticipated over the life of a loan, excluding a premium 
for the risk of default by the borrower. Financial econ-
omists usually measure the risk-free rate in the United 
States from U.S. government securities, such as Trea-
sury bills and notes.
risk premium Extra compensation paid to employees or 
extra interest paid to lenders, over amounts usually 
considered normal, in return for their undertaking to 
engage in activities riskier than normal.
ROA Return on assets.
ROI Return on investment; usually used to refer to a sin-
gle project and expressed as a ratio: income divided by 
average cost of assets devoted to the project.
royalty Compensation for the use of property, usually a 
patent, copyrighted material, or natural resources. The 
amount is often expressed as a percentage of receipts 
from using the property or as an amount per unit 
produced.
RRA Reserve recognition accounting.
RRR Required rate of return. See cost of capital.
rule of 69 Rule stating that an amount of cash invested at 
r % per period will double in 69/r + 0.35 periods. This 
approximation is accurate to one-tenth of a period 
for interest rates between 0.25% and 100% per period. 
For example, at 10% per period, the rule says that a 
given sum will double in 69/10 + 0.35 = 7.25 periods. 
At 10% per period, a given sum actually doubles in 
7.27+ periods.
rule of 72 Rule stating that an amount of cash invested at 
r % per period will double in 72/r periods. A reason-
able approximation for interest rates between 4% and 
10% but not nearly as accurate as the rule of 69 for 
 
The firm would close the Salary Expense account as 
part of the November 30 closing entries. On the next 
payday, December 9, the salary entry would be as 
follows:
(3) Retained Earnings (Salary Expense)
 
 (Shareholders’ Equity Decrease). . . . . . . 
7,000
 
 Salaries Payable (Liability Decrease)  . . . 
 
3,000
 
 Cash (Asset Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
10,000
 
 To record salary payments split between 
expense for December (seven days) and 
liability carried over from November.
 
To make entry (3), the bookkeeper must look back 
into the records to see how much of the debit is to 
Salaries Payable accrued from the previous month 
in order to split the total debits between December 
expense and the liability carried over from Novem-
ber. Notice that this entry forces the bookkeeper both 
(a) to refer to balances in old accounts and (b) to 
make an entry different from the one customarily 
made, entry (1). The reversing entry, made just after 
the books have been closed for the second quarter, 
makes the salary entry for December 9 the same as 
that made on all other Friday paydays. The reversing 
entry merely reverses the adjusting entry (2):
(4) Salaries Payable (Liability Decrease)  . . . . . 
3,000
 
 Retained Earnings (Salary Expense)
 
  (Shareholders’ Equity Increase)  . . . . . 
 
3,000
 
To reverse the adjusting entry.
 
This entry results in a zero balance in the Salaries Pay-
able account and a credit balance in the Salary Expense 
account If the firm makes entry (4) just after it closes 
the books for November, then the entry on December 
9 will be the customary entry (1). Entries (4) and (1) 
together have exactly the same effect as entry (3).
 
 
The procedure for using reversal entries is as fol-
lows: the firm makes the required adjustment to 
record an accrual (payable or receivable) at the end 
of an accounting period; it makes the closing entry as 
usual; as of the first day of the following period, it 
makes an entry reversing the adjusting entry; when 
the firm makes (or receives) a payment, it records the 
entry as though it had not recorded an adjusting entry 
at the end of the preceding period. Whether a firm 
uses reversal entries affects the record-keeping proce-
dures but not the financial statements.
 
 
This term is also used to describe the entry reversing 
an incorrect entry before recording the correct entry.
reverse stock split A stock split in which the firm decreases 
the number of shares outstanding. See stock split.
revolving fund A fund whose amounts the firm continually 
spends and replenishes; for example, a petty cash fund.
revolving loan A loan that both the borrower and the 
lender expect to renew at maturity.
right The privilege to subscribe to new stock issues or to 
purchase stock. Usually, securities called warrants 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

816
Glossary
partners) who report these amounts on their individ-
ual income tax returns. Contrast with C corporation.
SA (société anonyme) France: A corporation.
SAB Staff Accounting Bulletin of the SEC.
safe-harbor lease A form of tax-transfer lease.
safety stock Extra items of inventory kept on hand to pro-
tect against running out.
salary Compensation earned by managers, administra-
tors, and professionals, not based on an hourly rate. 
Contrast with wage.
sale A revenue transaction in which the firm delivers goods 
or services to a customer in return for cash or a con-
tractual obligation to pay.
sale and leaseback A financing transaction in which the 
firm sells improved property but takes it back for use 
on a long-term lease. Such transactions often have 
advantageous income tax effects but usually have no 
effect on financial statement income.
sales activity variance Sales volume variance.
sales allowance A sales invoice price reduction that a seller 
grants to a buyer because the seller delivered goods 
different from, perhaps because of damage, those the 
buyer ordered. The seller often accumulates amounts of 
such adjustments in a temporary revenue contra account 
having this, or a similar, title. See sales discount.
sales basis of revenue recognition Recognition of revenue 
not when a firm produces goods or when it receives 
orders but only when it has completed the sale by 
delivering the goods or services and has received cash 
or a claim to cash. Most firms recognize revenue on 
this basis. Compare with the percentage-of-completion 
method and the installment method. This is identical 
with the completed contract method, but the latter 
term ordinarily applies only to long-term construction 
projects.
sales contra, estimated uncollectibles A title for the contra-
revenue account to recognize estimated reductions in 
income caused by accounts receivable that will not be 
collected. See bad debt expense, allowance for uncol-
lectibles, and allowance method.
sales discount A sales invoice price reduction usually 
offered for prompt payment. See terms of sale and 
2/10, n/30.
sales return The physical return of merchandise. The seller 
often accumulates amounts of such returns in a tem-
porary revenue contra account.
interest rates outside that range. For example, at 10% 
per period, the rule says that a given sum will double 
in 72/10 = 7.2 periods.
rule of 78 The rule followed by many finance companies 
for allocating earnings on loans among the months of 
a year on the sum-of-the-months’-digits basis when 
the borrower makes equal monthly payments to the 
lender. The sum of the digits from 1 through 12 is 78, 
so the rule allocates 12/78 of the year’s earnings to the 
first month, 11/78 to the second month, and so on. 
This approximation allocates more of the early pay-
ments to interest and less to principal than does the 
correct, compound-interest method. Hence, lenders 
still use this method even though present-day com-
puters can make the compound-interest computation 
as easily as they can carry out the approximation. See 
sum-of-the-years’-digits depreciation.
ruling (and balancing) an account The process of summa-
rizing a series of entries in an account by computing 
a new balance and drawing double lines to indicate 
that the new balance summarizes the information 
above the double lines. An illustration appears below. 
The steps are as follows: (1) Compute the sum of all 
debit entries including opening debit balance, if any—
$1,464.16. (2)  Compute the sum of all credit entries 
including opening credit balance, if any—$413.57. 
(3) If the amount in (1) exceeds the amount in (2), 
then write the excess as a credit with a check mark—
$1,464.16 – $413.57 = $1,050.59. (4) Add both debit 
and credit columns, which should both now sum to the 
same amount, and show that identical total at the foot 
of both columns. (5) Draw double lines under those 
numbers and write the excess of debits over credits as 
the new debit balance with a check mark. (6)  If the 
amount in (2) exceeds the amount in (1), then write the 
excess as a debit with a check mark. (7) Do steps (4) 
and (5) except that the excess becomes the new credit 
balance. (8) If the amount in (1) equals the amount in 
(2), then the balance is zero, and only the totals with 
the double lines beneath them need appear.
S
S corporation A corporation taxed like a partnership. 
Corporation (or partnership) agreements allocate 
the periodic income to the individual shareholders (or 
An Open Account, Ruled and Balanced
(Steps indicated in parentheses correspond to steps described in “ruling an account.”)
Date 2013
Explanation
Ref.
Debit (1)
Date 2013
Explanation
Ref.
Credit (2)
Jan. 2
Balance
✓
100.00
Jan. 13
VR
121.37
Sept. 15
J
    0.42
Mar. 20
VR
56.42
Nov. 12
J
  413.15
June 5
J
1,138.09
Dec. 31
Balance
✓
1,050.59
(3)
Aug. 18
J
1.21
Nov. 20
VR
38.43
Dec. 7
VR
    8.64
        
(4)
2014
1,464.16
2014
1,464.16
(4)
(5)
Jan. 1
Balance
✓
1,050.59
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

817
Glossary
Accounting and Auditing Enforcement Releases, Staff 
Accounting Bulletins (these are, strictly speaking, inter-
pretations by the accounting staff, not rules of the 
commissioners themselves), and Regulation S-X and 
Regulation S-K. See also registration statement, 10-K, 
10-Q, and 20-F.
secret reserve Hidden reserve.
Securities and Exchange Commission SEC.
securitization The bundling of financial assets into groups 
that can become the basis for raising cash. For exam-
ple, a bank might have loaned to hundreds of custom-
ers under home mortgages. It could bundle a defined 
set of mortgages and offer for sale fractional interests, 
called securities, in the cash inflows from the pool of 
mortgages. An example of financial engineering. This 
has roughly the same economic effect as using the 
assets as collateral for a borrowing, but the securiti-
zation transaction enables the seller to sell to many 
investors and the items sold are marketable securities.
security Document that indicates ownership, such as a 
share of stock, or indebtedness, such as a bond, or 
potential ownership, such as an option or warrant.
security available for sale According to SFAS No. 115 
(1993) (Codification Topic 320), a debt or equity secu-
rity that is not a trading security, or a debt security 
that is not a security held to maturity. See available 
for sale.
security held to maturity According to SFAS No. 115 (1993) 
(Codification Topic 320), a debt security the holder has 
both the ability and the intent to hold to maturity; val-
ued in the balance sheet at amortized acquisition cost: 
the carrying value of the security at the end of each 
period is the carrying value at the beginning of the 
period multiplied by one plus the historical yield on the 
security (measured as of the time of purchase) less any 
cash the holder receives at the end of this period from 
the security. The preceding assumes that cash receipts 
come at the end of a period. If they come before period-
end, the computations are more complex.
segment (of a business) As defined by APB Opinion No. 30 
(Codification Topic 845), “a component of an entity 
whose activities represent a separate major line of 
business or class of customer. . . . [It may be] a subsid-
iary, a division, or a department, . . . . provided that 
its assets, results of operations, and activities can be 
clearly distinguished, physically and operationally for 
financial reporting purposes, from the other assets, 
results of operations, and activities of the entity.” 
SFAS No. 131 (Codification Topic 280) defines oper-
ating segments using the “management approach” as 
components of the enterprise engaging in revenue- and 
expense-generating business activities “whose operat-
ing results are regularly reviewed by the enterprise’s 
chief operating decision maker to make decisions 
about resources . . . and asset performance.”
 
 
The IFRS defines a segment as “a component of 
an entity that engages in business activities . . . whose 
operating results are regularly reviewed by the enti-
ty’s chief operating decision maker to make decisions 
about resources to be allocated to the segment . . . for 
which discrete financial information is available.”
sales-type (capital) lease A form of lease. See capital lease. 
When a manufacturer (or other firm) that ordinarily 
sells goods enters a capital lease as lessor, the lease is 
a “sales-type lease.” When a financial firm, such as 
a bank or insurance company or leasing company, 
acquires the asset from the manufacturer and then 
enters a capital lease as lessor, the lease is a “direct-
financing-type lease.” The manufacturer recognizes 
its ordinary profit (sales price less cost of goods sold, 
where sales price is the present value of the contractual 
lease payments plus any down payment) on executing 
the sales-type capital lease, but the financial firm does 
not recognize profit on executing a capital lease of the 
direct-financing type. Instead, it earns interest because 
the sum of lease payments exceed the cost of the leased 
asset. Manufacturers who enter a sales-type lease earn 
both an ordinary profit on the sale and interest.
sales value method Relative sales value method. See net 
realizable value method.
sales volume variance Budgeted contribution margin per 
unit times (actual sales volume minus planned sales 
volume).
salvage value Actual or estimated selling price, net of 
removal or disposal costs, of a used assetthat the firm 
expects to sell or otherwise retire. See residual value.
SAR Summary annual report.
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) The law passed in 2002 in the 
wake of the Enron, WorldCom, and other scandals 
to stiffen the requirements for corporate governance, 
including accounting issues. It speaks, among other 
things, to the regulation of the accounting profession, 
the standards for audit committees of public compa-
nies, the certifications managements must sign, and 
standards of internal control that companies must meet.
SARL (société à responsabilité limitée) France: a corpora-
tion with limited liability and a life of no more than 
99 years; must have at least two and no more than 50 
shareholders.
SAS Statement on Auditing Standards of the AICPA.
scale effect See discounted cash flow.
scatter diagram A graphic representation of the relation 
between two or more variables within a population.
schedule A supporting set of calculations, with explana-
tions, that show how to derive figures in a financial 
statement or tax return.
scientific method Effective interest method of amortizing 
bond discount or premium.
scope paragraph A section of the auditor’s report where 
the auditor describes the nature of the work under-
taken, the procedures performed, and any limitations.
scrap value Salvage value assuming the owner intends to 
junk the item. A net realizable value. Residual value.
SEC (Securities and Exchange Commission) An agency 
authorized by the U.S. Congress to regulate, among 
other things, the financial reporting practices of most 
public corporations. The SEC has indicated that it will 
usually allow the FASB to set accounting principles, 
but it often requires more disclosure than the FASB 
requires. The SEC states its accounting requirements in 
its Accounting Series Releases (ASR—replaced in 1982 
by the following two), Financial Reporting Releases, 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

818
Glossary
service bureau A commercial data-processing center pro-
viding service to various customers.
service cost, (current) service cost Pension plan expenses 
incurred during an accounting period for employment 
services performed during that period. Contrast with 
prior service cost. See funded.
service department A department, such as the personnel or 
computer department, that provides services to other 
departments rather than direct work on a salable 
product. Contrast with production department. A firm 
must allocate costs of service departments to product 
costs under full absorption costing if the services ben-
efit manufacturing operations.
service department cost allocation A procedure in which 
firms allocate the costs of operating service depart-
ments to other departments.
service life Period of expected usefulness of an asset; may 
differ from depreciable life for income tax purposes.
service potential The future benefits that cause an item to 
be classified as an asset. Without service potential, an 
item has no future benefits, and accounting will not 
classify the item as an asset. SFAC No. 6 suggests that 
the primary characteristic of service potential is the 
ability to generate future net cash inflows.
services Useful work done by a person, a machine, or an 
organization. See goods.
setup The time or costs required to prepare production 
equipment for doing a job.
SFAC Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts of the 
FASB.
SFAS; FAS Statement of Financial Accounting standards. 
See FASB.
shadow price An opportunity cost. A linear programming 
analysis provides as one of its outputs the potential 
value of having available more of the scarce resources 
that constrain the production process, for example, 
the value of having more time available on a machine 
tool critical to the production of two products. Com-
mon terminology refers to this value as the “shadow 
price” or the “dual value” of the scarce resource.
share A unit of stock representing ownership in a 
corporation.
share premium United Kingdom: additional paid-in capital 
or capital contributed in excess of par method.
shareholder One who owns a share.
shareholders’ equity Proprietorship or owners’ equity of a 
corporation. Because stock means inventory in Austra-
lia, the United Kingdom, and Canada, their writers 
use the term “shareholders’ equity” rather than the 
term “stockholders’ equity.”
short run; short term Contrast with long run. Managers 
mean a period of time long enough to allow change 
the level of production or other activity within the 
constraints of current total productive capacity. In a 
balance sheet context, it means current, ordinarily due 
within one year. Use a hyphen when the phrase is an 
adjective, but no hyphen when it is a noun.
short-term liquidity risk The risk that an entity will not 
have enough cash in the short run to pay its debts.
short-term operating budget Management’s quantitative 
action plan for the coming year.
segment reporting Reporting of sales, income, and assets 
by segments of a business, usually classified by nature 
of products sold but sometimes by geographical area 
where the firm produces or sells goods or by type of 
customers; sometimes called “line of business report-
ing.” The accounting for segment income does not 
allocate central corporate expenses to the segments.
self-balancing A set of records with equal debits and cred-
its such as the ledger (but not individual accounts), the 
balance sheet, and a fund in nonprofit accounting.
self-check(ing) digit A digit forming part of an account 
or code number, normally the last digit of the num-
ber, which is mathematically derived from the other 
numbers of the code and is used to detect errors in 
transcribing the code number. For example, assume 
the last digit of the account number is the remainder 
after summing the preceding digits and dividing that 
sum by nine. Suppose the computer encounters the 
account numbers 7027261-7 and 9445229-7. The pro-
gram can tell that something has gone wrong with the 
encoding of the second account number because the 
sum of the first seven digits is 35, whose remainder on 
division by 9 is 8, not 7. The first account number does 
not show such an error because the sum of the first 
seven digits is 25, whose remainder on division by 9 is, 
indeed, 7. The first account number may be in error, 
but the second surely is.
self-insurance See insurance.
self-sustaining foreign operation A foreign operation both 
financially and operationally independent of the 
reporting enterprise (owner) so that the owner’s expo-
sure to exchange-rate changes results only from the 
owner’s net investment in the foreign entity.
selling and administrative expenses Expenses not specifi-
cally identifiable with, or assigned to, production.
semifixed costs Costs that increase with activity as a step 
function.
semivariable costs Costs that increase strictly linearly with 
activity but that are positive at zero activity level. 
Royalty fees of 2% of sales are variable; royalty fees 
of $1,000 per year plus 2% of sales are semivariable.
senior securities; senior rights Bonds as opposed to pre-
ferred stock; preferred stock as opposed to common 
stock. The firm must meet the senior security claim 
against earnings or assets before meeting the claims of 
less-senior securities.
sensitivity analysis A study of how the outcome of a deci-
sion-making process changes as one or more of the 
assumptions change.
separability criterion An intangible can be an asset if it 
meets this criterion, which requires that the firm be 
able to sell or to transfer or to license or to rent or to 
exchange it with a counterparty.
sequential access Computer-storage access in which the 
analyst can locate information only by a sequential 
search of the storage file. Compare direct access.
serial bonds An issue of bonds that mature in part at one 
date, another part on another date, and so on. The 
various maturity dates usually occur at equally spaced 
intervals. Contrast with term bonds.
service basis of depreciation Production method.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

819
Glossary
the effect of income from discontinued operations and 
extraordinary items, appears as net income. Contrast 
with multiple-step, and see proprietorship theory.
sinking fund Assets and their earnings earmarked for the 
retirement of bonds or other long-term obligations. 
Earnings of sinking fund investments become taxable 
income of the company.
sinking fund method of depreciation Method in which the 
periodic charge is an equal amount each period so that 
the future value of the charges, considered as an annu-
ity, will accumulate at the end of the depreciable life 
to an amount equal to the acquisition cost of the asset. 
The firm does not necessarily, or even usually, accu-
mulate a fund of cash. Firms rarely use this method.
skeleton account T-account.
slide The name of a record-keeping error where in record-
ing the number, the bookkeeper moves the decimal 
point from where it should be; for example, recording 
$12,500.00 as $125,000.00 or $1,250.00.
SMAC (Society of Management Accountants of Canada) 
The national association of accountants whose provin-
cial associations engage in industrial and governmen-
tal accounting. The association undertakes research 
and administers an educational program and com-
prehensive examinations; those who pass qualify to 
be designated CMA (Certified Management Accoun-
tants), formerly called RIA (Registered Industrial 
Accountant).
SNC (société en nom collectif) France: a partnership.
soak-up method The equity method.
Social Security taxes Taxes levied by the federal govern-
ment on both employers and employees to provide 
funds to pay retired persons (or their survivors) who 
are entitled to receive such payments, either because 
they paid Social Security taxes themselves or because 
Congress has declared them eligible. Unlike a pension 
plan, the Social Security system does not collect funds 
and invest them for many years. The tax collections in 
a given year pay primarily for benefits distributed that 
year. At any given time the system has a multitrillion-
dollar unfunded obligation to current workers for their 
eventual retirement benefits. See Old Age, Survivors, 
and Disability Insurance.
software The programming aids, such as operating sys-
tems, programming languages, compilers, application 
programs, and report writers that extend the capabili-
ties of and simplify the use of the computer. Compare 
hardware.
sole proprietorship A firm in which all owners’ equity 
belongs to one person and that is not incorporated.
solvent Able to meet debts when due.
SOP Statement of Position (of the AcSEC of the AICPA).
source of funds Any transaction that increases cash and 
marketable securities held as current assets.
sources and uses statement Statement of cash flows.
SOX Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
SOYD Sum-of-the years’-digits depreciation.
SP (société en participation) France: a silent partnership in 
which the managing partner acts for the partnership 
as an individual in transacting with others who need 
not know that the person represents a partnership.
shrinkage An excess of inventory shown on the books over 
actual physical quantities on hand; can result from 
theft or shoplifting as well as from evaporation, excess 
scrap, or general wear and tear. Some accountants, in 
an attempt to downplay their own errors, use the term 
to mean record-keeping mistakes that they later must 
correct, with some embarrassment, and that result in 
material changes in reported income. One should not 
use the term “shrinkage” for the correction of mis-
takes because adequate terminology exists for describ-
ing mistakes.
shutdown cost Those fixed costs that the firm continues to 
incur after it has ceased production; the costs of clos-
ing down a particular production facility.
side letter See channel stuffing.
sight draft A demand for payment drawn by Person A 
to whom Person B owes cash. Person A presents the 
draft to Person B’s (the debtor’s) bank in expectation 
that Person B will authorize his or her bank to dis-
burse the funds. Sellers often use such drafts when sell-
ing goods to a new customer in a different city. The 
seller is uncertain whether the buyer will pay the bill. 
The seller sends the bill of lading, or other evidence 
of ownership of the goods, along with a sight draft to 
the buyer’s bank. Before the warehouse holding the 
goods can release them to the buyer, the buyer must 
instruct its bank to honor the sight draft by withdraw-
ing funds from the buyer’s account. Once the bank 
honors the sight draft, it hands to the buyer the bill of 
lading or other document evidencing ownership, and 
the goods become the property of the buyer.
significant influence An investor has significant influence 
over an investee if it can change the course of opera-
tions from those the investee would otherwise have 
undertaken. U.S. GAAP contains a rebuttable pre-
sumption that an investor has (does not have) signifi-
cant influence if it does (does not) own 20% or more 
of the investee’s voting shares.
simple interest Interest calculated on principal where inter-
est earned during periods before maturity of the loan 
does not increase the principal amount earning inter-
est for the subsequent periods and the lender cannot 
withdraw the funds before maturity. Interest = Princi-
pal × Interest Rate × Time, where the rate is a rate 
per period (typically a year) and time is expressed in 
units of that period. For example, if the rate is annual 
and the time is two months, then in the formula, use 
2/12 for time. Simple interest is seldom used in eco-
nomic calculations except for periods of less than one 
year and then only for computational convenience. 
Contrast with compound interest.
single-entry accounting Accounting that is neither self-
balancing nor articulated. That is, it does not rely on 
equal debits and credits. The firm makes no journal 
entries and must plug to derive owners’ equity for the 
balance sheet.
single proprietorship Sole proprietorship.
single-step Said of an income statement in which ordinary 
revenue and gain items appear first, with their total. 
Then come all ordinary expenses and losses, with their 
total. The difference between these two totals, plus 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

820
Glossary
have rows and columns, but they need not represent 
debits and credits. Moreover, they can have more than 
two dimensions.
squeeze A term sometimes used for plug.
SSARS Statement on Standards for Accounting and 
Review Services.
stabilized accounting Constant-dollar accounting.
stable monetary unit assumption In spite of inflation, 
which appears to be a way of life, the assumption 
that underlies historical cost/nominal-dollar account-
ing—namely, that one can meaningfully add together 
current dollars and dollars of previous years. The 
assumption gives no specific recognition to changing 
values of the dollar in the usual financial statements. 
See constant-dollar accounting.
Staff Accounting Bulletin An interpretation issued by the 
staff of the Chief Accountant of the SEC “suggesting” 
how the accountants should apply various Accounting 
Series Releases in practice. The suggestions are part 
of U.S. GAAP.
stakeholder An individual or group, such as employees, 
suppliers, customers, and shareholders, who have an 
interest in the corporation’s activities and outcomes.
standard(s) See standard cost for manufacturing context 
and GAAP for another.
standard (cost) Anticipated cost of producing a unit of 
output; a predetermined cost to be assigned to prod-
ucts produced. Standard cost implies a norm—what 
costs should be. Budgeted cost implies a forecast—
something likely, but not necessarily, a “should,” as 
implied by a norm. Firms use standard costs as the 
benchmark for gauging good and bad performance. 
Although a firm may similarly use a budget, it need 
not. A budget may be a planning document, subject 
to changes whenever plans change, whereas standard 
costs usually change annually or when technology sig-
nificantly changes or when costs of labor and materi-
als significantly change.
standard costing Costing based on standard costs.
standard costing system Product costing using standard 
costs rather than actual costs. The firm may use either 
full absorption or variable costing principles, although 
the IRS, FASB, and IASB allow only full absorption 
costing.
standard error (of regression coefficients) A measure 
of the uncertainty about the magnitude of the esti-
mated parameters of an equation fit with a regression 
analysis.
standard manufacturing overhead Overhead costs expected 
to be incurred per unit of time and per unit produced.
standard price (rate) Unit price established for materials 
or labor used in standard cost systems.
standard quantity allowed The direct material or direct 
labor (inputs) quantity that production should have 
used if it had produced the units of output in accor-
dance with preset standards.
standby costs A type of capacity cost, such as property 
taxes, incurred even if a firm shuts down operations 
completely. Contrast with enabling costs.
stated capital Amount of capital contributed by sharehold-
ers; sometimes used to mean legal capital.
special assessment A compulsory levy made by a govern-
mental unit on property to pay the costs of a specific 
improvement or service presumed not to benefit the 
general public but only the owners of the property so 
assessed; accounted for in a special assessment fund.
special journal A journal, such as a sales journal or cash 
disbursements journal, to record transactions of a simi-
lar nature that occur frequently.
special purpose entity; SPE; QSPE In general, the goal 
of creating a SPE or variable interest entity is for an 
investor to achieve off-balance-sheet financing, by con-
structing a business which itself engages in substantial 
borrowing, for which the investor has economic obli-
gation to repay under some circumstances, but which 
the investor need not consolidate. In U.S. GAAP, 
the name for a business now known as a qualifying 
special-purpose entity (QSPE) or a variable inter-
est entity. U.S. GAAP never defined the SPE, but 
brought it into existence with an EITF consensus in 
1990. U.S. GAAP (Codification Topic 860-40) gives 
detailed guidance as to when an entity qualifies as a 
QSPE and becomes exempt from consolidation. IFRS 
defines SPE in terms of control: if the investor has 
control, then it must consolidate. IFRS gives several 
indicia of control, but no rules.
special revenue debt A governmental unit’s debt backed 
only by revenues from specific sources, such as tolls 
from a bridge.
specific identification method Method for valuing ending 
inventory and cost of goods sold by identifying actual 
units sold and remaining in inventory and summing 
the actual costs of those individual units; usually used 
for items with large unit values, such as precious jew-
elry, automobiles, and fur coats.
specific item sampling Sampling in which the analyst 
selects particular items because of their nature, value, 
or method of recording. Compare representative item 
sampling.
specific price changes Changes in the market prices of spe-
cific goods and services. Contrast with general price-
level changes.
specific price index A measure of the price of a specific 
good or service, or a small group of similar goods or 
services, at one time relative to the price during a base 
period. Contrast with general price index. See dollar-
value LIFO method.
spending variance In standard cost systems, the rate or 
price variance for overhead costs.
split Stock split. Sometimes called split-up.
split-off point In accumulating and allocating costs for 
joint products, the point at which all costs are no lon-
ger joint costs but at which an analyst can identify 
costs associated with individual products or perhaps 
with a smaller number of joint products.
spoilage See abnormal spoilage and normal spoilage.
spot price The price of a commodity for delivery on the 
day of the price quotation. See forward price for 
contrast.
spreadsheet Since personal-computer software has become 
widespread, this term has come to refer to any file cre-
ated by programs such as Microsoft Excel®. Such files 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

821
Glossary
in compiling an annual report; required by APB Opin-
ion No. 22 (Codification Topic 235). This summary 
may be a separate exhibit or the first note to the finan-
cial statements.
Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS) A series address-
ing specific auditing standards and procedures. No. 1 
(1973) of this series codifies all statements on audit-
ing standards previously promulgated by the AICPA. 
Contrast with auditing standards and PCAOB.
Statement on Standards for Accounting and Review Ser-
vices (SSARS) Pronouncements issued by the AICPA 
on unaudited financial statements and unaudited 
financial information of nonpublic entities.
static budget Fixed budget. Budget developed for a set 
level of the driving variable, such as production or 
sales, which the analyst does not change if the actual 
level deviates from the level set at the outset of the 
analysis.
status quo Events or cost incurrences that will happen or 
that a firm expects to happen in the absence of taking 
some contemplated action.
statutory tax rate The tax rate specified in the income tax 
law for each type of income (for example, ordinary 
income, capital gain or loss).
step allocation method Step-down method.
step cost Semifixed cost.
step-down method In allocating service department costs, 
a method that starts by allocating one service depart-
ment’s costs to production departments and to all other 
service departments. Then the firm allocates a second 
service department’s costs, including costs allocated 
from the first, to production departments and to all 
other service departments except the first one. In this 
fashion, a firm may allocate all service departments 
costs, including previous allocations, to production 
departments and to those service departments whose 
costs it has not yet allocated.
step method Step-down method.
step(ped) cost Semifixed cost.
sterilized allocation Desirable characteristics of cost allo-
cation methods. Optimal decisions result from consid-
ering incremental costs only. Optimal decisions never 
require allocations of joint or common costs. A “steril-
ized allocation” causes the optimal decision choice not 
to differ from the one that occurs when the accoun-
tant does not allocate joint or common costs “steril-
ized” with respect to that decision. Arthur L. Thomas 
first used the term in this context. Because absorption 
costing requires that product costs absorb all manu-
facturing costs and because some allocations can lead 
to bad decisions, Thomas (and we) advocate that the 
analyst choose a sterilized allocation scheme that will 
not alter the otherwise optimal decision. No single 
allocation scheme is always sterilized with respect to 
all decisions. Thus, Thomas (and we) advocate that 
decisions be made on the basis of incremental costs 
before any allocations.
stewardship Principle by which management is account-
able for an entity’s resources, for their efficient use, 
and for protecting them from adverse impact. Some 
theorists believe that accounting has as a primary goal 
stated value A term sometimes used for the face amount 
of capital stock, when the board has not designated 
a par method. Where there is stated value per share, 
capital contributed in excess of stated value may come 
into being.
statement of affairs A balance sheet showing immediate 
liquidation amounts rather than historical costs, usu-
ally prepared when insolvency or bankruptcy is immi-
nent. Such a statement specifically does not use the 
going-concern assumption.
statement of cash flows A schedule of cash receipts and 
payments, classified by investing, financing, and oper-
ating activities; required by the FASB for all for-profit 
companies. Companies may report operating activi-
ties with either the direct method (which shows only 
receipts and payments of cash) or the indirect method 
(which starts with net income and shows adjustments 
for revenues not currently producing cash and for 
expenses not currently using cash). Cash includes cash 
equivalents such as Treasury bills, commercial paper, 
and some marketable securities held as current assets 
(not as investments). This is sometimes called the funds 
statement. Before 1987, the FASB required the pre-
sentation of a similar statement called the statement of 
changes in financial position, which tended to empha-
size working capital, not cash.
statement of changes in financial position A statement, 
required by U.S. GAAP in the 1970s, that explains the 
changes in working capital (or cash) balances during a 
period and shows the changes in the working capital 
(or cash) accounts themselves. The statement of cash 
flows has replaced this statement.
statement of charge and discharge A financial statement, 
showing net assets or income, drawn up by an execu-
tor or administrator, to account for receipts and dis-
positions of cash or other assets in an estate or trust.
Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts (SFAC) One 
of a series of FASB publications in its conceptual 
framework for financial accounting and reporting. Such 
statements set forth objectives and fundamentals to be 
the basis for specific financial accounting and reporting 
standards.
Statement of Financial Accounting standards (SFAS, 
FAS) See FASB.
statement of financial position Balance sheet.
Statement of Position (SOP) A recommendation, on an 
emerging accounting problem, issued by the AcSEC 
of the AICPA. The AICPA’s Code of Professional 
Ethics specifically states that CPAs need not treat 
SOPs as they do rules from the FASB, but a CPA 
would be wary of departing from the recommenda-
tions of an SOP.
statement of profit and loss The IFRS term for income 
statement.
statement of retained earnings (income) A statement that 
reconciles the beginning-of-period and the end-of-
period balances in the retained earnings account. It 
shows the effects of earnings, dividend declarations, 
and prior-period adjustments.
statement of significant accounting policies (principles) A 
summary of the significant accounting principles used 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

822
Glossary
straight-debt value An estimate of the market value of a 
convertible bond if the bond did not contain a conver-
sion privilege.
straight-line (time or use) depreciation (method) Method 
in which, if the depreciable life is n periods, the peri-
odic depreciation charge is 1/n of the depreciable cost; 
results in equal periodic charges. Accountants some-
times call it straight-time depreciation.
strategic plan A statement of the method for achieving an 
organization’s goals.
stratified sampling In choosing a sample, a method in which 
the investigator first divides the entire population into 
relatively homogeneous subgroups (strata) and then 
selects random samples from these subgroups.
strike price Exercise price of a stock option. See option for 
discussion of this and related terms.
street security A stock certificate in immediately transfer-
able form, most commonly because the issuing firm 
has registered it in the name of the broker, who has 
endorsed it with “payee” left blank.
subchapter S corporation A firm legally organized as a 
corporation but taxed as if it were a partnership. Tax 
terminology calls the corporations paying their own 
income taxes C corporations.
subject to In an auditor’s report, qualifications usually 
caused by a material uncertainty in the valuation of an 
item, such as future promised payments from a foreign 
government or outcome of pending litigation.
subordinated (rights) Debt (or other security) whose claim 
on income or assets has lower priority than claims of 
other debt (or other security).
subscribed stock A shareholders’ equity account showing the 
capital that the firm will receive as soon as the share-
purchaser pays the subscription price. A subscription 
is a legal contract, so once the share-purchaser signs 
it, the firm makes an entry debiting an owners’ equity 
contra account and crediting subscribed stock.
subscription Agreement to buy a security or to purchase 
periodicals, such as magazines.
subsequent events Post-statement events.
subsidiary A company in which another company owns 
more than 50% of the voting shares.
subsidiary ledger The ledger that contains the detailed 
accounts whose total appears in a controlling account 
of the general ledger.
subsidiary (ledger) accounts The accounts in a subsidiary 
ledger.
successful efforts costing In petroleum accounting, the 
capitalization of the drilling costs of only those wells 
that contain gas or oil. See reserve recognition account-
ing for an example.
summary annual report (SAR) Condensed financial state-
ments distributed in lieu of the usual annual report. 
Since 1987, the SEC has allowed firms to include such 
statements in the annual report to shareholders as long 
as the firm includes full, detailed statements in SEC 
filings and in proxy materials sent to shareholders.
summary of significant accounting principles Statement of 
significant accounting policies (principles).
sum-of-the-years’-digits depreciation method (SYD, SOYD) 
An accelerated depreciation method for an asset with 
aiding users of financial statements in their assessment 
of management’s performance in stewardship.
stock A measure of the amount of something on hand at a 
specific time. Because of this meaning, careful writers 
do not use this word to refer to common or preferred 
shares. Contrast with flow. See inventory and capital 
stock.
stock appreciation rights An employer’s promise to pay 
to the employee an amount of cash on a certain 
future date, with the amount of cash being the differ-
ence between the market value of a specified number 
of shares of stock in the employer’s company on the 
given future date and some base price set on the date 
the rights are granted. Firms sometimes use this form 
of compensation because changes in tax laws in recent 
years have made stock options relatively less attrac-
tive. U.S. GAAP computes compensation based on 
the difference between the market value of the shares 
and the base price set at the time of the grant.
stock dividend A so-called dividend in which the firm dis-
tributes additional shares of capital stock without 
cash payments to existing shareholders. It results in a 
debit to retained earnings in the amount of the market 
value of the shares issued and a credit to capital stock 
accounts. Firms ordinarily use stock dividends to 
indicate that they have permanently reinvested earn-
ings in the business. Contrast with a stock split, which 
requires no entry in the capital stock accounts other 
than a notation that the par or stated value per share 
has changed.
stock option The right to purchase or sell a specified num-
ber of shares of stock for a specified price at speci-
fied times. Employee stock options are purchase rights 
granted by a corporation to employees, a form of 
compensation. Traded stock options are derivative 
securities, rights created and traded by investors, inde-
pendent of the corporation whose stock is optioned. 
Contrast with warrant.
stock (purchase) right See right.
stock split(-up) Increase in the number of common shares 
outstanding resulting from the issuance of additional 
shares to existing shareholders without additional capi-
tal contributions by them. Does not increase the total 
value (or stated value) of common shares outstanding 
because the board reduces the par (or stated) value per 
share in inverse proportion. A three-for-one stock split 
reduces par (or stated) value per share to one-third of 
its former amount. A stock split usually implies a dis-
tribution that increases the number of shares outstand-
ing by 20% or more. Compare with stock dividend.
stock subscriptions See subscription and subscribed stock.
stock warrant See warrant.
stockholders’ equity See shareholders’ equity.
stockout Occurs when a firm needs a unit of inventory 
to use in production or to sell to a customer but has 
none available.
stockout costs Contribution margin or other measure of 
profits not earned because a seller has run out of inven-
tory and cannot fill a customer’s order. A firm may 
incur an extra cost because of delay in filling an order.
stores Raw materials, parts, and supplies.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

823
Glossary
payments on debt denominated in another currency 
(such as German marks). An interest-rate swap typi-
cally obligates the party and counterparty to exchange 
the difference between fixed- and floating-rate interest 
payments on otherwise similar loans.
S-X See Regulation S-X.
SYD Sum-of-the-years’-digits depreciation.
T
T-account Account form shaped like the letter T with the 
title above the horizontal line. Debits appear on the 
left of the vertical line, credits on the right.
T-account work sheet A group of T-accounts used to work 
problems or to construct a statement of cash flows.
take-home pay The amount of a paycheck; earned wages 
or salary reduced by deductions for income taxes, 
Social Security taxes, contributions to fringe-benefit 
plans, union dues, and so on. Take-home pay might 
be as little as half of earned compensation.
take-or-pay contract As defined by SFAS No. 47 (Codi-
fication Topic 440), a purchaser-seller agreement that 
provides for the purchaser to pay specified amounts 
periodically in return for products or services. The pur-
chaser must make specified minimum payments even 
if it does not take delivery of the contracted products 
or services.
taking a bath To incur a large loss. See big bath.
tangible (asset) Having physical form. Accounting has 
never satisfactorily defined the distinction between 
tangible and intangible assets. Typically, accountants 
define intangibles by giving an exhaustive list, and 
everything not on the list is defined as tangible. See 
intangible asset for such a list.
target cost Standard cost. Sometimes, target price less 
expected profit margin.
target price Selling price based on customers’ value in 
use of a good or service, constrained by competitors’ 
prices of similar items.
tax A nonpenal, but compulsory, charge levied by a gov-
ernment on income, consumption, wealth, or other 
basis, for the benefit of all those governed. The term 
does not include fines or specific charges for benefits 
accruing only to those paying the charges, such as 
licenses, permits, special assessments, admission fees, 
and tolls.
tax allocation: interperiod See deferred income tax liability.
tax allocation: intrastatement The showing of income tax 
effects on extraordinary items, income from discontin-
ued operations, and prior-period adjustments, along 
with these items, separately from income taxes on 
other income. See net of tax reporting.
tax avoidance See tax shelter and loophole.
tax basis of assets and liabilities A concept important 
for applying SFAS No. 109 (Codification Topic 740) 
on deferred income taxes. Two assets will generally 
have different carrying values if the firm paid differ-
ent amounts for them, amortizes them on a different 
schedule, or both. Similarly a single asset will gener-
ally have a carrying value different from what it will 
have for tax purposes if the firm recorded different 
depreciable life of n years where the charge in period i 
(i = 1, . . . , n) is the fraction (n + 1 – i)/[n(n + 1)/2] 
of the depreciable cost. If an asset has a depreciable 
cost of $15,000 and a five-year depreciable life, for 
example, the depreciation charges would be $5,000 (= 
5/15 × $15,000) in the first year, $4,000 in the second, 
$3,000 in the third, $2,000 in the fourth, and $1,000 
in the fifth. The name derives from the fact that the 
denominator in the fraction is the sum of the digits 1 
through n.
sunk cost Past costs that current and future decisions can-
not affect and, hence, that are irrelevant for decision 
making aside from income tax effects. Contrast with 
incremental costs and imputed costs. For example, the 
acquisition cost of machinery is irrelevant to a deci-
sion of whether to scrap the machinery. The current 
exit value of the machinery is the opportunity cost of 
continuing to own it, and the cost of, say, the elec-
tricity to run the machinery is an incremental cost of 
its operation. Sunk costs become relevant for deci-
sion making when the analysis requires taking income 
taxes (gain or loss on disposal of asset) into account, 
since the cash payment for income taxes depends on 
the tax basis of the asset. Avoid this term in careful 
writing because it is ambiguous. Consider, for exam-
ple, a machine costing $100,000 with current salvage 
value of $20,000. Some (including us) would say that 
$100,000 (the gross amount) is “sunk”; others would 
say that only $80,000 (the net amount) is “sunk.”
supplementary statements (schedules) Statements (sched-
ules) in addition to the four basic financial statements 
(balance sheet, income statement, statement of cash 
flows, and the statement of retained earnings).
surplus A word once used but now considered poor ter-
minology; prefaced by “earned” to mean retained 
earnings and prefaced by “capital” to mean capital 
contributed in excess of par (or stated) value.
surplus reserves Appropriated retained earnings. A phrase 
with nothing to recommend it: of all the words in 
accounting, reserve is the most objectionable, and sur-
plus is the second-most objectionable.
suspense account A temporary account used to record part 
of a transaction before final analysis of that transac-
tion. For example, if a business regularly classifies 
all sales into a dozen or more different categories 
but wants to deposit the proceeds of cash sales every 
day, it may credit a sales suspense account pending 
detailed classification of all sales into Durable Goods 
Sales, Women’s Clothing Sales, Men’s Clothing Sales, 
Housewares Sales, and so on.
sustainable income The part of distributable income (com-
puted from current cost data) that the firm can expect 
to earn in the next accounting period if it continues 
operations at the same levels as were maintained 
during the current period. Income from discontinued 
operations, for example, may be distributable but not 
sustainable.
swap A currency swap is a financial instrument in which 
the holder promises to pay to (or receive from) the 
counterparty the difference between debt denomi-
nated in one currency (such as U.S. dollars) and the 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

824
Glossary
depreciation because Congress had not provided for tax 
refunds to those who acquire qualifying assets but who 
have no taxable income. In principle, a company with-
out taxable income could lease from another firm with 
taxable income an asset that it would otherwise pur-
chase. The second firm acquires the asset, gets the tax-
reduction benefits from the acquisition, and becomes 
a lessor, leasing the asset (presumably at a lower price 
reflecting its own costs lowered by the tax reductions) 
to the unprofitable company. Before 1981, tax laws 
discouraged such leases. That is, although firms could 
enter into such leases, they could not legally transfer 
the tax benefits. Under certain restrictive conditions, 
the tax law now allows a profitable firm to earn tax 
credits and take deductions while leasing to the firm 
without tax liability in such leases. These are some-
times called safe-harbor leases.
taxable income Income computed according to IRS regu-
lations and subject to income taxes. Contrast with 
income, net income, income before taxes (in the 
income statement), and comprehensive income (a finan-
cial reporting concept). Use the term “pretax income” 
to refer to income before taxes on the income state-
ment in financial reports.
Technical Bulletin The FASB has authorized its staff 
to issue bulletins to provide guidance on financial 
accounting and reporting problems. Although the 
FASB does not formally approve the contents of the 
bulletins, their contents are part of U.S. GAAP.
technology As an account classification, typically the sum 
of a firm’s technical trade secrets and know-how, as 
distinct from its patents, which tend to be in their own 
account.
temporary account Account that does not appear on the 
balance sheet; revenue and expense accounts, their 
adjuncts and contras, production cost accounts, dividend 
distribution accounts, and purchases-related accounts 
(which close to the various inventories); sometimes 
called a “nominal account.”
temporary difference According to the SFAS No. 109 (Cod-
ification Topic 740) definition: “A difference between 
the tax basis of an assetor liability and its reported 
amount in the financial statements that will result in 
taxable or deductible amounts in future years.” Tem-
porary differences include timing differences and dif-
ferences between taxable income and pretax income 
caused by different cost bases for assets. For example, 
a plant asset might have a cost of $10,000 for financial 
reporting but a basis of $7,000 for income tax pur-
poses. This temporary difference might arise because 
the firm has used an accelerated depreciation method 
for tax but straight-line for book, or the firm may 
have purchased the asset in a transaction in which the 
fair value of the asset exceeded its tax basis. Both situ-
ations create a temporary difference.
temporary investments Investments in marketable securi-
ties that the owner intends to sell within a short time, 
usually one year, and hence classifies as current assets.
term bonds A bond issue whose component bonds all 
mature at the same time. Contrast with serial bonds.
acquisition amounts for the asset for book and for tax 
purposes, amortizes it differently for book and for tax 
purposes, or both. The difference between financial 
carrying value and income tax basis becomes impor-
tant in computing deferred income tax amounts. The 
adjusted cost in the financial records is the book basis, 
and the adjusted amount in the tax records is the tax 
basis. Differences between book and tax basis can 
arise for liabilities as well as for assets.
tax credit A subtraction from taxes otherwise payable. 
Contrast with tax deduction.
tax deduction A subtraction from revenues and gains to 
arrive at taxable income. Tax deductions differ tech-
nically from tax exemptions, but both reduce gross 
income in computing taxable income. Both differ 
from tax credits, which reduce the computed tax itself 
in computing taxes payable. If the tax rate is the frac-
tion t of pretax income, then a tax credit of $1 is worth 
$1/t of tax deductions.
tax evasion The fraudulent understatement of taxable rev-
enues or overstatement of deductions and expenses or 
both. Contrast with tax shelter and loophole.
tax-exempts See municipal bonds.
tax shelter The legal avoidance of, or reduction in, income 
taxes resulting from a careful reading of the complex 
income-tax regulations and the subsequent rearrange-
ment of financial affairs to take advantage of the 
regulations. Often writers use the term pejoratively, 
but the courts have long held that a taxpayer has no 
obligation to pay taxes any larger than the legal mini-
mum. If the public concludes that a given tax shelter 
is “unfair,” then Congress can, and has, changed the 
laws and regulations but courts have ruled some tax 
shelters illegal without the need for legislative action. 
The term is sometimes used to refer to the investment 
that permits tax avoidance. See loophole.
tax shield The amount of an expense, such as depre-
ciation, that reduces taxable income but does not 
require working capital. Sometimes this term includes 
expenses that reduce taxable income and use working 
capital. A depreciation deduction (or R&D expense in 
the expanded sense) of $10,000 provides a tax shield 
of $3,700 when the marginal tax rate is 37%.
tax-transfer lease One form of capital lease. Congress has 
in the past provided business with an incentive to invest 
in qualifying plant and equipment by granting an invest-
ment credit, which, though it occurs as a reduction in 
income taxes otherwise payable, effectively reduces the 
purchase price of the assets. Similarly, Congress con-
tinues to grant an incentive to acquire such assets by 
allowing the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem (MACRS, form of unusually accelerated deprecia-
tion). Accelerated depreciation for tax purposes allows 
a reduction of taxes paid in the early years of an asset’s 
life, providing the firm with an increased net present 
value of cash flows. The IRS administers both of these 
incentives through the income tax laws, rather than 
paying an outright cash payment. A business with no 
taxable income in many cases had difficulty reaping 
the benefits of the investment credit or of accelerated 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

825
Glossary
time deposit Cash in bank earning interest. Contrast with 
demand deposit.
time-series analysis See cross-section analysis for defini-
tion and contrast.
time value element in stock options The longer one can 
hold an option before exercising it or letting it lapse, 
the more valuable the option. In assessing the fair 
value of options, one can try to isolate the two com-
ponents of value: this time value and the benefit value, 
which equals intrinsic value.
times-interest (charges) earned Ratio of pretax income 
plus interest charges to interest charges. See ratio and 
Exhibit 7.12.
timing difference The major type of temporary difference 
between taxable income and pretax income reported 
to shareholders; reverses in a subsequent period and 
requires an entry in the deferred income tax account; 
for example, the use of accelerated depreciation for 
tax returns and straight-line depreciation for financial 
reporting. Contrast with permanent difference.
Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX) A public market where 
various corporate securities trade.
total assets turnover ratio Sales divided by average total 
assets. See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
total quality management (TQM) Concept of organiz-
ing a company to excel in all its activities in order to 
increase the quality of products and services.
traceable cost A cost that a firm can identify with or 
assign to a specific product. Contrast with a joint cost.
trade acceptance A draft that a seller presents for signature 
(acceptance) to the buyer at the time it sells goods. The 
draft then becomes the equivalent of a note receivable 
of the seller and a note payable of the buyer.
trade credit Occurs when one business allows another 
to buy from it in return for a promise to pay later. 
Contrast with “consumer credit,” which occurs when 
a business extends a retail customer the privilege of 
paying later.
trade discount A list price discount offered to all customers 
of a given type. Contrast with a discount offered for 
prompt payment and with quantity discount.
trade-in Acquiring a new asset in exchange for a used one 
and perhaps additional cash. See boot and trade-in 
transaction.
trade-in transaction The accounting for a trade-in—an 
exchange of similar assets without much cash pay-
ment. The accounting depends on whether future cash 
flows of the reporting entity will change as a result 
of the transaction, that is, whether the transaction 
has commercial substance. When a firm swaps one 
non-monetary asset for another, there will usually be 
uncertainty as to whether the estimate of the fair value 
of the asset given up is more reliably measureable 
than the estimate of the fair value of the new asset 
acquired. If the transaction has commercial substance, 
the firm will record the transaction using whichever 
estimate it deems more reliable. To illustrate, suppose 
the firm owns a van that originally cost $275,000 and 
has $25,000 of accumulated depreciation, with net car-
rying value of $250,000. The firm estimates the fair 
term loan A loan with a maturity date, as opposed to 
a demand loan, which is due whenever the lender 
requests payment. In practice, bankers and auditors 
use this phrase only for loans for a year or more.
term structure A phrase with different meanings in 
accounting and financial economics. In accounting, it 
refers to the pattern of times that must elapse before 
assets turn into, or produce, cash and the pattern of 
times that must elapse before liabilities require cash. 
In financial economics, the phrase refers to the pat-
tern of yields or interest rates as a function of the time 
that elapses for loans to come due. For example, if six-
month loans cost 6% per year and 10-year loans cost 
9% per year, this is called a “normal” term structure 
because the longer-term loan carries a higher rate. If 
the six-month loan costs 9% per year and the 10-year 
loan costs 6% per year, the term structure is said to be 
“inverted.” See yield curve.
terminal cash flows Cash flows that occur at the end of an 
investment project. Often include proceeds of salvage 
of equipment and tax on gain (loss) on disposal. See 
terminal value.
terminal value In cash flow projections that persist for 
many periods, the analyst often summarizes the far 
distant future in a medium distant period. For exam-
ple, the analyst might give a cash inflow for Year 20, 
which is the present value of expected cash flows for 
all the years after Year 20. That last value is called the 
“terminal value” and is often derived using the perpe-
tuity growth model.
terms of sale The conditions governing payment for a 
sale. For example, the terms 2/10, n(et)/30 mean that 
if the purchaser makes payment within 10 days of the 
invoice date, it can take a discount of 2% from invoice 
price; the purchaser must pay the invoice amount, in 
any event, within 30 days, or it becomes overdue.
theory of constraints (TOC) Concept of improving opera-
tions by identifying and reducing bottlenecks in pro-
cess flows.
thin capitalization A state of having a high debt–equity 
ratio. Under income tax legislation, the term has a 
special meaning.
throughput contract As defined by SFAS No. 47 (Codi-
fication Topic 440), an agreement that is signed by a 
shipper (processor) and by the owner of a transporta-
tion facility (such as an oil or natural gas pipeline or 
a ship) or a manufacturing facility and that provides 
for the shipper (processor) to pay specified amounts 
periodically in return for the transportation (process-
ing) of a product. The shipper (processor) must make 
cash payments even if it does not ship (process) the 
contracted quantities.
throughput contribution Sales dollars minus the sum of all 
short-run variable costs.
tickler file A collection of vouchers or other memoranda 
arranged chronologically to remind the person in 
charge of certain duties to make payments (or to do 
other tasks) as scheduled.
time-adjusted rate of return Internal rate of return.
time cost Period cost.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

826
Glossary
the firm must expense internally developed trademark 
rights.
trading on the equity Said of a firm engaging in debt financ-
ing; frequently said of a firm doing so to a degree con-
sidered abnormal for a firm of its kind. Leverage.
trading securities Marketable securities that a firm holds 
and expects to sell within a relatively short time; a 
classification important in SFAS No. 115 (Codifica-
tion Topic 320), which requires the owner to carry 
marketable equity securities on the balance sheet at 
market value, not at cost. Contrast with available for 
sale, securities and held-to-maturity securities. Under 
SFAS No. 115 (Codification Topic 320), the balance 
sheet reports trading securities at market value on the 
balance sheet date, and the income statement reports 
holding gains and losses on trading securities. When 
the firm sells the securities, it reports realized gain or 
loss as the difference between the selling price and the 
market value at the last balance sheet date.
tranche A slice or portion. Used in finance to refer to 
securities with different rights, usually along a com-
mon spectrum. For example one group of investors 
might be entitled to the first $1 million of cash flows 
from an asset and a second group might be entitled 
to the second $1 million. The groups are referred to 
as tranches.
transaction A transfer (of more than promises—see exec-
utory contract) between the accounting entity and 
another party or parties.
transfer Under SFAC No. 6, consists of two types: recip-
rocal and nonreciprocal. In a reciprocal transfer, or 
exchange, the entity both receives and sacrifices. In a 
nonreciprocal transfer, the entity sacrifices but does 
not receive (examples include gifts, distributions to 
owners) or receives but does not sacrifice (investment 
by owner in entity). SFAC No. 6 suggests that the 
term “internal transfer” is self-contradictory and that 
writers should use the term “internal event” instead.
transfer agent Usually a bank or trust company desig-
nated by a corporation to make legal transfers of stock 
(bonds) and, perhaps, to pay dividends or debt service 
payments.
transfer price A substitute for a market, or arm’s length, 
price used in profit, or responsibility center, accounting 
when one segment of the business “sells” to another 
segment. Incentives of profit center managers will not 
coincide with the best interests of the entire business 
unless a firm sets transfer prices properly.
transfer-pricing problem The problem of setting transfer 
prices so that both buyer and seller have goal congru-
ence with respect to the parent organization’s goals.
translation adjustment The effect of exchange-rate changes 
caused by converting the value of a net investment 
denominated in a foreign currency to the entity’s 
reporting currency. SFAS No. 52 (Codification Topic 
830) requires firms to translate their net investment in 
relatively self-contained foreign operations at the bal-
ance sheet date. Year-to-year changes in value caused 
by exchange-rate changes accumulate in an owners’ 
equity account, sometimes called the cumulative trans-
lation adjustment.
value of the van to be $240,000. The generic entry for 
the trade-in transaction is as follows:
New Van (Asset Increase). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
A 
Accumulated Depreciation
 (Old Asset Decrease)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25,000 
Loss or Gain on Exchange  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
B 
or B
 
Old Asset (Asset Decrease) . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 275,000
 
(1)  If the firm decides that the estimate of the fair 
value of the old van is more reliable, then it will 
record the new van at $240,000; A = $240,000. 
It will then plug for B, which results in a loss of 
$10,000.
 
(2)  If the firm decides that the estimate of fair value 
of the new van is more reliable, then it will record 
the new van at $270,000; A = $270,000. It will 
then plug for B which results in a gain of $20,000.
 
If the trade-in transaction lacks commercial substance, 
then the firm will record the new van at the carrying 
value of the old, $250,000; A = $250,000. There will, 
by design, be no gain or loss on the transaction.
trade payables (receivables) Payables (receivables) arising 
in the ordinary course of business transactions. Most 
accounts payable (receivable) are of this kind.
trade secret Technical or business information such as 
formulas, recipes, computer programs, and marketing 
data not generally known by competitors and main-
tained by the firm as a secret; theoretically capable of 
having an indefinite, finite life. A famous example is 
the secret process for Coca-Cola® (a registered trade-
mark of the company). Compare with know-how. The 
firm will capitalize this intangible asset only if pur-
chased. If this intangible has a finite, expected useful 
life, U.S. GAAP requires amortization over that esti-
mate of its life. If the right has indefinite life, then U.S. 
GAAP requires no amortization, but annual tests for 
impairment. If the firm develops the intangible inter-
nally, the firm will expense the costs as incurred and 
show no asset.
trademark A distinctive word or symbol that is affixed 
to a product, its package, or its dispenser and that 
uniquely identifies the firm’s products and services. 
See trademark right.
trademark right The right to exclude competitors in sales 
or advertising from using words or symbols that are 
so similar to the firm’s trademarks as possibly to con-
fuse consumers. Trademark rights last as long as the 
firm continues to use the trademarks in question. In 
the United States, trademark rights arise from use 
and not from government registration. They therefore 
have a legal life independent of the life of a registra-
tion. Registrations last 20 years, and the holder may 
renew them as long as the holder uses the trademark. 
If this intangible has a finite, expected useful life, U.S. 
GAAP requires amortization over that estimate of its 
life. If the right has indefinite life, then U.S. GAAP 
requires no amortization, but annual tests for impair-
ment. Under SFAS No. 2 (Codification Topic 730), 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

827
Glossary
turnover The number of times that assets, such as inventory 
or accounts receivable, are replaced on average during 
the period. Accounts receivable turnover, for example, 
is total sales on account for a period divided by the 
average accounts receivable balance for the period. 
See ratio and Exhibit 7.12. In the United Kingdom, 
“turnover” means sales.
turnover of plant and equipment See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
t-value In regression analysis, the ratio of an estimated 
regression coefficient divided by its standard error.
two T-account method A method for computing either 
(1) foreign exchange gains and losses or (2) monetary 
gains or losses for constant-dollar accounting state-
ments. The left-hand T-account shows actual net bal-
ances of monetary items, and the right-hand T-account 
shows implied (common) dollar amounts.
U
unadjusted trial balance Trial balance taken before the 
accountant makes adjusting and closing entries at the 
end of the period.
unappropriated retained earnings Retained earnings not 
appropriated and therefore against which the board 
can declare dividends in the absence of retained earn-
ings restrictions. See restricted retained earnings.
unavoidable cost A cost that is not an avoidable cost.
uncertainty See risk for definition and contrast.
uncollectible account; uncollectible amount An account 
receivable that the debtor will not pay. If the firm uses 
the preferable allowance method, the entry on judging 
a specific account to be uncollectible debits the allow-
ance for uncollectible accounts and credits the specific 
account receivable. See bad debt expense and sales 
contra, estimated uncollectibles.
unconsolidated subsidiary A subsidiary not consolidated 
perhaps because it is a foreign country from which the 
parent cannot take assets.
uncontrollable cost The opposite of controllable cost.
underapplied (underabsorbed) overhead An excess of 
actual overhead costs for a period over costs applied, 
or charged, to products produced during the period; a 
debit balance remaining in an overhead account after 
the accounting assigns overhead to product. See over-
applied overhead.
underlying document The record, memorandum, voucher, 
or other signal that is the authority for making an 
entry into a journal.
underlyings A derivative contract specifies its various pay-
offs in terms of variables, called underlyings such as a 
common stock, or specified interest rate, or commod-
ity price, or foreign exchange rate.
underwriter One who agrees to purchase a security issue for a 
specified price, usually for resale to others. Often under-
writers join together to buy the entire issue then allocate 
the issue among themselves for subsequent resale.
undistributed earnings Retained earnings. Typically, this 
term refers to that amount retained for a given year.
unearned income (revenue) Advances from customers; 
strictly speaking, a contradiction in terms because the 
terms “income” and “revenue” mean earned.
translation gain (or loss) Foreign exchange gain (or loss).
transportation-in Freight-in.
transposition error An error in problem solving resulting 
from reversing the order of digits in a number, such 
as recording “32” for “23.” If the only errors in a trial 
balance result from one or more transposition errors, 
then the difference between the sum of the debits and 
the sum of the credits will be divisible by nine. Not all 
such differences result from transposition errors.
treasurer The financial officer responsible for managing 
cash and raising funds.
treasury bond A bond issued by a corporation and then 
reacquired. Such bonds are treated as retired when 
reacquired, and an extraordinary gain or loss on reac-
quisition is recognized. This term usually refers to a 
bond issued by the U.S. Treasury Department.
treasury shares Capital stock issued and then reacquired 
by the corporation. Such reacquisitions result in a 
reduction of shareholders’ equity and usually appear 
on the balance sheet as contra to shareholders’ equity. 
Accounting recognizes neither gain nor loss on trans-
actions involving treasury stock. The accounting deb-
its (if positive) or credits (if negative) any difference 
between the amounts paid and received for treasury 
stock transactions to additional paid-in capital. See 
cost method and par method.
treasury stock Treasury shares.
treatment of changes in periodic depreciation and amortiza-
tion See accounting changes.
trend analysis Investigation of sales or other economic 
trends. Can range from a simple visual extrapolation 
of points on a graph to a sophisticated computerized 
time series analysis.
trial balance A two-column listing of account balances. 
The left-hand column shows all accounts with debit 
balances and their total. The right-hand column shows 
all accounts with credit balances and their total. The 
two totals should be equal. Accountants compute trial 
balances as a partial check of the arithmetic accuracy 
of the entries previously made. See adjusted, preclos-
ing, post-closing, unadjusted trial balance, plug, slide, 
and transposition error.
troubled debt restructuring As defined in SFAS No. 15 
(Codification Topics 310 and 470), a concession (chang-
ing of the terms of a debt) that is granted by a creditor 
for economic or legal reasons related to the debtor’s 
financial difficulty and that the creditor would not 
otherwise consider.
true up In accounting, an adjusting entry to match an end-
ing account balance with physical reality. In finance, 
it sometimes refers to a cash expenditure to have total 
expenditures match a number given by some rules or 
regulations; for example, the employer contributed an 
extra $12,000 to the pension fund at the end of Decem-
ber to true up the amount in the fund to the amount 
required by year end.
t-statistic For an estimated regression coefficient, the esti-
mated coefficient divided by the standard error of the 
estimate.
TSX Toronto Stock Exchange. Abbreviated TSE until 
2001.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

828
Glossary
outside the United States that has filed the necessary 
documents with the SEC to list and trade its securities 
in the United States.
usage variance Efficiency variance.
use of funds Any transaction that reduces funds (however 
“funds” is defined).
useful life Service life.
V
valuation account A contra account or adjunct account. 
When the firm reports accounts receivable at expected 
collectible amounts, it will credit any expected uncol-
lectible amounts to the allowance for uncollectibles, 
a valuation account. In this way, the firm can show 
both the gross receivables amount and the amount 
it expects to collect. SFAC No. 6 says a valuation 
account is “a separate item that reduces or increases 
the carrying amount” of an asset (or liability). The 
accounts are part of the related assets (or liabilities) 
and are not assets (or liabilities) in their own right.
valuation allowance A contra account for deferred income 
tax assets, reducing its nominal amount to the amount 
the firm expects to realize because it has future tax-
able income that the expenses and losses reflected in 
the deferred tax assets can offset. Deferred income tax 
assets arise when the taxpayer records expenses on the 
financial statements before it can take deductions on its 
tax returns. Examples are for bad debts and warranty 
costs. In some future period, the firm will be able to 
deduct the bad debt and warranty costs from its taxable 
income in those future periods. If the firm has some 
doubts that it will earn future income, which the bad 
debt and warranty costs can offset, then it will report 
a reduction in deferred tax assets in the earlier periods.
value Monetary worth. This term is usually so vague that 
you should not use it without a modifying adjective 
unless most people would agree on the amount. Do 
not confuse with cost. See fair market value, fair value, 
entry value, and exit value.
value added Cost of a product or work-in-process minus 
the cost of the material purchased for the product or 
work-in-process.
value-added activity Any activity that increases the useful-
ness to a customer of a product or service.
value chain The set of business functions that increase the 
usefulness to the customer of a product or service; 
typically including research and development, design 
of products and services, production, marketing, dis-
tribution, and customer service.
value engineering An evaluation of the activities in the 
value chain to reduce costs.
value variance Price variance.
variable annuity An annuity whose periodic payments 
depend on some uncertain outcome, such as stock 
market prices.
variable budget Flexible budget.
variable costing In allocating costs, a method that assigns 
only variable manufacturing costs to products and 
unemployment tax See FUTA.
unencumbered appropriation In governmental account-
ing, portion of an appropriation not yet spent or 
encumbered.
unexpired cost An asset.
unfavorable variance In standard cost accounting, an 
excess of expected revenue over actual revenue or an 
excess of actual cost over standard cost.
unfunded Not funded. An obligation or liability, usually 
for pension costs, exists, but no funds have been set 
aside to discharge the obligation or liability.
Uniform Partnership Act A model law, enacted by many 
states, to govern the relations between partners when 
the partnership agreement fails to specify the agreed-
upon treatment.
unissued capital stock Stock authorized but not yet issued.
uniting-of-interests method The IASB’s term for the 
pooling- of-interests method. No longer allowed.
unit-level activities Work that converts resources into indi-
vidual products. Examples include direct materials, 
direct labor, and energy to run the machines.
units-of-production method The production method of 
depreciation.
unlimited liability The legal obligation of general partners 
or the sole proprietor for all debts of the partnership 
or sole proprietorship.
unqualified opinion See auditor’s report.
unrealized appreciation An unrealized holding gain; fre-
quently used in the context of marketable securities.
unrealized gain (loss) on marketable securities An income 
statement account title for the amount of gain (loss) 
during the current period on the portfolio of market-
able securities held as trading securities. SFAS No. 115 
(Codification Topic 320) requires the firm to recognize, 
in the income statement, gains and losses caused by 
changes in market values, even though the firm has 
not yet realized them.
unrealized gross margin (profit) A contra account to install-
ment accounts receivable used with the installment 
method of revenue recognition; shows the amount 
of profit that the firm will eventually realize when it 
collects the receivable. Some accountants show this 
account as a liability.
unrealized holding gain See inventory profit for the defini-
tion and an example.
unrecovered cost Carrying value of an asset.
unsecured borrowing Borrowing without specified collat-
eral. See debenture bond.
unused capacity The difference between resources supplied 
and resources used.
U.S. GAAP Generally accepted accounting principles; a 
singular noun. In this book, we use U.S. GAAP for 
this concept. The international analog is IFRS.
U.S. GAAP hierarchy See generally accepted accounting 
principles.
U.S. SEC registrant A firm incorporated based in the 
United States that lists and trades its securities in the 
United States; a non-U.S. SEC registrant (sometimes 
called “foreign private issuer”) is a firm incorporated 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

829
Glossary
variation analysis Analysis of the causes of changes in 
financial statement items of interest such as net income 
or gross margin, or of variances from budget or from 
standard costs.
VAT (value-added tax) A tax levied on the market value of 
a firm’s outputs less the market value of its purchased 
inputs.
vendor A seller; sometimes spelled “vender.”
verifiability See verifiable.
verifiable A qualitative objective of financial reporting 
specifying that accountants can trace items in financial 
statements back to underlying documents—supporting 
invoices, canceled checks, and other physical pieces of 
evidence.
verification The auditor’s act of reviewing or check-
ing items in financial statements by tracing back to 
underlying documents—supporting invoices, canceled 
checks, and other business documents—or sending out 
confirmations to be returned. Compare with physical 
verification.
vertical analysis Analysis of the financial statements of 
a single firm or across several firms for a particular 
time, as opposed to horizontal or time-series analysis, 
in which the analyst compares items over time for a 
single firm or across firms.
vertical integration The extension of activity by an orga-
nization into business directly related to the produc-
tion or distribution of the organization’s end products. 
Although a firm may sell products to others at vari-
ous stages, a vertically integrated firm devotes the 
substantial portion of the output at each stage to the 
production of the next stage or to end products. Com-
pare horizontal integration.
vested An employee’s pension plan benefits that are not 
contingent on the employee’s continuing to work for 
the employer.
vesting The process of becoming vested.
VIE Variable interest entity.
visual curve fitting method One crude form of cost esti-
mation. Sometimes, when a firm needs only rough 
approximations of the amounts of fixed and variable 
costs, management need not perform a formal regres-
sion analysis but can plot the data and draw a line that 
seems to fit the data. Then it can use the parameters 
of that line for the rough approximations.
volume variance Production volume variance; less often, 
used to mean sales volume variance.
voucher A document that signals recognition of a liability 
and authorizes the disbursement of cash; sometimes 
used to refer to the written evidence documenting an 
accounting entry, as in the term journal voucher.
voucher system In controlling cash, a method that 
requires someone in the firm to authorize each check 
with an approved voucher. The firm makes no dis-
bursements of currency or coins except from petty 
cash funds.
vouching The function performed by an auditor to ascer-
tain that underlying data or documents support a 
journal entry.
treats fixed manufacturing costs as period expenses. 
Contrast with full absorption costing.
variable costs Costs that change as activity levels change. 
Strictly speaking, variable costs are zero when the 
activity level is zero. See semivariable costs. In account-
ing, this term most often means the sum of direct costs 
and variable overhead.
variable interest entity (VIE) An entity arranged so that 
one cannot ascertain controlling financial interest 
by analyzing voting interest because the entity meets 
either or both of the following conditions:
 
(1)  The entity has insufficient owners’ equity at risk, 
which means it cannot finance its operations 
without additional financial support, such as the 
promises of another entity.
 
(2)  The entity’s owners’ equity lacks one or more 
of the attributes associated with equity: the abil-
ity to absorb losses, the right to receive residual 
returns, and the ability, conveyed by voting rights, 
to make decisions.
 
A VIE may, but need not, have a primary beneficiary, 
which absorbs (or receives) a majority of the vari-
ability of outcomes of the entity If there is a primary 
beneficiary, that business will consolidate the VIE, 
regardless of ownership.
variable overhead efficiency variance The difference between 
the actual and standard cost driver volume times the 
standard cost driver rate.
variable overhead price variance The difference between 
the actual and standard cost driver rate times the 
actual cost driver volume.
variable overhead variance Difference between actual and 
standard variable overhead costs.
variable rate debt Debt whose interest rate results from 
the periodic application of a formula, such as “three-
month LIBOR [London Interbank Offered Rate] plus 
1% [one hundred basis points] set on the 8th day of 
each February, May, August, and November.”
variables sampling The use of a sampling technique in 
which the sampler infers a particular quantitative char-
acteristic of an entire population from a sample (for 
example, mean amount of accounts receivable). See 
also estimation sampling. See attribute(s) sampling for 
contrast and further examples.
variance Difference between actual and standard costs or 
between budgeted and actual expenditures or, some-
times, expenses. The word has completely different 
meanings in accounting and in statistics, where it 
means a measure of dispersion of a distribution.
variance analysis Variance investigation. This term’s mean-
ing differs in statistics.
variance investigation A step in managerial control pro-
cesses. Standard costing systems produce variance num-
bers of various sorts. These numbers seldom exactly 
equal to zero. Management must decide when a vari-
ance differs sufficiently from zero to study its cause. 
This term refers both to the decision about when to 
study the cause and to the study itself.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

830
Glossary
purchase price of all units on hand at the time of with-
drawal or of computation of ending inventory. The 
firm uses the inventory equation to calculate the other 
quantity. If a firm uses the perpetual inventory method, 
accountants often call it the moving average method.
weighted average number of common shares outstanding 
The number of common shares outstanding at the start 
of an accounting period, adjusted for issuances, repur-
chases, and cancellations of shares, with each change 
in the number of shares outstanding weighted by the 
length of time between changes. The calculation is 
number of shares outstanding × the length of time 
(as a fraction of the accounting period) those shares 
are outstanding. For example, assume the number of 
shares outstanding at the start of a year is 20; the firm 
issues 8 shares at the end of 6 months and repurchases 
4 shares at the end of 9 months. The weighted average 
number of shares outstanding is 23 (= 20 × 0.50 + 28 
× 0.25 + 24 × 0.25).
where-got, where-gone statement A term allegedly used in 
the 1920s by W. M. Cole for a statement much like 
the statement of cash flows. Noted accounting histo-
rian S. Zeff reports that Cole actually used the term 
“where-got-gone” statement.
wind up To bring to an end, such as the life of a corpo-
ration. The board winds up the life of a corporation 
by following the winding-up provisions of applicable 
statutes, by surrendering the charter, or by following 
bankruptcy proceedings. See also liquidation.
window dressing The attempt to make financial statements 
show operating results, or a financial position, more 
favorable than they would otherwise show.
with recourse See note receivable discounted.
withdrawals Assets distributed to an owner. Partner’s 
drawings. See inventory equation for another context.
withholding Deductions that are taken from salaries or 
wages, usually for income taxes, health insurance, and 
social security and that the employer remits, in the 
employee’s name, to the taxing authority or insurance 
firm.
without recourse See note receivable discounted.
work-in-process; work-in-progress (inventory account) Par-
tially completed product; appears on the balance sheet 
as inventory. SEC Regulation S-X requires that firms 
report inventory amounts for raw material, work-in-
process, and finished goods.
work sheet (program) (1) A computer program designed 
to combine explanations and calculations. This type 
of program helps in preparing financial statements 
and schedules. (2) A tabular schedule for convenient 
summary of adjusting and closing entries. The work 
sheet usually begins with an unadjusted trial balance. 
Adjusting entries appear in the next two columns, one 
for debits and one for credits. The work sheet carries 
the horizontal sum of each line to the right into either 
the income statement or the balance sheet column, as 
appropriate. The plug to equate the income statement 
column totals is, if a debit, the income or, if a credit, 
a loss for the period. That income will close retained 
earnings on the balance sheet. The income statement 
credit columns are the revenues for the period, and 
W
wage Compensation of employees based on time worked 
or output of product for manual labor. But see take-
home pay.
Wages and Salaries Payable A liability account title.
warning signal Tool used to identify quality-control prob-
lems; only signals a problem. Contrast with diagnostic 
signal, which both signals a problem and suggests its 
cause.
warrant A certificate entitling the owner to buy a speci-
fied number of shares at a specified time(s) for a speci-
fied price; differs from a stock option only in that the 
firm grants options to employees and issues warrants 
to the public. Warrants are similar to stock options 
originated on an exchange. See right.
warranty A promise by a seller to correct deficiencies in 
products sold. When the seller gives warranties, proper 
accounting practice recognizes an estimate of war-
ranty expense and an estimated liability at the time of 
sale. See allowance method. See guarantee for contrast 
in proper usage.
Warranty Liability (Provision) Account title in U.S. GAAP 
(IFRS) for the estimated cost to satisfy warranties.
wash sale The sale and purchase of the same or similar 
asset within a short time period. For income tax pur-
poses, the taxpayer may not recognize losses on a sale 
of stock if the taxpayer purchases equivalent stock 
within 30 days before or after the date of sale.
waste Material that is a residue from manufacturing oper-
ations and that has no sale value. Frequently, this has 
negative value because a firm must incur additional 
costs for disposal.
wasting asset A natural resource that diminishes in value 
because of extractions of oil, or ore, or gas, or the 
removal of timber and, hence, is subject to amortiza-
tion, called depletion.
watered stock Shares issued for assets with fair market 
value less than par or stated value. The firm records 
the assets on the books at the overstated values. In the 
law, for shares to be considered watered, the board of 
directors must have acted in bad faith or fraudulently 
in issuing the shares under these circumstances. The 
term originated from a former practice of cattle own-
ers who fed cattle (“stock”) large quantities of salt to 
make them thirsty. The cattle then drank much water 
before their owner took them to market. The owners 
did this to make the cattle appear heavier and more 
valuable than otherwise.
weighted average An average computed by counting each 
occurrence of each value, not merely a single occur-
rence of each value. For example, if a firm purchases 
one unit for $1 and two units for $2 each, then the 
simple average of the purchase prices is $1.50, but the 
weighted average price per unit is $5/3 = $1.67. Con-
trast with moving average.
weighted-average cost of capital Measured as the weighted 
average of the after-tax cost  of long-term debt and the 
cost of equity.
weighted-average inventory method Valuing either with-
drawals or ending inventory at the weighted average 
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

831
Glossary
yield curve The relation between interest rates and the term 
to maturity of loans, or the duration (a technical term 
in financial economics) of bonds and notes. Ordinar-
ily, longer-term loans have higher interest rates than 
shorter-term loans. This is called a normal yield curve. 
Sometimes long-term and short-term rates are approx-
imately the same—a flat yield curve. Sometimes short-
term loans have a higher rate than long-term ones—an 
inverted yield curve. Term structure of interest rates.
yield to maturity At a given time, the internal rate of return 
of a series of cash flows.
yield variance Measures the input-output relation while 
holding the standard mix of inputs constant: (standard 
price multiplied by actual amount of input used in the 
standard mix) – (standard price multiplied by standard 
quantity allowed for the actual output). It is the part 
of the efficiency variance not called the mix variance.
Z
zero-base(d) budgeting (ZBB) One philosophy for setting 
budgets. In preparing an ordinary budget for the next 
period, a manager starts with the budget for the cur-
rent period and makes adjustments as seem necessary 
because of changed conditions for the next period. Since 
most managers like to increase the scope of the activi-
ties managed and since most prices increase most of 
the time, amounts in budgets prepared in the ordinary, 
incremental way seem to increase period after period. 
The authority approving the budget assumes that man-
agers will carry out operations in the same way as in the 
past and that next period’s expenditures will have to be 
at least as large as those of the current period. Thus, this 
authority tends to study only the increments to the cur-
rent period’s budget. In ZBB, the authority questions 
the process for carrying out a program and the entire 
budget for the next period. The authority studies every 
dollar in the budget, not just the dollars incremental to 
the previous period’s amounts. The advocates of ZBB 
claim that in this way, (1) management will more likely 
delete programs or divisions of marginal benefit to the 
business or governmental unit, rather than continuing 
with costs at least as large as the present ones, and (2) 
management may discover and implement alternative, 
more cost-effective ways of carrying out programs. ZBB 
implies questioning the existence of programs and the 
fundamental nature of the way that firms carry them 
out, not merely the amounts used to fund them. Experts 
appear to divide evenly as to whether the middle word 
should be “base” or “based.”
zero coupon bond A debt issue with a single promised cash 
flow on the maturity date; a single-payment note.
the debit columns are the expenses (and revenue con-
tras) that appear on the income statement. “Work 
sheet” also refers to schedules for ascertaining other 
items that appear on the financial statements and that 
require adjustment or compilation.
working capital Current assets minus current liabilities; 
sometimes called net working capital or net current 
assets.
working capital ratio See ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
work(ing) papers The schedules and analyses prepared by 
the auditor in carrying out investigations before issu-
ing an opinion on financial statements.
worth Value. See net worth.
worth–debt ratio Reciprocal of the debt-equity ratio. See 
ratio and Exhibit 7.12.
write down To write off, except that the firm does not 
charge all the asset’s cost to expense or loss; generally 
used for nonrecurring items.
write (writing) off To charge an asset to expense or loss; 
that is, to debit expense (or loss) and credit the asset. 
To derecognize a specific account receivable that the 
holder has decided is uncollectible; the debit is to the 
Allowance for Uncollectibles account.
write-off method For treating uncollectible accounts, 
a method that debits bad debt expense and credits 
accounts receivable of specific customers as the firm 
identifies specific accounts as uncollectible. The firm 
cannot use this method when it can estimate uncol-
lectible amounts and they are significant. See bad debt 
expense, sales contra, estimated uncollectibles, and the 
allowance method for contrast.
write up To increase the recorded cost of an asset with no 
corresponding disbursement of funds; that is, to debit 
asset and credit revenue or, perhaps, owners’ equity; 
seldom done in the United States because currently 
accepted accounting principles await actual transac-
tions before recording asset increases. An exception 
occurs in accounting for marketable equity securities.
writing off See write off.
X
XBRL eXtensible Business Reporting Language. A speci-
fication of information taxonomies and classifications 
used, and required by the SEC, to make information 
retrieval and analysis easier than otherwise.
Y
yield (rate) Internal rate of return of a stream of cash flows. 
Cash yield is cash flow divided by carrying value. See 
also dividend yield.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I n d e x
A
Abandonment of assets, 392
ABO (accumulated benefit obligations), 
471
Accelerated depreciation, 385–6
Accounting conventions and concepts, 
overview of, 24
Accounting equation, 14 
Accounting errors, adjustments for, 
682–4
Accounting estimates, changes in, 683–4
Accounting methods, 24–7
Accounting period convention, 24
Accounting periods, 7, 16, 24
Accounting principles, changes in, 683
Accounting Principles Board (APB) 
Opinions. See APB (Accounting 
Principles Board) Opinions
Accounting Research Bulletins (ARBs)
No. 43 (revision of ARB Nos. 1–42), 
336n, 589n, 591n
No. 45 (long-term construction-type 
contracts), 300n
Accounting standard setting, 21–3. See 
also Generally accepted account-
ing principles (U.S. GAAP); 
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS)
Accounting Standards Codification 
(ASC)
defined, 21
Topic 220 (presentation of compre-
hensive income), 152n
Topic 350-30-50, 387n
Topic 360-10-50, 387n
Topic 820-10 (fair value), 117n
Accounting Standards Updates (ASU)
defined, 21
No. 2011-04 (fair value measure-
ment), 532n
No. 2011-05 (presentation of com-
prehensive income), 152n
No. 2011-08 (testing goodwill for 
impairment), 399n
No. 2012-02 (testing indefinite-lived 
intangible assets for impairment), 
398n
Accounts
balance sheet, 44–6
defined, 43–4, 71
income statement, 71–2
naming, 44
Accounts payable
cash cycle, 344–5
defined, 344
on balance sheet, 45
pro forma financial statement 
 projections, 250
statement of cash flows, 624–5
turnover ratio, 235–6, 344
Accounts receivable
as investment, 5
defined, 5, 281
financial ratios, 291
financial statement presentation, 
289–91
measurement, 118
on balance sheet, 44
pro forma financial statement 
 projections, 249
statement of cash flows, 184, 625
summary of reporting standards, 664
transfers of in exchange for cash, 292
turnover ratio, 229, 291
uncollectible accounts, 281–9
Accounts Receivable, Gross account, 282
Accounts Receivable, Net account, 282
Accrual basis of accounting
defined, 26–7
income recognition, 277, 288
statement of cash flows need, 167–8
vs. cash-basis accounting, 662–3
Accumulated benefit obligations 
(ABO), 471
Accumulated deficit, 124, 584n
Accumulated depreciation, 45, 385, 617–9
Accumulated other comprehensive 
income (AOCI)
defined, 152, 682
on balance sheet, 46
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 251
Acid-test ratio, 233–4
Acquisition cost method, of asset 
 measurement and income recog-
nition, 507
Acquisition costs
defined, 116
inventories recorded at, 335–8
marketable securities and deriva-
tives, 507, 509
measurement, 379–81, 507
treatment over life of long-lived 
asset, 382–8
Acquisition method, for business com-
binations, 556
Addback for depreciation, 619
Additional paid-in capital (APIC)
capital stock issuance, 586
defined, 124
on balance sheet, 46
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 250–1
Adjusting entries, 79–83
Administration, defined, 6
Administrative costs, 149–50
Advances from customers, 46, 294–5, 625
Advances from tenants, 46
Advances to suppliers, 45
Advertising expenses, 72
Affiliates, 623–4
Aggregated amounts, 15
Aging-of-accounts-receivable procedure, 
285–7
AICPA. See American Institute of Cer-
tified Public Accounting (AICPA)
Allowance for doubtful accounts, 285
Allowance for Uncollectibles account, 282
Allowance for Uncollectibles to Accounts 
Receivable, Gross, ratio, 291
Allowance method
defined, 282
for product warranties, 294
for sales returns, 293–4
for uncollectible accounts, 282–5, 664
for warranties, 348
American Institute of Certified Public 
Accounting (AICPA)
Accounting Research Bulletins. See 
Accounting Research Bulletins 
(ARBs)
Accounting Standards Executive 
Committee, Statement of Posi-
tion 937, Reporting on Advertising 
Costs, 126n
Committee on Accounting Proce-
dures, Accounting Research Bul-
letin No. 43, 336n
standard-setting authority, 21
Amortization
defined, 382–3
 
expense, 383, 395
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

834
Index
Bombardier, revenue recognition, 279, 
280–1
Bond indenture, 417
Bonds
accounting for after issuance, 427–31
as investment, 5
callable bonds, 417
cash flow patterns, 421–2
convertible bonds, 417, 596–7, 668
debenture bonds, 417
defined, 5, 417
initial issue price, 422–6
interest rates, 418
par value. See Par value
 
payable, 46, 417, 418
retirement of debt, 432–3
serial bonds, 417
statement of cash flows, 627
summary of reporting standards, 665
terminology, 422
variety of provisions, 417–8
zero coupon bonds, 417
Bonuses. See Stock options
Book basis, 479
Book income, 479–80
Book value, 45. See also Carrying value
Buildings
as investment, 5
asset account, 43
depreciation, 617–9. See also 
Depreciation
on balance sheet, 45
salvage value, 384
Business activities, overview of, 4–6
Business combinations, 555–6
Bylaws, 585
C
Call options, 593
Callable bonds, 417
Callable preferred shares, 587
Capital
additional paid-in capital. See Addi-
tional paid-in capital (APIC)
contributed capital, 124
defined, 585
working capital. See Working capital
Capital contributed in excess of par 
value, 124. See also Additional 
paid-in capital (APIC)
Capital contributions, 583, 584–7
Capital expenditures, 18
Capital lease method, 435–41
defined, 435
lessee’s financial statement effects, 437
lessor’s financial statement effects, 
440–1
old rules, 435–7, 439–40
vs. operating lease method, 437–9
Capital stock, 585
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 248–9
realized assets, 119
recognition of, 114–6, 659–60
 
retirement obligation, 384
return on assets (ROA), 223–4
revaluations of, 393
sales of, 185–8, 391–2
turnover ratio, 226–31
ASU. See Accounting Standards 
Updates (ASU)
Audit opinion, 23
Auditors, 23
Authoritative guidance, 113
Auto dealers, 192
Available-for-sale securities (or finan-
cial assets), 509, 513–5, 533, 667. 
See also Marketable securities
B
Bad Debt Expense account, 283
Bad debt expense-sales revenue ratio, 
291
Balance sheet, 43–70, 111–40
aggregation, 15
analysis of, 16
assets. See Assets
classifications, 15, 112
defined, 8–9
defined benefit plans, 473–4
derivatives, 519–20
dual effect of transactions, 48–50, 
52–3
equation, 14–5, 48–50, 112–3
equity method investments, 553–4
examples, 8, 12, 47–8, 86, 145, 170, 
225, 616
IFRS format, 113
income statement and, 17, 72–3
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 567
journal entries, 53–7
liabilities. See Liabilities
long-term debt, 444
marketable securities and deriva-
tives, 506–8
measurement, 16
preparation, 85
shareholders’ equity measurement 
and disclosure, 46, 124–5, 
583–4
statement of cash flows and, 18
T-accounts, 50–7
terminology, 43–6
U.S. GAAP format, 112–3
Bargain purchase, 556
Basic earnings per share, 685
Benefit element (stock options), 594
Boards of directors, 4, 20
Boise Cascade, 416
Amortization (continued)
held-to-maturity securities, 510
measurement methods, 383–7
of patents, 620
of stock options, 594
periodic depreciation, 387–9
 
schedule, 420–1, 428, 430
treatment of changes in, 388–9
Amortized cost method, intercorporate 
investments in common stock, 567
Amortized costs, 418, 510–2
Annual report to shareholders, 6. See 
also Financial statements
AOCI. See Accumulated other compre-
hensive income (AOCI)
APB (Accounting Principles Board) 
Opinions
No. 6 (status of Accounting 
Research Bulletins), 591n
No. 10 (Omnibus Opinion—1966), 
296n, 299n
No. 14 (convertible debt), 596n
No. 18 (equity method), 548n
No. 29 (accounting for nonmonetary 
transactions), 589n
No. 30 (reporting the results of 
operations), 678n
APIC. See Additional paid-in capital 
(APIC)
Apple, Inc., revenue recognition, 279, 
280, 295
ARBs. See Accounting Research Bul-
letins (ARBs)
Arcelor Mittal, marketable securities 
acquisitions, 506
ASC. See Accounting Standards Codifi-
cation (ASC)
Asset recognition, 114–6, 659–60
Assets
abandonment of, 392
balance sheet accounts, 44–5
current assets. See Current assets
defined, 9, 44, 114, 659–60
depreciation of. See Depreciation
equality of assets and liabilities plus 
shareholders’ equity equation, 
14–5
fair value. See Fair value
financial assets. See Financial assets
impairments. See Impairment loss
intangible assets. See Intangible 
assets
liabilities to assets ratio, 236
long-lived assets. See Long-lived 
assets
measurement, 116–20
net assets, 46
noncurrent assets. See Noncurrent 
assets
operating assets, 328, 375
prepaid assets, 328
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

835
Index
Consistency, 658–9
Consolidated Edison (ConEd), held-to-
maturity investments, 510–1
Consolidated financial statements
consolidated net income, 561–2
defined, 554
disclosure of consolidation 
policy, 564
intercompany eliminations, 559–61
investments subsequent to date of 
acquisition, 558
limitations, 565
noncontrolling interest, 562
preparation at date of acquisition, 
557–8
preparation subsequent to date of 
acquisition, 559
purpose, 555
recording acquisition, 556–7
Consolidation policy, 564
Consolidation work sheet, 556–7
Construction in Progress (or Process) 
account, 300
Constructive capitalization, 442
Constructive retirement method, trea-
sury stock repurchases and reissu-
ances, 591–2
Contingent obligations or provisions, 
466–7, 660
Contra accounts, 51n, 81
Contracts
capital stock contracts, 585
forward commodity contracts, 519
forward foreign exchange contracts, 
518, 519
interest rate swaps. See Interest rate 
swap contracts
multiple deliverable contracts, 
280, 661
mutually unexecuted (executory) 
contracts, 122, 466, 660
Contractual limits on dividends, 588
Contractual rights, as investment, 5
Contributed capital, 124
Control, 554. See also Majority, active 
investments
Control (controlling) accounts, 283
Convergence, FASB and IASB stan-
dards, 23
Convertible bonds, 417, 596–7, 668
Convertible preferred stock, 587, 596–7
Corporate bylaws, 585
Corporate charters, 585
Corporations
advantages of business form, 584–5
business activities, 4–6
distributions. See Distributions
investments. See Intercorporate 
investments in common stock
Correcting entries, 82
Corrections of errors, 683
interest rate swap designated as, 
526–30
summary of accounting for, 530
Cash flow statement. See Statement of 
cash flows
Cash-generating unit, 399, 400
Central vs. peripheral activities, 
677–81
Changes
accounting principles, 683
estimates, 683–4
periodic depreciation and amortiza-
tion, 388–9
service life, 388–9
Charges (debits), 51–2, 54
Charters, 585
Chrysler Corporation, bond issuance, 
421–2, 423
Citigroup, intercorporate investments in 
common stock, 547, 548
Closing process, 84–5
Coca-Cola Company, intercorporate 
investments in common stock, 
547, 548–9
Commercial substance, 392n
Committee on Accounting Procedures, 
Accounting Research Bulletins. 
See Accounting Research Bulle-
tins (ARBs)
Common stock (common shares)
as investment, 5
debt securities converted to, 630
defined, 585
dividends, 589, 590
intercorporate investments. See 
Intercorporate investments in 
common stock
issuance, 585–6
par value, 124
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 250–1
repurchases, 590–3, 661
shareholders’ equity account, 46
splits, 589–90
Common-size balance sheets, 239, 
240–1
Common-size financial statements, 
239–43
Common-size income statements, 
227–8, 239
Comparability, 22, 658–9
Completed contract method, 302–3
Comprehensive income, 151–2, 662. See 
also Accumulated other compre-
hensive income (AOCI); Other 
comprehensive income (OCI)
Concepts Statements. See Statements of 
Financial Accounting Concepts
Conceptual framework, 21–2
Conditional obligations, 661
Conservatism, 120
Capital stock contracts, 585
Carrying value
changes to reflect fair value, 682
defined, 45
disclosures of, 433
of loan, 419–20
Cash
accounts receivable transfers 
for, 292
as investment, 5
balance sheet accounts, 43
collection uncertainty, 296–9
defined, 328
flow of. See Cash flow
measurement, 118
on statement of cash flows, 168
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 249
receipt of, 280
stock issue for, 586
Cash basis of accounting, 25–6, 27
Cash change equation, 174–5
Cash (earnings or operating) cycle, 12, 
234, 344–5
Cash dividends, 588–9
Cash equivalents, 168, 328
Cash flow
bonds, 421–2
classification ambiguities, 171–2
defined, 168
from financing activities, 171, 190–1
from investing activities, 169, 190–1
from operations. See Cash flow from 
operations
hedges. See Cash flow hedges
net income and, 167–8, 173–4, 632
present value of future cash 
flows, 418
statement of. See Statement of 
cash flows
types of, 169–71
Cash flow from financing activities, 
171, 190–1
Cash flow from investing activities, 169, 
190–1
Cash flow from operations
defined, 169
financial ratios, 234, 237
net income and, 632
on statement of cash flows, 17–8
relationship with other cash flows, 
190–1
Cash flow from operations to current 
liabilities ratio, 234
Cash flow from operations to total 
liabilities ratio, 237
Cash flow hedges
defined, 520
disclosures about, 531
fair value option, 533
gains and losses, 521
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

836
Index
examples, 517–9
fair value option, 532–3
hedge designation, 520–30
on balance sheet, 519–20
statement of cash flows impact, 633–4
summary of accounting for, 530–1
summary of reporting standards, 667
terminology, 519
Diffuse ownership, 548n
Diluted earnings per share, 685
Direct labor, 330
Direct materials, 329
Direct method for creating cash flow 
statement, 85, 173–4, 179–83, 
631–2
Direct response marketing costs, 126n
Direct write-off method, 284n
Disaggregated data, 43–4
Disclosures
carrying value, 433
cash flow hedges, 531
consolidated financial statements, 564
derivatives, 531–2
fair value, 433
fair value hedges, 531
financial statement notes, 22
income, 674–84
marketable securities, 515–7
segment disclosure, 686–9
transactions in statement of cash 
flows, 191–2
Discontinued operations, 679–81
Discount to face value, 424
Disposal of long-lived assets, 391–2, 623
Distributions, 587–98
defined, 583
dividends. See Dividends
option arrangements, 593–7
stock repurchases, 590–3
stock splits, 589–90
Dividends
corporate financial policy and, 588
defined, 5
 
in kind, 589
legal limits, 588
recording procedures, 75
shareholders’ rights, 587
statement of cash flows, 627
types, 588–9
Double-declining balance method, 
385–6
Doubtful accounts, allowance for, 285
Dual effect of transactions, 48–50, 52–3, 
76–8
DuPont Decomposition Analysis, 226–31
E
Earnings. See also Net income
defined, 16, 141
price-earnings ratio, 685
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 250
product warranties, 347–8
restructuring, 349–50
short-term notes payable, 345
wages and salaries payable, 346
Current market interest rate, 418, 
420, 422
Current ratio, 233, 327, 354
Current replacement cost, 116
Customers, advances from, 46, 
294–5, 625
D
Days accounts receivable outstanding, 
229, 291
Debenture bonds, 417
Debits, 51–2, 54
Debt 
 
covenants, 465
 
markets, 417–8
 
ratios, 236–7, 415–6
 
retirement, 432–3, 627
 
securities, conversion to common 
stock, 630. See also Bonds
 
securities held to maturity, 509, 
533, 667. See also Marketable 
securities
 
service payments, 421n
Debt-equity ratio, 236, 415–6
Declining-balance method, 385
Deferred 
 
compensation, 469
 
gross margin, 296n
 
income taxes, 46, 621–2
 
performance obligations, 294–5
 
Revenues, 294–5
 
tax asset valuation 
allowance, 484
 
tax assets, 480, 485
 
tax liabilities, 480, 485
Defined benefit plans, 470, 471–4
Defined contribution plans, 470
Definite service life, asset impairment 
procedures for assets with, 396–7
Dell Inc., cash flow, 345
Depreciation
asset measurement and, 119
defined, 382–3
 
expense, 383, 395
measurement methods, 383–7
of buildings and equipment, 617–9
on balance sheet, 45
periodic depreciation, 387–9
treatment of changes in, 388–9
Derivatives
asset measurement and income rec-
ognition issues, 506–8
defined, 518
disclosures about, 531–2
Cost constraints, defined, 659
Cost flow. See Flow of costs
Cost method, treasury stock repur-
chases and reissuances, 591–2
Cost of goods sold
calculation using different inventory 
valuation bases, 336–7
defined, 17, 72, 143, 331
 
percentage, 342–3
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 247
Cost of sales, 17
Cost of services, 72, 143
Cost recovery method, 298–9
Costco Wholesale Corporation, revenue 
recognition, 278, 295
Costs
acquisition costs. See Acquisition 
costs
administrative costs, 149–50
amortized costs, 418, 510–2
current replacement cost, 116
direct response marketing costs, 126n
flow. See Flow of costs
interest costs, 380, 471–2
joint costs, 383
manufacturing costs, 330
opportunity cost, 117
prior service costs, 473
product costs, 149, 330, 619
replacement costs, 336
service costs, 471
Counterparties, 519
Coupon interest rate, 421
Coupon payments, excess over interest 
expense, 622–3
Coupon rate, 422
Credit, 51–2, 54
Credit card payments, 278n
Credit change, defined, 614n
Creditors, 5
Cross-section analysis, 242–3
Cumulative dividend rights, 587
Current amount, 16
Current assets
balance sheet account, 44
cash. See Cash
cash equivalents, 328
defined, 15, 47, 112
inventories. See Inventories
marketable securities. See Market-
able securities
prepayments, 328
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 249
Current liabilities
accounts payable. See Accounts 
payable
defined, 15, 47, 112
income taxes payable, 347
interest payable, 345–6
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

837
Index
FASB. See Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Board (FASB)
FIFO (first-in, first-out)
conversion of LIFO to, 352–4
defined, 340
vs. other cost-flow assumptions, 
341, 355
Finance lease method. See Capital lease 
method
Financial accounting, defined, 3
Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB)
Accounting Standards Codification 
(ASC). See Accounting Standards 
Codification (ASC)
Accounting Standards Updates 
(ASU). See Accounting Standards 
Updates (ASU)
conceptual framework for standard-
setting decision, 21–2, 657–63
Interpretation No. 35 (applying 
equity method for investments in 
common stock), 549n
Interpretation No. 46R (consolida-
tion of variable interest entities), 
565n
joint revenue recognition project 
with IASB, 305–6
leases, 434–5, 439, 441
role of, 21
Statements of Financial Account-
ing Concepts. See Statements of 
Financial Accounting Concepts
Statements of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS). See State-
ments of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS)
Financial accounting systems. See Gen-
erally accepted accounting princi-
ples (U.S. GAAP); International 
Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS)
Financial assets
 
at fair value through profit or loss, 
509, 512–3, 532, 667. See also 
Marketable securities
classification of, 533–4
defined, 328, 375
measurement, 118
Financial instruments, 418
Financial leverage, 223–4, 231
Financial liabilities, 123, 328
Financial ratios
accounts receivable, 291
defined, 222
firm performance analysis using, 
239–43
inventory, 342–3
limitations of, 238–9
long-term borrowing, 415–6
long-term liquidity risk, 236–8
classification on income statement, 17
defined, 17, 141, 662
depreciation, 383, 395
expenditures treated as, 376–9
income tax. See Income tax expense
interest. See Interest expense
measurement, 150–1
operating, 143, 246–8
period expenses, 149–50, 330
recognition of, 149–50, 167–8, 
278, 662
recording procedures, 75
reporting on income statement, 
143–4
research and development. See 
Research and development 
(R&D) expenses
selling, general, and administrative 
(SG&A), 17, 72, 248
Extraordinary gains and losses, 681
F
Face value, 421, 422, 424–5
Fair value
defined, 117, 418, 422
derivatives, 507–8, 520
disclosures of, 433
hedges. See Fair value hedges
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 567
long-lived assets, 378, 392–4
marketable securities, 507–8
measurement option. See Fair 
value option
remeasurement of investments in 
statement of cash flows, 629
remeasurement of marketable equity 
to in statement of cash flows, 
628–9
stock options, 594
unrealized vs. realized gains and 
losses from changes in, 681–2
Fair value hedges
defined, 520
disclosures about, 531
fair value, 532
gains and losses, 521
interest rate swap designated as, 
521–6
of recognized asset or liability, 
521–6
summary of accounting for, 526
Fair value option
defined, 418
derivatives, 532–3
implications of measuring financial 
assets and liabilities at, 433–4
marketable securities, 532–3
statement of cash flows impact, 633–4
Faithful representation, 658
retained earnings. See Retained 
earnings
shareholders’ equity changes result-
ing from, 583
statement. See Income statement
Earnings (cash or operating) cycle, 12, 
234, 344–5
Earnings per share (EPS), 684–9
Economic entity, defined, 554
Effective interest method, 420–1, 
427–31, 665
Effective tax rate, 479
Emerging Issues Task Force, Issue No. 
08-1 (revenue arrangements with 
multiple deliverables), 280n
Employee stock options (ESOs), 593–5, 
620, 668
Entity, reporting, 663
Entry value, 116
EPS (earnings per share), 684–9
Equipment
acquisition of, 626
as investment, 5
balance sheet account, 43
depreciation, 617–9. See also 
Depreciation
disposal of, 623
on balance sheet, 45
sales of, 185–8
Equity, defined, 415n. See also Share-
holders’ equity
Equity method, 549–54, 562, 567
Equity method investments, 549
Equity securities. See Marketable 
securities
Errors, adjustments for, 682–4
ESOs (employee stock options), 593–5, 
620, 668
Estimates, changes in, 683–4
Excess purchase price, on acquisition of 
equity method investment, 552
Executory contracts, 122, 466, 660
Exercise date, 594
Exercise price, 593, 594
Exit value, 117
Expected holding period, 548
Expenditures
additional expenditures to maintain 
or improve long-lived assets, 
389–90
treatment as assets vs. expenses, 
376–9
Expense recognition
conditions, 662
criteria, 149
defined, 278
period expenses, 149–50
product costs, 149
timing of, 149, 167–8
Expenses
advertising, 72
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

838
Index
fair value option. See Fair value 
option
financial statement presentation, 7
holding gain, 383n
income measurement, 677
income statement format, 142
income tax expenses, 480–1, 484
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 548–9, 554
interest costs during construction, 
380
inventory, 335–8
lease accounting, 438
long-lived assets, 375, 378, 379
marketable securities, 509–17
multiple deliverable contracts, 280
off-balance-sheet financing, 467–8
other comprehensive income, 682
patent costs, 45
periodic depreciation and amortiza-
tion, 387
reporting periods, 7
research and development costs, 377
restructuring liabilities, 349
retirement benefits, 469–71, 473, 
474, 475
revenue recognition, 146, 300, 302, 
304–5
sales returns, 293
segment disclosure, 686
stock rights, 595
summary of, 663–74
trade-in transactions, 392
treasury stock, 591
unrealized gains and losses form 
changes in fair value, 682
variable interest entities, 565–6
vs. IFRS, 670
warranty liabilities, 348
Goals, 4–5
Going concerns, 119
Goldman Sachs, marketable securities 
acquisitions, 505, 508
Goodwill
acquisition method, 556
defined, 378, 556
impairment loss, 393, 398–401
on balance sheet, 45
summary of reporting standards, 665
Governing boards, 4, 20
Grant date, 593
Gross margin (gross profit), 143, 296
Gross margin percentage, 296
Guarantees, 467
H
Health insurance, 469, 475
Hedge accounting, 520–30
classification of derivatives, 520
defined, 520
Fixed assets, 376, 664. See also 
Long-lived assets
Fixed interest rates, 418
Fixed-asset turnover ratio, 230–1, 376
Floor plan financing, 192
Flow of costs
assumptions for inventory, 338–41, 
351–5
defined, 330
diagram, 331
manufacturing firms, 332
Ford Motor Company, bond issuance, 
421, 422–3
Foreign private issuers, 21, 22–3
Forward commodity contracts, 519. See 
also Derivatives
Forward foreign exchange contracts, 
518, 519. See also Derivatives
Free cash flow, 172–3
Functional factors, 384
Funded status on balance sheet, 473–4
Furniture and fixtures, 45
G
Gains
defined, 146
extraordinary gains, 681
hedges, 521
holding gains, 336, 383
on equipment sales, 188
recognition of, 662
unrealized gains, 507–8, 681–2
General ledger, posting to, 54n
General Motors, bond issuance, 422, 
423–4
Generally accepted accounting prin-
ciples (U.S. GAAP)
Accounting Standards Codification 
(ASC). See Accounting Standards 
Codification (ASC)
acquisition cost measurement, 379
adjustments for errors and account-
ing changes, 682–4
asset impairment procedures, 
396–401
balance sheet format, 112–3
balance sheet measurement, 16
business combinations, 556
cash flows classification, 171
comprehensive income, 151–2
convertible securities, 596–7
defined, 3n, 21
derivatives, 520–1, 531
discontinued operations, 680
expenditures to maintain or improve 
long-lived assets, 389–90
expenses, 143
Extraordinary Gains and 
Losses, 681
fair value of long-lived assets, 393–4
Financial ratios (continued)
profitability, 222–31
short-term liquidity risk, 232–6
summary of, 244
Financial reporting
conceptual framework for standard-
setting decision, 21–2, 657–63
conventions, 7
defined, 3
depreciation and amortization 
method, 386–7
financial statements. See Financial 
statements
objectives, 657–8
process, 20–3
qualitative characteristics of infor-
mation, 658–9
summary of standards and concepts, 
663–74
Financial statement analysis, 219–74
income tax expense, 485–6
introduction, 219–20
limitations of, 238–9
objectives, 220–2
profitability analysis, 222–32
retirement benefits, 475–7
risk analysis, 232–8
Financial statements
accounts receivable, 289–91
analysis of. See Financial statement 
analysis
balance sheet. See Balance sheet
business activities relating to, 4–6
financial reporting conventions, 7
income statement. See Income 
statement
leases, 442–3
long-lived assets, 394–5
notes to. See Notes to financial 
statements
overview of, 6–7
preparation, 7, 83–7
pro forma financial statements, 
245–54
statement of cash flows. See State-
ment of cash flows
statement of shareholders’ equity. 
See Statement of shareholders’ 
equity
user responsibilities, 23
Financing, defined, 5
Financing activities
cash flows from, 171, 190–1
on statement of cash flows, 18, 171, 
628–30
Financing structure, 112
Finished goods inventory, 45, 331
Finite life, 382
First-in, first-out (FIFO). See FIFO 
(first-in, first-out)
Fiscal year, 7
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

839
Index
minority, active investments, 548–54
purpose of, 548–9
statement of cash flows impact, 634
summary of reporting standards, 668
variable interest entities, 565–6
Interest, defined, 421n
Interest costs, defined benefit plans, 
471–2
Interest costs during construction, 380
Interest coverage ratio, 237–8
Interest expense
defined, 72
effective interest method, 427–31
excess of coupon payments over, 
622–3
long-term debt, 444
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 251
Interest income, 72
Interest payable, 46, 345–6
Interest rate swap contracts. See also 
Derivatives
cash flow hedge designation, 526–30
example of, 506
fair value hedge designation, 521–6
purpose of, 518
Interest rates
bonds, 418
coupon interest rate, 421
current market interest rate, 418, 
420, 422
fixed interest rates, 418
historical market interest rate, 418, 
420, 422, 433
market interest rate, 418
variable interest rates, 418
Interest receivable, 45
Interim reports, 6n, 24
Internal audits, 23n
Internal rate of return, 418
International Accounting Standard (IAS)
No. 1 (financial statements), 141n, 
585n, 678n, 682n
No. 2 (inventories), 330n, 336n
No. 3 (business combinations), 377n, 
378n, 556n, 562n, 586n
No. 5 (noncurrent assets), 680n
No. 7 (statement of cash flows), 168n
No. 8 (accounting policies), 683n
No. 9 (financial instruments), 
533–4, 549n
No. 10 (consolidated financial state-
ments), 468n, 549n, 554n, 566n
No. 12 (income taxes), 480n
No. 13 (fair value measurement), 
433–4, 532n
No. 16 (property, plant, and equip-
ment), 384n, 387n, 388n, 392n, 
393n
No. 17 (leases), 435n
No. 18 (revenue), 304n
display, 142–5
dual effect of transactions, 76–8
examples, 13, 72–3, 141–2, 144, 
226, 615
expenses. See Expenses
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 567
journal entries, 76–8
long-lived assets, 395
marketable securities and deriva-
tives, 506–8
preparation, 83–5
purpose, 74, 141
recording of revenues, expenses, and 
dividends, 74–83
revenues. See Revenues
statement of cash flows and, 18, 
167–8
terminology, 71–2, 141–2
types of, 72
Income tax
deductions, 620
deferred, 46, 621–2
Income tax expense
calculation, 143, 479–80
defined, 72, 480
financial reporting requirements, 484
financial statement analysis, 485–6
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 251
temporary differences, 480–1
Income taxes payable
calculation, 480
defined, 347
on balance sheet, 46
summary of reporting standards, 666
Indefinite life, 382, 397–8
Independent auditors, 23
Indirect method for creating cash flow 
statement, 86, 173–4, 183–4, 631–2
Initial yield to maturity, 422
In-process research and development 
(IPR&D), 378
Installment method, 296–8, 299
Intangible assets. See also Long-lived 
assets
asset impairment procedures, 397–8
defined, 375
patents, 5, 45, 620
pro forma financial statement 
 projections, 249
summary of reporting standards, 664
Intel, debt ratios, 416
Intercompany transactions, 559–61
Intercorporate investments in common 
stock, 547–81
accounting summary, 566–7
examples, 547
expected holding period, 548
majority, active investments, 549, 
554–65
interest rate swaps designated as 
cash value hedge, 526–30
interest rate swaps designated as fair 
value hedge, 521–6
treatment of gains and losses, 521
Hedging, 518. See also Derivatives
Held-to-maturity investments, 509–12, 
533, 667. See also Marketable 
securities
Historical 
 
amount, 16
 
costs. See Acquisition costs
 
market interest rate, 418, 420, 422, 
433
Holding gains, 336, 383
Hybrid securities, 661
I
IAS. See International Accounting Stan-
dard (IAS)
IASB. See International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB)
IBM, expenditures treated as assets vs. 
expenses, 377
IFRS. See International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS)
Impaired inventory, 336
Impairment loss
asset measurement and, 119
defined, 393–4
goodwill, 393, 398–401
held-to-maturity securities, 511
income statement presentation, 395
measurement and recognition of, 
393–4, 396–401
on land, 396–7, 620–1
Implicit interest rate, 418
Improvements, 390
In-the-money stock options, 594
Income
before income taxes, 143
from continuing operations, 143–4, 
678–9
from discontinued operations, 143–4, 
679–81
gains and losses from discontinued 
operations, 679–81
measurement of, 677–8
recognition of. See Revenue 
recognition
reporting of, 674–84
Income statement, 71–110, 141–66
adjusting entries, 79–83
balance sheet and, 17, 73–4
classification of earnings, 678–81
closing process, 84–5
components of, 16–7
comprehensive income, 151–2
defined, 16
defined benefit plans, 474
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

840
Index
Investing activities
cash flows from, 18, 169, 190–1
defined, 5–6
Investment in Subsidiary account, 562
Investments in affiliates, 549
Investments in associates, 549
Investments in securities
defined, 508, 548
issued by other entities. See 
 Intercorporate investments in 
common stock
measurement, 118
on balance sheet, 45, 508
IPR&D (in-process research and devel-
opment), 378
J
Joint costs, 383
Joint ventures, 466
Journal entries
adjusting entries, 79–83
correcting entries, 82
from balance sheet accounts, 53–7
from income statement accounts, 
76–8
retirement benefit obligation 
changes, 477–9
L
Land
as investment, 5
impairment loss, 396–7, 620–1
on balance sheet, 45
Last-in, first-out (LIFO). See LIFO 
(last-in, first-out)
Leases
financial statement disclosure, 442–3
operating vs. capital lease methods, 
434–42
summary of reporting standards, 
665–6
Lessees, 437–9
Lessors, 439–41
Leverage, financial, 223–4, 231
Liabilities, 465–504
balance sheet accounts, 45–6
bonds. See Bonds
current liabilities. See Current 
liabilities
defined, 9–10, 44, 121, 660–1
equality of assets and liabilities 
plus shareholders’ equity equa-
tion, 14–5
financial liabilities, 123, 328
income tax expense. See Income 
tax expense
leases, 434–43, 665–6
measurement, 123–4
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 548–9, 554–5
interest costs during construction, 380
inventory, 335–8
lease accounting, 438–9
long-lived assets, 375, 378, 379
marketable securities, 509–17
off-balance-sheet financing, 467–8
other comprehensive income, 682
patent costs, 45
periodic depreciation and amortiza-
tion, 387
reporting periods, 7
research and development costs, 377
restructuring liabilities, 349
retirement benefits, 469–71, 473, 
474, 475
revenue recognition, 146, 300, 303, 
304–5
sales returns, 293
segment disclosure, 686
stock rights, 595
summary of, 663–74
trade-in transactions, 392
treasury stock, 591
unrealized gains and losses from 
changes in fair value, 682
variable interest entities, 565–6
vs. U.S. GAAP, 670
warranty liabilities, 348
International Financial Reporting Stan-
dards (IFRS), specific standards
No. 2 (share-based payment), 593n
No. 7 (financial instruments: disclo-
sures), 433n, 515n
No. 8 (operating segments), 686n
No. 13 (fair value measurement), 
117n
Intrinsic value, 593
Inventories
analysis of, 342–3
as investment, 5
cost-flow assumptions, 338–41, 
351–5
costs included in, 329–35
defined, 329
equation, 329
on balance sheet, 45, 330
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 249
remeasurement, 338
statement of cash flow, 625–6
summary of reporting standards, 664
valuation subsequent to acquisition, 
335–8
Inventory turnover ratio
cost of goods sold differences 
and, 341
defined, 229–30, 342–3
under LIFO, 354
International Accounting Standard (IAS) 
(continued)
No. 19 (employee benefits), 469n, 473n
No. 23 (borrowing costs), 380n
No. 28 (investments in associates), 
548n, 549n
No. 32 (financial instruments), 591n, 
596n, 597n
No. 33 (earnings per share), 684n, 
685n
No. 36 (impairments), 393n
No. 37 (provisions, contingent assets, 
and contingent liabilities), 349n
No. 38 (intangible assets), 377n, 
387n, 393n
No. 39 (recognition and measure-
ment), 418n, 433n, 442n, 468n, 
508n, 515n, 518n, 532n, 549n
International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB)
conceptual framework for standard-
setting decision, 22–3, 657–63
Framework for the Preparation and 
Presentation of Financial State-
ments, 114n
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS). See Interna-
tional Financial Reporting Stan-
dards (IFRS)
joint revenue recognition project 
with FASB, 305–6
leases, 434–5, 439, 441
role of, 22
International Financial Reporting Stan-
dards (IFRS)
acquisition cost measurement, 379
adjustments for errors and account-
ing changes, 682–4
asset impairment procedures, 396–401
balance sheet format, 113
balance sheet measurement, 16
business combinations, 556
cash flows classification, 171
comprehensive income, 151–2
convertible securities, 597
cost-flow assumptions, 340
defined, 22
derivatives, 520–1, 531
discontinued operations, 680
expenditures to maintain or improve 
long-lived assets, 389–90
expenses, 143
fair value of long-lived assets, 393–4
fair value option. See Fair 
value option
financial statement presentation, 7
holding gain, 383n
income measurement, 677
income statement format, 142
income tax expenses, 480–1, 484
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

841
Index
preferred stock. See Preferred stock 
(preferred shares)
reclassification of, 515
remeasurement to fair value on 
statement of cash flows, 515–7
summary of reporting standards, 667
Marketing, 6
Matching convention, 26, 149
Materiality, 24, 659
Maturity, retirement before, 432–3
Maturity value, of bonds, 421, 422
MD&A (Management’s Discussion and 
Analysis), 6
Merchandise inventory, 45. See also 
Inventories
Merchandising firms, 329
Merck
acquisition cost measurement, 380
acquisition cost treatment over life 
of long-lived asset, 383
expenditures treated as assets vs. 
expenses, 377
Microsoft Corporation, intercorporate 
investments in common stock, 
547, 548
Minority, active investments, 548–54
Minority, passive investments, 548
Minority (noncontrolling) interest, 
251, 562
Mitchells & Butlers Plc., revenue recog-
nition, 279–80
Monetary amount, 7
Mortgage payable, 46
Multiple deliverable contracts, 280, 661
Mutually unexecuted (executory) con-
tracts, 122, 466, 660
N
Natural business year, 24
Negative cash flow, 345
Nestlé, 337, 505
Net assets, 46
Net book value, 45
Net defined benefit liability (asset), 473
Net income
calculation, 74
cash flow from operations and, 
167–8, 173–4, 632
components, 662
consolidated financial statements, 
561–2
defined, 16–7, 141
statement of cash flows work 
sheet, 615
unrealized gains and losses in, 507
vs. comprehensive income, 151–2
Net loss, 17, 141
Net realizable value, 116–7
Net settlement, 519
notes. See Notes
pro forma financial statement 
 projections, 250
retirement, 627
Long-term debt ratio, 236, 415
Long-term liabilities, pro forma finan-
cial statement projections, 250
Long-term liquidity risk, 236–8
Loss contingencies or provisions, 467
Losses
defined, 146
extraordinary losses, 681
hedges, 521
impairment. See Impairment loss
marketable equity securities sale, 621
net loss, 17, 141
on equipment sales, 186–8
recognition of, 662
unrealized losses, 507–8, 681–2
Louisiana-Pacific Corporation, execu-
tory contracts, 466, 467
Lower-of-cost-or-market basis, 336
M
Maintenance, 390
Majority, active investments
consolidated financial statements. 
See Consolidated financial 
statements
defined, 549
purchase transaction, 555–6
reasons for legally separate corpora-
tions, 555
U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS approach, 554
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
(MD&A), 6
Managers and management, 4n, 20
Manufacturing costs, 330
Manufacturing firms, 329–35
Manufacturing overhead, 330
Market interest rate, 418
Market participant perspective, 117
Market price, 594
Market value, of inventory, 336–8. See 
also Fair value
Marketable securities
acquisitions, 505–6, 508
asset measurement and income rec-
ognition issues, 506–8
bonds. See Bonds
classification of, 509, 533–4
common stock. See Common stock 
(common shares)
defined, 505, 548
disclosures about, 515–7
fair value option, 532–3
loss on sale of, 621
measurement of, 509–12
on balance sheet, 44
noncurrent liabilities. See Noncur-
rent liabilities
nonfinancial liabilities, 123, 660
notes. See Notes
off-balance-sheet financing, 465–9
operating liabilities, 328
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 250–1
recognition of, 121–3, 660–1
restructuring liabilities, 349–50
retirement benefits, 469–79
warranties, 347–8, 626
Liabilities to assets ratio, 236
Licenses, as investment, 5
LIFO (last-in, first-out)
conformity rule, 340n
conversion to FIFO, 352–4
current ratio under, 354
defined, 340–1
financial statement effects, 351–5
 
inventory layer, 351–2
 
inventory turnover ratio under, 354
 
liquidation, 351–2
 
reserve, 352
vs. other cost-flow assumptions, 
341, 355
Limited liability, 584
 
companies (LLCs), 584n
 
partnerships (LLPs), 584n
Liquidity
defined, 232, 327
long-term risk, 236–8
operations impact, 190
short-term risk, 232–6
Long-lived assets, 375–414
characteristics, 375–6
definitions, 375
disposal of, 391–2
expenditures, 376–9
fair value changes, 392–4
financial statement presentation, 
394–5
impact on new information about, 
388–92
impairments. See Impairment loss
measurement at acquisition cost, 
379–81
treatment of acquisition cost over 
life of, 382–8
Long-term contracts, revenue recogni-
tion, 280–1, 299–303
Long-term creditors, 5
Long-term debt
balance sheet presentation, 444
bonds. See Bonds
debt ratios, 236, 415–6
disclosures of, 433
interest expense computation, 444
leases. See Leases
markets for, 417–8
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

842
Index
Prepaid 
 
assets, 328, 624
 
insurance, 45
 
rent, 45
Prepayments, 328, 624
Present value 
 
of defined benefit obligation, 471
 
of future cash flows, 418
 
of future net cash flows, 117–8
Price appreciation or depreciation, 221
Price-earnings ratio, 685
Primary beneficiary, 566
Principal, 421, 422
Prior service costs, 473
Pro forma financial statements, 245–54
defined, 245
example, 253–4
preparation steps, 246–52
Probable, defined, 122, 661
Product 
 
costs, 149, 330, 619
 
life cycle, 633
 
warranties. See Warranties
Production, 6
Profit and loss statement (P&L). See 
Income statement
Profit and profitability. See also 
Net income
before income taxes, 143
defined, 16, 141, 222
DuPont Decomposition Analysis, 
226–31
financial statement’s role in assess-
ment, 221–2
return on assets (ROA), 223–4
return on equity (ROE), 222–4
Profit margin ratio, 226–8
Progress payments, 299
Projected benefit obligations 
(PBO), 471
Property, plant, and equipment (PPE), 
249, 664
 
Gross account, 387
 
Net account, 387–8
Property dividends, 589
Proprietorships, 5n
Provision for Bad Debts account, 283
Provision for Uncollectible Accounts 
account, 283
Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB), 23
Publicly traded firms, 5
Purchase method, 556
Purchasing, 6
Put options (bond), 418
Q
Qualitative characteristics, 658–9
Quick ratio, 233–4
 
lease method, 435, 437–42
 
leases, 435, 466
 
liabilities, 328
 
profit, 84, 143, 679
 
segments, 686–9
Opportunity cost, 117
Option arrangements, 593–7
Other comprehensive income (OCI)
defined, 151–2
equity method investments, 551–2
unrealized gains and losses in, 507, 682
Out-of-the-money stock options, 594
Owners’ equity. See Retained earnings; 
Shareholders’ equity
P
Paid-in capital, 124
Par value
bonds issued at, 422n, 425, 427
bonds issued at less than, 425–6, 427
bonds issued at more than, 426, 
429–30
defined, 124, 586
Parent (P), 549, 554
Partnerships, 5n
Patents, 5, 45, 620
PBO (projected benefit obligations), 471
PCAOB (Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board), 23
Pensions. See Retirement benefits
Percentage-of-completion method, 
300–2, 303
Percentage-of-sales procedure, 285–7
Performance, accounting methods for, 
24–7
Period expenses, 149–50, 330
Periodic depreciation and amortization, 
387–8
Periodic inventory method, 329n, 339n
Peripheral vs. central activities, 677–81
Permanent accounts, 44, 71
Permanent differences, 480
Perpetual inventory method, 329n, 339n
Physical factors, 384
P&L (profit and loss statement). See 
Income statement
Pol Roget Vineyards, revenue recogni-
tion, 278
Posting, 54n, 78
PPE (property, plant, and equipment), 
249, 664
Preferred stock (preferred shares)
defined, 587
on balance sheet, 46
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 250
shareholders’ rights, 587
statement of cash flows, 627
Premium to face value, 424
Nike, available-for-sale securities, 513–5
Nominal value, 124
Non-cash transactions, 173, 175, 628–30
Noncontrolling interest, 251, 562
Noncurrent assets
defined, 15, 47, 112
investments in securities. See Invest-
ments in securities
net income adjustments, 632
Noncurrent liabilities
defined, 15, 47, 112
net income adjustments, 632
Nonfinancial assets, 118
Nonfinancial liabilities, 123, 660
Nonmonetary transactions, 173, 175
Non-operating expenses, pro forma 
financial statement projections, 
248
Non-operating income, 679
Nonrecurring vs. recurring activities, 
677–81
Non-U.S. issuers, 21, 22–3
Non-U.S. SEC registrants, 21, 22–3
No-par shares, 586n
Notes
defined, 417
initial valuation, 419
measurement subsequent to date of 
initial loan, 419–20
summary of reporting standards, 665
Notes payable
accounting measurement, 418
defined, 345, 417
on balance sheet, 45–6
Notes receivable, 45
Notes to financial statements
consolidation policy, 564
defined, 19
disclosure in, 22
leases, 442–3
retirement benefits, 475–7
Notional amounts, 519
O
Obligating event, 121, 660
OCI. See Other comprehensive income 
(OCI)
Off-balance-sheet financing, 465–9
One-line consolidation, 562
Operating activities
 
assets, 328, 375
cash flows from, 17–8, 169, 190–1. 
See also Cash flow from 
operations
  cash or earnings cycle, 112, 234, 
344–5
defined, 6
 
expenses, 143, 246–8
 
income, 84, 143, 679
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

843
Index
investments in. See Investments in 
securities
marketable securities. See Market-
able securities
trading securities, 509, 512–3, 
532, 667
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC)
10-K form, 24
10-Q form, 24
accounting standards establish-
ment, 21
defined, 21
Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104, 304
Securities available for sale, 509, 513–5, 
533, 667. See also Marketable 
securities
Securitization, 292, 468
Segment disclosure, 686–9
Segments, defined, 143
Self-constructed assets, 380–1
Selling, general, and administrative 
(SG&A) expenses, 17, 72, 248
Senior rights, 417
Serial bonds, 417
Service costs, 471
Service life
changes in, 388–9
defined, 382
estimation, 384
Services received, stock issue for, 586
SFAS. See Statements of Financial 
Accounting Standards (SFAS)
SG&A. See Selling, general, and admin-
istrative expenses (SG&A)
Share premium, 124. See also Addi-
tional paid-in capital (APIC)
Shareholders, defined, 5
Shareholders’ equity, 583–609
balance sheet disclosure, 46, 124–5, 
583–4
capital contributions, 583, 584–7
defined, 12–3, 44, 124, 661
distributions, 583, 587–98
equality of assets and liabilities plus 
shareholders’ equity equation, 
14–5
measurement, 124–5, 583–4
noncurrent shareholders’ equity, 15
return on equity (ROE), 222–4
Shares. See Stock
Short-term 
 
borrowing, 627
 
creditors, 5
 
investments, pro forma financial 
statement projections, 249
 
liquidity risk, 232–6
 
notes payable, 345
Siemens AG, marketable securities 
acquisitions, 505–6
Retirement of debt, 432–3, 627
Retrospective restatement, 682–3
Return
 
defined, 221
 
of goods, 280, 293–4
 
on assets (ROA), 223–4, 226–7, 342–3
 
on equity (ROE), 222–4, 226–7
Revenue measurement, 277
Revenue recognition, 277–326
after sale, 294–9
applications of principles, 278–81
at time of sale, 281–94
before delivery, 299–303
criteria for, 146, 661
defined, 146, 277
examples, 146–9
FASB-IASB joint project, 305–6
measurement, 661
summary of reporting standards, 
663
timing of, 167
U.S. GAAP vs. IFRS criteria, 304–5
vs. receipt of cash, 280
Revenues
classification on income statement, 17
defined, 17, 72, 141, 142–3, 661
measurement, 149
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 246
recognition of. See Revenue 
recognition
recording procedures, 74–5
reporting on income statement, 142–3
Risk, 221–2, 232–8
ROA (return on assets), 223–4, 226–7, 
342–3
Roche Holding, marketable securities 
acquisitions, 505, 508
ROE (return on equity), 22–4, 226–7
S
SA Electric, 416
Sales of assets, 185–8, 391–2
Sales or sales revenue. See Revenues
Sales returns, 280, 293–4
Salvage value, 383–4, 388–9
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (2002), 23
Schedules, 19. See also Notes to finan-
cial statements
Seagram Company, contingent obliga-
tions, 467
SEC. See Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC)
Secured borrowings, 417
Securities
available-for-sale securities, 509, 
513–5, 533, 667
bonds. See Bonds
hybrid securities, 661
R
Ratio analysis. See Financial ratios
Raw materials, 45, 329
R&D. See Research and development 
(R&D) expenses
Realization, 24
Realized assets, 119
Reclassification of marketable securi-
ties, 515
Recognition, 22
Recognized assets, 119
Record keeping
account terminology, 43–4
balance sheet, 43–70
income statement, 71–110
introduction, 43
process, 88
Recoverable amount, 396
Recurring vs. nonrecurring activities, 
677–81
Relevance, 21, 119, 658
Reliability, 119–20
Rent received in advance, 46
Repairs, 390
Replacement costs, 336
Reporting. See also Financial reporting
 
entity, 663
 
periods, 7, 16, 24
 
unit, 399
Representational faithfulness, 21–2
Repurchases of stock. See Stock 
repurchases
Research and development (R&D) 
expenses
defined, 6, 72
in-process research and development 
(IPR&D), 378
treatment as assets vs. expenses, 
377
Residual value. See Salvage value
Restructuring
 
defined, 349
 
liabilities, 349–50
 
provision, 349
Retailing, 84
Retained earnings
defined, 13, 124–5
on balance sheet, 46
pro forma financial statement 
 projections, 251
Retirement benefits, 469–79
defined benefit plans, 470, 471–5
financial statement analysis, 475–7
health insurance, 475
journal entry to record change in 
obligations, 477–9
pension expense recognition, 469
pension plan structure, 469–71
summary of reporting standards, 666
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

844
Index
No. 107 (disclosures about fair value 
of financial statements), 433n
No. 109 (income taxes), 480n
No. 115 (securities), 508n, 515n, 532n
No. 123R (share-based payment), 
593n
No. 128 (earnings per share), 684n, 
685n
No. 129 (capital structure), 585n
No. 130 (reporting comprehensive 
income), 551n, 678n, 682n
No. 131 (segments), 686n
No. 133 (derivative instruments and 
hedging), 433n, 518n
No. 138 (derivative instruments and 
hedging), 518n
No. 141R (business combinations), 
378n, 556n, 586n
No. 142 (goodwill and other intan-
gible assets), 393n, 399n
No. 143 (asset retirement obliga-
tions), 384n
No. 144 (impairment of long-lived 
asset), 393n, 680n
No. 153 (exchanges of nonmonetary 
assets), 392n
No. 154 (accounting changes and 
error corrections), 388n, 683n
No. 156 (servicing of financial 
assets), 468n
No. 157 (fair value measurements), 
433–4
No. 158 (defined benefit pension 
plans), 469n, 473n
No. 159 (fair value option), 418n, 
433, 442n, 532n, 549n
No. 160 (noncontrolling interests), 
562n
No. 166 (transfers of financial 
assets), 468n
No. 167 (amendments to FASB 
Interpretation No. 46(R)), 565n
Statutory limits on dividends, 588
Stock
capital stock, 585
common stock. See Common stock 
(common shares)
 
dividends, 589, 590
issuance, 585–6
 
options, 593–5, 620, 628
preferred stock. See Preferred stock 
(preferred shares)
price appreciation or depreciation, 221
 
purchase rights, 593
repurchases, 590–3, 661
rights, 593, 595
splits, 589–90
treasury stock, 590–3, 627, 669
warrants, 593, 595–6, 668
 Stockholders, defined, 5
prepayments, 624
presentation formats, 173
pro forma financial statement pro-
jections, 252
retirement of long-term debt at 
maturity, 627
short-term borrowing, 627
stock option compensation expense, 
620
T-account work sheet, 614, 618–9
treasury stock, 627
using information from, 190–1
warranty liability, 626
Statement of earnings, examples of, 9, 
170. See also Income statement
Statement of financial position. See 
Balance sheet
Statement of operating activity. See 
Income statement
Statement of operations. See Income 
statement
Statement of profit and loss. See 
Income statement
Statement of shareholders’ equity
defined, 18
examples of, 11, 15
Statements of Financial Accounting 
Concepts
conceptual framework, 21–2
No. 2 (qualitative characteristics), 
120n 
No. 5 (recognition and measure-
ment), 114n, 121n, 141n, 304n
No. 6 (financial statements), 114n, 
121n, 124n, 296n
No. 8 (general financial reporting 
and qualitative characteristics), 
114n, 119n, 120n, 657n
Statements of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS)
defined, 21
No. 2 (research and development 
costs), 377n
No. 5 (contingencies), 588n
No. 13 (leases), 435n
No. 34 (interest capitalization), 380n
No. 45 (franchises), 305n
No. 48 (revenue recognition), 
280n, 293n
No. 49 (product financing arrange-
ments), 468n
No. 66 (real estate), 305n
No. 68 (research and development), 
468n
No. 86 (costs of computer software), 
377n
No. 94 (majority-owned subsidiar-
ies), 549n, 554n
No. 95 (statement of cash flows), 
168n
Significant influence, 548
Solvency risk, 236–8
Southwest Airlines, marketable securi-
ties acquisitions, 505, 508
SPE. See Special purpose entities
Special purpose entities (SPE), 468, 565n
Specific identification, 339
Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 104 (SAB 
104), 304
Standard setting, 21–3. See also Gener-
ally accepted accounting princi-
ples (U.S. GAAP); International 
Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS)
Stated value, 124
Statement of cash flows, 167–218, 613–56
accounts payable, 624–5
accounts receivable, 625
advances from customers, 625
asset sales, 185–8
balance sheet and, 18
bond issuance, 627
concepts underlying, 613–4
deferred income taxes, 621–2
defined, 17, 167
depreciation of buildings and equip-
ment, 617–9
derivative transactions, 633–4
direct vs. indirect method, 85–6, 
173–4, 179–84, 631–2
dividends, 627
employee stock options exercised, 628
equipment acquisition, 626
equipment disposal gain, 623
equity in undistributed earnings of 
affiliate, 623–4
examples, 10, 14, 87, 168–74, 615–30
excess of coupon payments over 
interest expense, 622–3
fair value option transactions, 633–4
financing activities, 18, 628–30
impairment loss on land, 620–1
income statement and, 18, 167–8
intercorporate investments in com-
mon stock, 634
interpretation of, 172–3, 191–3, 632–3
inventories, 625–6
investing activities, 18
loss on marketable equity securities 
sale, 621
need for, 167–8
net income, 615
net income-cash flow from opera-
tions reconciliation, 173–4
non-cash investments, 628–30
operating activities, 17–8
overview of, 168–74
patent amortization, 620
preferred stock issuance, 627
preparation, 85–7, 174–90
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

845
Index
V
Variable interest entities (VIE), 468, 565–6
Variable interest rates, 418
Verifiability, 22, 659
Vesting period, 593
VIE. See Variable interest entities
W
Wages and salaries payable, 346
Walt Disney Company, intercorporate 
investments in common stock, 
547, 548, 549
Warranties
allowance method, 294
defined, 122, 347–8
Warrants, stock, 593, 595–6, 668
Warranty 
 
liability, 347–8, 626
 
provision, 347
Weighted-average cost-flow assump-
tion, 339–41
Weighted-average number of outstand-
ing common shares, 684–5
Weyerhaeuser Company, executory 
contracts, 466, 467
Work sheets, T-account, 175–9, 614, 
618–9
Working capital, 327–74
current asset accounts, 328–43
current liability accounts, 344–50
defined, 327–8
net income adjustments, 632
 
ratio, 327
terminology, 327–8
turnover ratios, 234–6
Work-in-process (work-in-progress) 
inventory, 45, 331
WPP Group, 416
Writing off accounts, 284
Y
Yield to maturity, 418
Z
Zero coupon bonds, 417
Timeliness, 22
Time-series analysis, 242
Trade payables. See Accounts payable
Trade receivables. See Accounts 
receivable
Trade-in transactions, 392
Trading securities, 509, 512–3, 532, 667. 
See also Marketable securities
Transactions, classification and disclo-
sure of, 191–2
Transfers of receivables, 467–8
Treasury stock (treasury shares), 590–3, 
627, 669
Treatment of changes in periodic 
 depreciation and amortization, 
388–9
Turnover ratios
accounts payable, 235–6, 344
accounts receivable, 229, 291
asset turnover, 226–31
fixed assets, 230–1, 376
inventory. See Inventory turnover 
ratio
working capital, 234–6
U
Uncertainty, 661
Uncollectible accounts, 281–9
allowance method, 282–5, 664
avoiding, 281–2
defined, 281
estimation of, 285–9
summary of accounting for, 289
Unconditional obligations, 661
Underlyings, 519
Understandability, 22, 659
Unearned Revenues, 294–5
United Airlines, operating lease agree-
ments, 466
Unrealized gains and losses, 507–8, 
681–2
Unsecured borrowings, 417
U.S. GAAP. See Generally accepted 
accounting principles (U.S. GAAP)
U.S. SEC registrants, 21
Use method, 385
Useful life. See Service life
Users of financial statements, 23
Stockholders’ equity. See Shareholders’ 
equity
Straight-line (time and use) method, 
384–6
Strategies, 4–5
Strike price (exercise price), 593
Subordinated rights, 417
Subsidiary (S), 549, 554
Substantial performance, revenue 
 recognition after sale when, 
294–5
Substantial uncertainty about cash 
 collection, 298–9
Sum-of-the-years’-digits method, 385
Suppliers, advances to, 45
Supporting schedules, 19. See also 
Notes to financial statements
Swaps, interest rate. See Interest rate 
swap contracts
T
T-accounts, 50–7
debit and credit, 51
defined, 50
dual effect of transactions in, 52–3
examples of, 51–2, 176, 180, 187
increases and decreases to, 50–1
journal entries and, 53–7
statement of cash flows preparation, 
614, 618–9
work sheet preparation, 175–9, 614, 
618–9
Takeovers, 591
Tangible assets, 375. See also Long-
lived assets
Tax basis, 479
Tax reporting, depreciation and amorti-
zation method, 386
Tax treatment, of employer contribu-
tions to postretirement benefits, 
475n
Taxes payable, 347
Temporary accounts, 44, 71
Temporary differences, 480–1
10-K form, 24
10-Q form, 24
Tenants, advances from, 46
Time value element, 594
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Simplified Statement of Cash Flows
(Exhibit 6.12, p. 192)
OPERATIONS
Cash Receipts from Customers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(1)
Less: Cash Payments to Suppliers, Employees, and Others  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  −(2)
Cash Flow from Operations [= (1) – (2)]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 −S1
Reconciliation of Net Income to Cash Flow from Operations
Net Income  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
          (3)
Additions to Net Income to Compute Cash Flow from Operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             +(4)
Subtractions from Net Income to Compute Cash Flow from Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
             −(5)
Cash Flow from Operations [= (3) + (4) – (5)] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S1
INVESTING
Proceeds from Dispositions of “Investing” Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+(6)
Cash Used to Acquire “Investing” Assets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 −(7)
Cash Flow from Investing [= (6) – (7)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S2
FINANCING
Cash Provided by Increases in Debt or Capital Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
+(8)
Cash Used to Reduce Debt or Capital Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
−(9)
Cash Used for Dividends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
−(10)
Cash Flow from Financing [= (8) – (9) – (10)]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S3
Net Change in Cash [= S1 + S2 + S3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
(11)
Cash, Beginning of the Period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S4
Cash, End of the Period [= (11) + S4]  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
        S5
Effects of Various Methods of Accounting for Short- and 
Long-Term Investments in Corporate Securities
(Exhibit 14.8, p. 567)
Method of Accounting
Balance Sheet
Income Statement
Fair value method for marketable securities 
available for sale (generally used when equity 
ownership percentage is less than 20%) and 
for cash flow hedges.a
Investment account or derivative appears at 
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses appear 
in Other Comprehensive Income.
Dividends declared by investee included 
in revenue of investor. Gains and losses 
included in income when realized in arm’s-
length transactions with outsiders.
Fair value method for trading securities 
(generally used when ownership percentage 
is less than 20%) and for fair value hedges.
Investment account or derivative appears at 
fair value. Unrealized gains and losses appear 
in income statement, and the effects increase 
or decrease the Retained Earnings account.
Dividends declared by investee included in 
revenue of investor. Gains and losses (from 
then-current carrying values) included in 
income when fair values change.
Amortized cost method (used only for debt 
where holder has both intent and ability to 
hold to maturity).a
Acquisition cost plus accrued interest not yet 
received in cash.
Carrying value at start of period multiplied 
by historical market interest rate on the 
date of acquisition of debt security.
Equity method (generally used when 
ownership percentage is at least 20% but 
not more than 50%).a
Investment account appears at acquisition 
cost plus share of investee’s net income less 
share of investee’s dividends since acquisition 
minus amortization of excess of purchase 
price over fair value of identifiable assets 
with limited lives.
Equity in investee’s net income is part of 
the investor’s income in the period that 
investee earns income. Reduce (increase) by 
the amount, if any, of intercompany gains 
(losses).
Consolidation (generally used when ownership 
percentage exceeds 50% [U.S. GAAP] or when 
the investor controls the investee [IFRS]).
Eliminate investment account, and replace 
it with individual assets and liabilities of 
subsidiary. Show noncontrolling interest in 
shareholders’ equity. Eliminate inter-company 
assets and liabilities.
Combine individual revenues and expenses 
of subsidiary with those of parent, and 
eliminate intercompany items. Subtract 
noncontrolling interest in subsidiary’s net 
income.
aFirms can elect the fair value option to account for these securities. The effects on the balance sheet and income statement are the same as 
those described for trading securities and fair value hedges.
© Cengage Learning 2014
© Cengage Learning 2014
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Common Accounting Terms
(Glossary, pp. 735–832)
account. 
A device for keeping track of the amount on one line (or part of one line) of a balance sheet.
adjunct account. 
An account for accumulating additions to another account.
advances from customers. 
Liability title used on receipt of cash for future goods or service.
advances to suppliers. 
Asset title used on paying cash for future goods or service.
asset. 
Future benefi t that (1) the fi rm controls and (2) arises from something other than an executory contract.
capital. 
Avoid using this word because it has so many different meanings, such as cash, assets, funding sources, and owners’ equity.
closing entry. 
Journal entry made after preparing income statement to move balances in revenue and expense accounts to Retained Earnings.
contra account. 
An account for accumulating subtractions from another account.
conservatism. 
Defer income to later periods, showing low cumulative income; show low asset totals.
control(ling) account. 
An account showing the sum of balances in other, similar accounts.
depreciation, amortization. 
An allocation of costs to periods of benefi t (and, in manufacturing, subsequently to products). Not a decline in market value.
equity. 
A source of assets. A claim to assets.
executory contract. 
A mere exchange of promises.
expenditure. 
Outfl ow of cash.
expense. 
Gone (net) asset. Effect on Balance Sheet: The decrease in owners’ equity accompanying the decrease in (net) assets caused by the sale 
of goods, the rendering of services, or the passage of time.
goodwill. 
The excess of purchase price (fair value of consideration given) over the fair market value of identifi able net assets in a purchased 
acquisition.
income statement. 
Not the Purpose: To report income.  Purpose: To tell why income was what it was to allow comparisons across time or across companies 
(divisions), or both.
liability. 
An obligation (1) for a reasonably defi nite amount, (2) due at a reasonably defi nite time, (3) arising from something other than an 
 executory contract.
make (making) money. 
One of at least seven possible meanings. Don’t say this unless you can be precise about your meaning.
net assets. 
Assets minus liabilities.
partially executory contract. Executory contract in which one or both parties have done something other than merely promise.
periodic inventory. 
Compute cost of goods sold once per period, at the end as: beginning inventory (from books) plus purchases minus ending inventory 
(go out into the warehouse; then count and cost it). Contrast with perpetual inventory, where fi rm tracks cost of goods sold with each 
 withdrawal from inventory.
product cost. 
A manufacturing cost; debited to work in process, not to expense.
receipt. 
Infl ow of cash.
revenue. 
Service rendered. Effect on balance sheet: The increase in owners’ equity accompanying the increase in (net) assets caused by the selling 
of goods or the rendering of service. Measured by the expected net present value of the cash receipts.
Debit-Credit Rules
(Glossary, p. 762)
Typical Asset Account
 
Opening Balance
 
Increase 
Decrease
 
+ 
−
 
Dr. 
Cr.
 
Ending Balance
Typical Liability Account
 
 
Opening Balance
 
Decrease 
Increase
 
− 
+
 
Dr. 
Cr.
 
 
Ending Balance
Typical Owners’ Equity Account
 
 
Opening Balance
 
Decrease 
Increase
 
− 
+
 
Dr. 
Cr.
 
 
Ending Balance
Owners’ Equity
 
Decrease 
Increase
 
− 
+
 
Dr. 
Cr.
 
Expenses 
Revenues
 
Dr. 
Cr. 
Dr. 
Cr.
 
+ 
− 
− 
+
 
* 
 
 
*
*Normal balance before closing.
make money.  making money. Do not use these phrases as they can mean any of the following: 1. Earn income: “Microsoft 
made a lot of money last year.” 2. Earn other comprehensive income: “I still hold the Microsoft shares I bought in 1990, 
and I’ve made a lot of money on them.” This is an unrealized holding gain, an increase in wealth, but not an increase in 
cash. 3. Save opportunity costs or opportunity losses: “If I’d only sold those shares in 1999, I’d have made more money. 
I didn’t sell the shares, so I lost money.” This use refers to the lost benefi ts from not doing something. Accounting does 
not recognize opportunity costs. 4. Earn revenues: “He made a lot of money touting cooking devices on TV.” He earned 
income and received payments, but this use subtracts no costs. 5. Earn gross margin. 6. Sell for cash. 7. Generate cash 
fl ow from operations. Many companies can have positive income but negative cash fl ow from operations. Some analysts 
will say such a company made no money in such a year. 8. Counterfeit.
Copyright 2014 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s).
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

